Rape survivors who arrive in the UK on small boats across the Channel are being neglected by the authorities while others are being inadequately treated for life-changing injuries, a damning report has disclosed. Inspectors found that suicidal women who had been repeatedly raped by people smugglers were not adequately supported after arriving on UK soil. One girl who had suffered fuel burns on the boat as she travelled across the Channel was neglected for two days, leaving her with scars for life, it was found. The disclosures have emerged in reports by prisons inspectors and independent monitors who examined the holding conditions for migrants detained on the Kent coast. They said that the conditions in which new arrivals are held continue to be “very poor” despite previous Home Office assurances that it would make significant improvements. The inspectors said they found no evidence of specialist support for vulnerable detainees. “One woman was held for almost a day after disclosing she had been raped repeatedly by a smuggler five days before she left France. “She was described as suicidal and ‘inconsolable’. On release, she was housed in unsuitable initial accommodation holding both male and female asylum seekers,” the report said. Another woman disclosed she had been raped twice on her journey to the UK, but her condition was not followed up. Yet another woman was held overnight before disclosing that she had been “sold” to a man as a house servant, and was then held for another 20 hours, the report said. Charlie Taylor, HM chief inspector of prisons, said the Home Office had not done enough to improve facilities since the last inspection in September 2020 found that the facilities were badly equipped. “It is unclear why there had been such delays following the assurances that we were given by the Home Office after our last inspection. Leaders told us of difficulties in coordinating the various partners whose cooperation was required, but this was not a sufficient explanation,” he said. The Dover Independent Monitoring Board (IMB), which monitors the Kent Channel detention facilities, said it was “extremely concerned” about the continuing – and worsening – conditions in Dover, believing these should be highlighted as a matter of urgency. It found that migrants faced being held in increasingly cold conditions. Children, including toddlers and babies, were held at Tug Haven, the initial point of entry, overnight. New arrivals, some of whom had been splashed with scorching fuel on the boats, bore evidence of severe injuries, the report said. “One 16-year-old girl who had fuel burns on her legs and had been at Tug Haven for two days wearing wet clothes did not have her injuries detected until she was admitted to the Kent intake unit. “By this time the seam of her clothes had become embedded into the burns and a medic reported that the girl was likely to be scarred for life,” the report said. Dame Anne Owers, the national chair of IMBs, said urgent action is required. “IMBs have continued to raise very serious concerns about the conditions and treatment of cross-Channel detainees, both on initial arrival and on the subsequent journey through the detention system, culminating in the events described in these reports.” On Tuesday, the Home Office confirmed that part of the Ministry of Defence (MoD) site in Manston, Kent, will be used as a processing site for new arrivals by January 2022. The secure site will be able to hold people “for a maximum of five days while their security and initial asylum processing checks are undertaken”. The announcement was not welcomed by the constituency’s MP, Sir Roger Gale, who told the House of Commons the site was “inappropriate”. Asking an urgent question, the MP for North Thanet said “there is no indication as to how the site will accommodate these human beings, will be made secure or what facilities will be made available, other than statutory [rules] on the site medical services”. “I will be grateful if the minister will now instruct the team to do as I’ve already requested: put this unacceptable and unworkable proposal on hold and properly, thoroughly and swiftly examine the viable alternatives. And if while doing so he will conduct the consultations that ought to have been held weeks ago?” he said. Home Office minister Tom Pursglove told Gale: “That consultation is ongoing, including with local authorities, including with the NHS, and of course, including with him as the constituency member of parliament, and with the police.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “Last month’s tragedy is a devastating reminder of the dangers of Channel crossings and that’s why we are overhauling our broken asylum system to protect lives and ensure people smugglers can’t profit from this crime. “We take the welfare of people in our care extremely seriously and since these inspections we have continued to improve facilities and are opening new secure facilities.”Fewer than one in three patients who have ongoing Covid symptoms after being hospitalised with the disease say they feel fully recovered a year later, according to a study that offers new insights into potential treatments. As the pandemic has unfolded, a growing body of research has revealed that Covid not only causes health problems in the short-term, but also has long-term effects. Now a study has revealed many of those who had ongoing symptoms after hospitalisation are showing little improvement, with their condition similar at about 12 months after discharge to seven months earlier. “Only one in three participants felt fully recovered at one year,” said Dr Rachel Evans, one of the co-leads of the post-hospitalisation Covid-19 study – or Phos-Covid – which is led by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Leicester Biomedical Research Centre, although the team says missing data means the figure could be as low as two in 10 or as high as six in 10. The research – which has yet to be peer-reviewed – reveals how the team collected both self-reported and objective measures of health, such as physical performance and organ function, among 2,320 adults about five months after they were discharged from hospital after having had Covid. They then looked at similar measures for 924 participants at about one year after discharge, 807 of whom had attended the previous follow-up. Between five months and one year after discharge, the proportion of participants reporting feeling recovered remained very similar – at just under 30% at 12 months – as did the prevalence of symptoms including breathlessness, fatigue and pain. Little or no improvement was seen for areas including organ function, physical function and cognitive impairment – or “brain fog” – with about one in 10 participants having a significant degree of the latter 12 months after discharge. “Unfortunately, we weren’t seeing improvements at one year from where people were at five months post-discharge,” said Evans. Further work by the team revealed that participants grouped together in one of four “clusters”: very severe symptoms, severe symptoms, mild symptoms and those with severe brain fog and other moderate symptoms. While those in the “mild” group reported about four symptoms on average, those in the very severe group reported about 20. Evans said the team found minimal or no change in any of the health outcomes between five months and one year across the four clusters, while questionnaires completed by participants rating their health compared with how they retrospectively viewed it before hospitalisation, revealed a significant drop in health-related quality of life at five months – with the impact larger for more severe ongoing symptoms – and then very little change again at one year. The study cannot prove the cause of the ongoing symptoms, and stressed the need for approaches to improve the mental and physical impairments in patients. However, the team found that being female, obese, able to walk only a very short distance and having raised levels of certain inflammatory proteins in their blood – compared with the mild group – were all linked to having very severe symptoms. Some of the inflammatory proteins were also found to be raised in those with severe brain fog. Chris Brightling, professor of respiratory medicine at the University of Leicester and chief investigator on the study, said the team is trying to unpick whether autoimmunity may be a driver, adding anti-inflammatory drugs could be tested to see if they aid improvement. Evans added that weight management and improving walking distance are other areas to explore as possible interventions. “One of the key messages we are keen to really get through is that none of us think long Covid has one mechanism and one treatment,” said Evans. “We need the groups to define their particular problem, and then target the management accordingly.”1 Start the conversation early, ideally before your child gets a smartphone or social media account so they are prepared for the risks – and benefits – of life online. 2 Make it age appropriate. “In an age-appropriate way, you can explain that there are some things online that are for adults only and that if they ever see anything that worries them online that they should come and tell you,” says the charity Childnet International. 3 Don’t let porn become a taboo subject. Don’t let awkwardness build, the children’s commissioner’s guide says. “It should be something that parents talk about to their kids,” was the message from 16- to 21-year-olds. 4 Try to be casual and use everyday opportunities to talk about tricky subjects. It’s probably best to avoid “the big talk”, which can be off-putting for young people. Perhaps try having a conversation while walking or driving, when you are side by side rather than face to face. It can be more relaxed that way. 5 Talk regularly, the NSPCC children’s charity advises. “Talking regularly with your child is the greatest tool to help keep them safe online. Talking regularly and making it part of daily conversation, like you would about their day at school, will help your child feel relaxed. It also means when they do have any worries, they’re more likely to come and speak to you.” 6 Laughter can help. “Our young people told us that laughing with their parent can break tension and makes everyone feel more comfortable – they don’t want you to be too serious or scary,” the commissioner’s guide says. 7 Do not tell them off if they look at porn, and do not instantly take away their device as punishment. “Be reassuring about the confusing emotions your child might feel after seeing explicit content,” says the commissioner’s guide. “Let them know it’s OK to be curious and that this is a normal part of growing up. Create a judgment‑free space to talk about it.” 8 Try not to overreact. If they come across porn – either accidentally or deliberately – try to explain why watching adult content too young can be harmful. “Don’t punish instead of having a proper good talk.” 9 Be prepared to challenge views that may arise from watching adult content, says the commissioner’s guidance. “Reinforce the message that sex and bodies, as depicted in a lot of porn, are not realistic. Explain that porn can make things like non‑consensual sex appear ‘normal’ or ‘OK’ but it is not.” 10 Do your homework. Young people want their parents to learn about new technology. They also want parents to be better informed about the risks of the online world and how to prevent early exposure to harmful content, including online pornography. 11 Look for support from other sources if needed. Parents and carers should be ready to offer support to their child, but also be prepared to seek further help if their child needs it, including how and where to report incidents of online sexual abuse. 12 Create a safe and trusting home environment. The young people surveyed for the children’s commissioner’s guide said they wanted to share things with their parents but do not always feel able. “Help your child to feel comfortable talking about apps they’re on and what they’re experiencing online.”Parents should start to talk to their children about online pornography and sexual harassment when they are as young as nine or 10, ideally before they have a smartphone or social media account, the children’s commissioner for England has said. Dame Rachel de Souza urged parents to “talk early, and talk often” to their children in an age-appropriate way, so they are better prepared for the risks of the online world and will find it easier to raise difficult issues further down the line. Concern has been growing about the ease of access to and damaging impact of online pornography on young children who often browse the internet unsupervised and are exposed to material that shows degradation and violence towards women. The issue was recently brought into sharp focus by the Everyone’s Invited movement, which revealed widespread sexual harassment and abuse in schools, fuelling concern that online porn can influence real-life behaviours and attitudes around gender roles, sex and consent. Rather than waiting until children are teenagers, De Souza wants parents to open the conversation much earlier and has produced a guide to help them negotiate tricky conversations about children’s online behaviour, using advice from teenagers and young adults based on what they wish their parents had known. “The overriding message you’ll see from our focus group is talk early, talk often,” she said. “You might be surprised how early our young people felt parents need to start the conversation. But kids want an age‑appropriate conversation that evolves over time in line with their growing maturity. “My advice to parents and carers is to create the culture before the crisis. Children have told us they want their mums and dads to create a safe, judgment‑free space for them to talk about these issues. It’s better to do that before you hit a problem rather than trying to create that mood while you’re dealing with one.” This week the Grammy-winning singer Billie Eilish revealed the damaging impact watching pornography from an early age had on her. She started at 11 and developed an addiction that gave her nightmares and made dating difficult. “I think porn is a disgrace. I used to watch a lot of porn, to be honest. I started watching porn when I was, like, 11. I think it really destroyed my brain and I feel incredibly devastated that I was exposed to so much porn,” she told the Howard Stern Show in the US on Monday. De Souza’s guide highlights the gap between what parents think and their children’s reality. Only a quarter of parents think their child has seen pornography online, but in reality more than half of 11- to 13-year-olds have already seen porn, many came across it by accident and 62% say their viewing of porn is mostly unintentional. “Talking to our children about this issue can be hard,” said the children’s commissioner. “Parents tell me they sometimes feel uncomfortable, not just because of the sexualised nature of the topic, but also because their children know more about technology than they do. “For mums, dads and carers who grew up without smartphones, this whole world can feel bewildering. But children want to talk to their parents and carers about this. We know this because they’ve told us. And that’s what is at the heart of this guidance.” As well as online pornography, the guide – which is called The Things I Wish My Parents Had Known: A Guide From Teens and Young Adults on Dealing With Sexual Harassment Online – also looks at the pressure on young people to send nude pictures and sexualised bullying.Perhaps it was only right that, with Christmas just around the corner, the ultimate pantomime villain of darts was front and centre on the PDC world championship’s return to normality. The event last year was very much darts, but not as we knew it; yes, there were stories and moments we will never forget, and try telling Gerwyn Price that the manner of his first world title was any less meaningful in the absence of a crowd. Price knows that darts, more than any other sport, thrives from the energy a live crowd can bring. They came in their thousands here in all manner of fancy dress: jockeys, Bavarians, cowboys and even a Homer Simpson or two. They were here for a pre-Christmas party, but after the peculiarity of last year’s tournament they were also here to remind us what normality felt like. As the prime minister spent another day trying to get to grips with Covid-19, for 3,500 lager-fuelled darts fans inside Alexandra Palace the biggest party on the sporting calendar felt like the kind of great escape we have all craved over these past two years. The players played their part too, not least Ricky Evans. The opening night had somewhat stuttered its way into life with Ritchie Edhouse’s victory against Peter Hudson, but by the time the world No 38 was dancing on to the stage to the strains of YMCA by the Village People before his clash with India’s Nitin Kumar, the Palace – and the tournament – felt like it had sparked back to life. Evans wasted little time in dispatching Kumar in straight sets, but if the hors d’oeuvre to the evening’s entertainment was a party the first of the two main courses were anything but, particularly for Adrian Lewis. The two-times champion of the world has tumbled down the rankings in the pandemic era to such an extent that for the first time here, he entered as an unseeded player. Such is the money at stake in this event, careers can change with one result, for better or worse. Lewis entered this event as the provisional world No 38: a prospect that would have been unthinkable when he was contesting the final against Gary Anderson just six years ago. So as the decibel levels in the crowd began to rise in correspondence with the alcohol that had been consumed and Lewis went a set behind against the Canadian Matt Campbell, you wondered whether we had an upset on our hands on the opening night. But Lewis rallied, prevailed 3-1 and set up a second-round tie with the man who beat him in the 2016 final, Anderson. That will be some clash. “Bring it on,” Lewis said with a smile. Then, the main event. Price has spoken of his desire to win this event with a crowd in attendance after last year’s triumph in an empty arena, but he may have reconsidered that as his walk-on music was drowned out by booing as the defence of his title began against Edhouse. That noise was only superseded by the roars as Edhouse, the world No 80 going into the tournament, took the opening set in consecutive legs. “Edhouse till I die” was the somewhat inebriated chant at one point as those in attendance began to dream of a monumental upset, but one thing we know about Price is that he cares little for theatrics like that. The Welshman motored through the gears after going a set behind and despite a couple of minor scares, he prevailed. Fallon Sherrock could yet await if she progresses to round three. “I hope the rules change again,” Price said later with a laugh when asked about the crowd’s presence. The final double was met with a trademark roar from Price, and even a smattering of applause from the crowd, who could perhaps appreciate how the champion – much like Lewis before him – responded to the adversity thrown his way on the opening night. That is what champions do. We will hear that bellowing Welsh roar again as the tournament progresses: we can only hope we hear the same roar from the crowd all the way through to the final on 3 January, too.Mikel Arteta heaped praise on Alexandre Lacazette after Arsenal’s 2-0 win against West Ham, suggesting he is front-runner to take the club captaincy for an extended period. Lacazette took the armband for a second successive game after Pierre‑Emerick Aubameyang, who was officially stripped of it on Tuesday, was again dropped from the matchday squad. Although the Frenchman missed a penalty, he set up Gabriel Martinelli’s opener and put in a commanding all-round display. Arteta gave no indication of when Aubameyang would return but hinted Lacazette will occupy the role for the foreseeable future. “Alexandre is the next in line and he is taking it the way everybody saw, with such pride and commitment,” Arteta said. “I am really happy with the way he played. Absolutely he has embraced the captaincy, but Laca has always been like that in the dressing room. You see the way he acts with the young players, his willingness to help. It’s in his nature, he is not a selfish player, he is happy to make the rest better.” Arteta’s comments were in stark contrast to his appraisal on Tuesday of Aubameyang, who he said had failed to show the requisite “commitment and passion”. There remains doubt over Lacazette’s own future given his contract expires next summer, but it appears likely he will captain Arsenal when selected over the coming weeks. Arteta also has options to rotate the captaincy among a “leadership group” of senior players that includes Granit Xhaka, Kieran Tierney and Rob Holding if Lacazette is unavailable. Asked whether Aubameyang would return to the squad for the match on Saturday at Leeds, where Arsenal will seek to cement their top-four place with a third successive win, Arteta simply said: “No news.” A high-tempo display that could have brought more goals, the win eventually confirmed by Emile Smith Rowe, delighted Arteta. “I’m really pleased with the performance, the attitude, the commitment and the quality we showed. It sets the tone of the team against a really good side that is very difficult to dominate the way we did today.” David Moyes, managing his 600th Premier League game, had no complaints about the outcome. “I didn’t think a lot of our performance,” he said. “I thought Arsenal played well and had good intensity. We weren’t able to deal with it at the start or in the second half.” Although West Ham’s players protested against the red card awarded to Vladimir Coufal in the incident that brought Lacazette’s spot‑kick, Moyes said his defender should have dealt with the situation better and that the referee, Anthony Taylor, “might have got this one right”.Joe Biden visited Kentucky to survey damage from the tornadoes that swept through the state on Friday, which killed at least 74 people. The president said the federal government would cover 100% of the costs related to the first 30 days of Kentucky’s tornado response. “I intend to do whatever it takes, as long as it takes – as long as it takes – to support your state, your local leaders, as you recover and rebuild,” Biden said in Dawson Springs this afternoon. “Because you will recover and you will rebuild.” Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer is considering delaying passage of the Build Back Better Act to focus on voting rights legislation, according to multiple reports. Democrats had originally hoped to pass the Build Back Better Act before the end of the year, but negotiations over the $1.75tn spending package have dragged on, as centrist Joe Manchin has voiced criticism of the bill’s price tag. Manchin has been meeting with other Senate Democrats to discuss potential filibuster rule changes that would allow voting rights legislation to advance. Senate Republicans have repeatedly used the filibuster to block voting rights bills from moving forward. Potential ideas for filibuster reform include requiring senators to actually talk and hold the Senate floor while filibustering or designating voting rights as an issue not subject to the filibuster. Derek Chauvin pleaded guilty to two counts of violating George Floyd’s civil rights. The change in Chauvin’s plea comes a year and a half after the former Minneapolis police officer murdered Floyd by keeping his knee on Floyd’s neck for several minutes. The Omicron variant now represents 3% of all coronavirus cases in the US, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said at a press briefing today. Dr Rochelle Walensky added that Omicron cases have now been reported in 36 US states. – Maanvi Singh and Joan E Greve The National Archives released a trove of 1,500 documents related the 1963 assassination of John F Kennedy. From the AP: The disclosure of secret cables, internal memos and other documents satisfies a deadline set in October by Joe Biden and is in keeping with a federal statute that calls for the release of records in the government’s possession. Additional documents are expected to be made public next year. There was no immediate indication that the records contained revelations that could radically reshape the public’s understanding of the events surrounding the 22 November 1963 assassination of Kennedy in Dallas at the hands of Lee Harvey Oswald. But the latest tranche of documents was nonetheless eagerly anticipated by historians and others who, decades after the Kennedy killing, remain skeptical that, at the height of the cold war, a troubled young man with a mail-order rifle was solely responsible for an assassination that changed the course of American history. The documents include CIA cables and memos discussing Oswald’s previously disclosed but never fully explained visits to the Soviet and Cuban embassies in Mexico City as well as discussion, in the days after the assassination, of the potential of Cuban involvement in the killing of Kennedy. Read more: Sam Levin and Johana Bhuiyan report: The Los Angeles police department worked with a Polish firm that specializes in “strategic communications” to monitor social media and collect millions of tweets last year, including thousands related to Black Lives Matter and “defund the police”, according to records reviewed by the Guardian. Internal LAPD documents, obtained by the Brennan Center for Justice through public records requests, reveal that the department conducted a one-month trial of social media monitoring software from Edge NPD, a company that typically worked in advertising and marketing, had no prior experience contracting with law enforcement and was based thousands of miles away in Warsaw, Poland. During the trial in fall 2020, Edge NPD tracked tweets on roughly 200 keywords for LAPD, the records show. In the process, the software collected millions of tweets, according to Edge NPD’s CEO, Dobromir Cias. The data set included tens of thousands of tweets related to Black Lives Matter and racial justice protests, some of them from prominent Black activists outside LA and private civilians advocating for reforms, the files show. The records suggest that LAPD was interested in using the company’s services in part to help the department respond to “negative narratives”. Cias told the Guardian the company also aimed to flag possible threats. Read more: Guardian staff: Joe Biden has nominated Caroline Kennedy, daughter of John F Kennedy, to be the US ambassador to Australia. Kennedy, 63, a member of one of America’s most famous political families, has long been considered a leading candidate for a high-profile envoy position after she threw her support behind Biden’s presidential campaign. In a statement, Kennedy called Australia “a country that is as vital to our future security and prosperity.” She added: “I look forward to collaborating with the government of Australia to strengthen our alliance, improve global health and increase vaccine access during this terrible pandemic and to address the urgent climate crisis. I am excited to get to know the Australian people, learn about their fascinating country and share with them what I love most about America.” Kennedy previously served as US ambassador to Japan under Barack Obama, from 2013 to 2010. She was the first female US ambassador to Japan and in a statement announcing the new position in Australia, the White House lauded her work there. “She advanced the realignment of US Forces in Okinawa, promoted women’s empowerment in Japan, and increased student exchange between the US and Japan,” it said. “In 2017, she founded the International Poetry Exchange Project to virtually connect students in Japan, Korea, the Philippines, and the Bronx through the power of the spoken word.” Last month Kennedy was awarded the Grand Cordon of the Rising Sun, the highest Japanese honor for which foreigners are eligible. Kennedy was an important supporter of Biden in his campaign to be president. In a Boston Globe editorial to announce her endorsement, Kennedy praised Biden for his public service over his long career as a public servant and recalled him visiting Tokyo while she was ambassador. Read more: That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Maanvi Singh, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden visited Kentucky to survey damage from the tornadoes that swept through the state on Friday, which killed at least 74 people. The president said the federal government would cover 100% of the costs related to the first 30 days of Kentucky’s tornado response. “I intend to do whatever it takes, as long as it takes – as long as it takes – to support your state, your local leaders, as you recover and rebuild,” Biden said in Dawson Springs this afternoon. “Because you will recover and you will rebuild.” Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer is considering delaying passage of the Build Back Better Act to focus on voting rights legislation, according to multiple reports. Democrats had originally hoped to pass the Build Back Better Act before the end of the year, but negotiations over the $1.75tn spending package have dragged on, as centrist Joe Manchin has voiced criticism of the bill’s price tag. Manchin has been meeting with other Senate Democrats to discuss potential filibuster rule changes that would allow voting rights legislation to advance. Senate Republicans have repeatedly used the filibuster to block voting rights bills from moving forward. Potential ideas for filibuster reform include requiring senators to actually talk and hold the Senate floor while filibustering or designating voting rights as an issue not subject to the filibuster. Derek Chauvin pleaded guilty to two counts of violating George Floyd’s civil rights. The change in Chauvin’s plea comes a year and a half after the former Minneapolis police officer murdered Floyd by keeping his knee on Floyd’s neck for several minutes. The Omicron variant now represents 3% of all coronavirus cases in the US, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said at a press briefing today. Dr Rochelle Walensky added that Omicron cases have now been reported in 36 US states. Maanvi will have more coming up, so stay tuned. After delivering his prepared remarks in Kentucky, a journalist asked Joe Biden about reports that Senate Democrats will shift focus to voting rights and delay passage of their Build Back Better Act until 2022. “If we can get the congressional voting rights done, we should do it. If we can’t, we’ve got to keep going. There’s nothing domestically more important than voting rights,” Biden said, per the Washington Post. Biden’s comments come as Democrats struggle to reach a final deal with centrist Senator Joe Manchin on their $1.75tn spending package, which they had originally hoped to pass before the end of the year. Manchin has been meeting with other moderate Democratic senators to discuss potential filibuster rule changes to help voting rights legislation advance without Republican support. Speaking in Dawson Springs, Kentucky, Joe Biden pledged to provide all federal assistance necessary to help the community rebuild after the deadly tornadoes last week. “I intend to do whatever it takes, as long as it takes – as long as it takes – to support your state, your local leaders, as you recover and rebuild. Because you will recover and you will rebuild,” Biden said. Four Fema search and rescue teams have already been deployed to Kentucky, Biden noted, and the agency has also provided 61 generators for those without power. The president also announced that the federal government would be covering 100% of the costs related to the first 30 days of tornado recovery in Kentucky. “I promise you: you’re going to heal. We’re going to recover. You’re going to rebuild. You’re going to be stronger than you were before. We’re going to build back better than it was,” Biden said. Joe Biden is now speaking in Dawson Springs, Kentucky, on his administration’s response to the tornadoes that swept through the state late Friday and early Saturday. The president was introduced by Kentucky Governor Andy Beshear, who thanked Biden for his swift approval of the state’s major disaster declaration. The governor’s voice shook with emotion as he recounted how, as a child, he spent Christmases with family not too far from where he was speaking. “This town is part of who I am,” Beshear said. “To me, this was always a safe place. Bad things did not happen here – until Saturday.” One source told Politico that the negotiations between Joe Biden and Joe Manchin over the Build Back Better Act are not going well. “The talks between [Biden] and Manchin have been going very poorly. They are far apart,” the source said. Democrats’ hopes of passing the bill before Christmas are rapidly diminishing, meaning families likely will not get checks from the expanded child tax credit program next month. Joe Manchin became ... a bit frustrated today when a journalist asked him to respond to the report that he has voiced criticism of the proposal to include the expanded child tax credit program in Democrats’ Build Back Better Act. “This is bullshit,” Manchin told a HuffPost reporter. “You’re bullshit.” It’s seeming increasingly unlikely that Congress will be able to pass the $1.75tn spending package before the end of the year, so families may not receive checks from the expanded child tax credit program next month. Potential ideas for filibuster reform include requiring senators to actually talk and hold the Senate floor while filibustering (they don’t currently have to) or designating voting rights as an issue not subject to the filibuster. Black leaders are expected to push the White House to be more vocal in its support for the voting rights measures. There is already widespread frustration that the White House is not putting enough political muscle behind the issue. There is a narrowing window to get the bills through Congress and doing so would be a major victory for Joe Biden to end his first year in office. “It’s absolutely critical that we pass federal voting rights protections by the end of the year. Anything short of that would be a failure for our democracy. Let’s get it done. The clock is ticking,” said Derrick Johnson, the president of the NAACP, after a meeting with senators on Wednesday. The push to move forward on voting rights comes as a group of senators, including Angus King of Maine, Jon Tester of Montana, and Tim Kaine of Virginia, have been meeting with Joe Manchin to try and figure out a path forward on the filibuster. It’s unclear if a deal might come together before the end of the year. Democrats have already signaled they expect negotiations to carry over into January. Manchin is a staunch supporter of the filibuster rule, and any changes are likely to keep it in place, while giving Democrats room to pass voting rights legislation. Democrats made a similar carve-out this week for raising the debt ceiling, a move that prompted Sen. Raphael Warnock, a Georgia Democrat, to call for similar action on voting rights. As it becomes increasingly less likely that the Senate will be able to vote on the Build Back Better Act this month, majority leader Chuck Schumer is now hoping to take up a voting rights bill before Christmas. NBC News reports: The Senate was scheduled to have already headed home for the Christmas holiday, but sources say Schumer isn’t ready to tell them to leave Washington, yet. Schumer is instead hoping to take action on voting rights that has stalled in the chamber, multiple sources said. That legislation — which failed to get any Republican support and therefore could not clear the needed 60 vote threshold. Senate Democrats are discussing changing the rules to allow for passage on a 50-vote majority, a move that remains uncertain. A group of four moderate Democrats, including [centrist Senator Joe Manchin], have held numerous meetings in the past several days to discuss a possible rule change. Additional meetings are planned for Wednesday. The expanded child tax credit has reportedly become a sticking point in Democrats’ talks over the Build Back Better Act, as the party races to pass the $1.75tn spending package before the end of the year. The Washington Post reports: A push by Senate Democrats to pass a roughly $2 trillion tax-and-spending measure before Christmas appeared in new political peril on Wednesday, as talks soured between President Biden and Sen. Joe Manchin III (D-W.Va.) over the size and scope of the package. The gaps between the two sides remain immense, with Biden seeking to safeguard his economic agenda from significant cuts while Manchin continues to insist on steep spending reductions, according to three people familiar with the matter who requested anonymity to describe the sensitive negotiations. The sticking points include the fate of the expanded child tax credit, one of the sources said, a Democratic priority that Manchin hopes to defund or limit considerably in the bill. ... The plussed-up payments are set to expire at the end of this year unless lawmakers reauthorize it as part of their broader package, known as the Build Back Better Act. This has prompted Democrats across the Capitol this week to call for swift action to prevent a lapse in benefits starting in January. But their urgent requests do not appear to have budged Manchin, who previously has expressed general skepticism about approving aid that sends more checks directly to Americans. When asked about the report, Manchin told reporters on Capitol Hill this afternoon, “I’m not opposed to the child tax credit.” However, as CNN notes, the centrist senator did not specify whether he would prefer the expanded child tax credit program to be taken out of the Build Back Better Act. Over on Capitol Hill, the Senate has passed the National Defense Authorization Act, sending the annual funding bill to Joe Biden’s desk for his signature. The final Senate vote was 88 to 11, with three Republicans and eight Democrats opposing the legislation. The bill includes a 2.7% pay increase for troops, an overhaul of the military justice system aimed at combating sexual assaults and $300 million in aid to the Ukrainian Security Assistance Initiative, among other provisions. One of the eight Democrats who voted against the bill was Kirsten Gillibrand, who has lobbied for years to overhaul the military justice system and felt that the final version of the bill did not go far enough to ensure justice for sexual assault survivors. “This bill represents a major setback on behalf of service members, women and survivors in particular,” Gilllibrand said in a statement last week. “However, we will not stop seeking true military justice reforms for our brave service members and I will continue to call for an up or down floor vote.” Joe Biden is visiting the parts of Kentucky hardest hit by the record tornado that roared through last Friday night as one of dozens of twisters that left hundreds of miles of death and destruction. The US president traveled to the state from the White House this morning and is in Mayfield, the small city of around 10,000 residents that was wrecked by the largest of the twisters, including the leveling of a candle factory by winds up to 200mph, where workers died. “I have not seen this much damage from a tornado,” Biden said. He met with Kentucky governor Andy Beshear and told local officials: “Don’t hesitate to ask for anything” from the federal government. Biden said at the weekend that he would not travel to the state immediately so as not to distract officials or get in the way of frantic rescue and recovery efforts. Federal officials went to the state, including from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The tornadoes killed at least 74 in Kentucky and another 14 people were killed in other states, including workers at an Amazon warehouse in Illinois. Beshear said those killed in Kentucky included a dozen children and, in addition, more than 100 people remain unaccounted for and he expects the death toll to rise. Biden has repeatedly emphasized that there should be no politics in dealing with the aftermath. “There’s no red tornadoes, there’s no blue tornadoes,” the president said. New York City mayor-elect Eric Adams named Keechant Sewell, a Long Island police official, as the city’s next police commissioner, making her the first woman to lead the nation’s largest police force. Adams, himself a former New York police captain, introduced Sewell on Wednesday as his barrier-breaking choice for one of the most high-profile and powerful jobs in his upcoming administration, the Associated Press said. The AP further reported: “She’s the woman for the job,” Adams declared as he appeared with Sewell at a news conference in her native New York city borough of Queens. “She carried with her throughout her career a sledgehammer and she crushed every glass ceiling that was put in her way,” Adams said. “Today, she has crashed and destroyed the final one we need in New York City.” Sewell, who serves as the Nassau County Police Chief of Detectives, will be the third Black person to serve as New York Police Department commissioner. The 49-year-old will replace Dermot Shea. She’ll begin when Adams takes office January 1. Adams praised Sewell for her “emotional intelligence,” describing her as “calm, collected, confident” and someone who had risen through the ranks. It has been decades since a Black person ran the NYPD, with Benjamin Ward and Lee Brown, who served in the 1980s and 1990s, preceding Sewell. She will inherit a police department in flux. The NYPD has struggled to keep crime down a few years after achieving record lows. The rise, particularly in shootings and killings, is part of a national trend in the wake of the pandemic. Sewell said she will be “laser-focused on violent crime,” with a particular emphasis on gun crimes. “We are in a pivotal moment in New York as our city faces the twin challenge of public safety and police accountability. They are not mutually exclusive,” Sewell said earlier today. Adams, the cofounder of 100 Blacks in Law Enforcement Who Care, an advocacy group that sought criminal justice reform and spoke out against police brutality, has pledged new strategies to fight crime, including the return of foot patrols. He has pushed back against progressive calls to defund the police and has defended the controversial stop-and-frisk police strategy as a useful tool that has been abused. He has also pledged to diversify the NYPD’s ranks. Among about 35,000 uniformed members of the department, about 45% are white, 30% are Hispanic, 15% are Black and 10% are Asian. Sewell was named Nassau’s Chief of Detectives in September 2020 overseeing a staff of about 350 people. The NYPD has about 35,000 officers. Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden has arrived in Kentucky to survey the damage from the tornadoes that swept through the state on Friday, which killed at least 74 people. The president is taking an aerial tour of Mayfield, one of the communities that suffered the most damage from the storms, and receiving a briefing from local officials before delivering remarks this afternoon. Derek Chauvin pleaded guilty to two counts of violating George Floyd’s civil rights. The change in Chauvin’s plea comes a year and a half after the former Minneapolis police officer murdered Floyd by keeping his knee on the Black man’s neck for several minutes. The Omicron variant now represents 3% of all coronavirus cases in the US, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said at a press briefing today. Dr Rochelle Walensky added that Omicron cases have now been reported in 36 US states. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Joe Biden has arrived in Kentucky to survey the damage wrought by the tornadoes that swept through the state on Friday and killed at least 74 people. Biden was greeted at Ft Campbell Airport by Kentucky Governor Andy Beshear, First Lady Britainy Beshear and former Governor Steve Beshear, who is the father of Andy. The president is taking an aerial tour of Mayfield, one of the communities that suffered the most damage from the tornadoes, before receiving a briefing from local officials. Later this afternoon, Biden will deliver remarks on the federal government’s response to the tornadoes and other forms of extreme weather. He has already approved a major disaster declaration in Kentucky. That’s still coming up, so stay tuned. The White House Covid team has told the American public that “there is no need to lockdown” the country amid the spread of the Omicron variant, but that getting vaccinated and taking booster shots is essential. Jeff Zients, White House coronavirus response coordinator, and CDC director Rochelle Walensky both remarked at the briefing just now how the government and the public have “far more tools” to fight Covid that everyone had a year ago. It’s been a year since the first person in the US was officially vaccinated after the first vaccine was given emergency use authorization by the federal regulator following successful testing - when a New York City intensive care unit nurse, Sandra Lindsay, got the shot. At that point, 300,000 people in the US had already been killed by Covid, a figure which has now reached 800,000. Zients said that 95% of Americans are eligible to be vaccinated and that should be the route everyone chooses to protect against the virus. “We know how to keep our kids in school, and businesses open and we are not going to shut down our economy in any way,” he said. A reporter at the press briefing asked how worried, in the overall sense,a weary public should be about the pandemic, a winter surge and Omicron, given the data that it is spreading fast but perhaps is milder than the Delta strain. Chief medical adviser to the president, Anthony Fauci, put it bluntly. “If you are unvaccinated, you are very vulnerable, not only to the Delta surge we are currently experiencing but also to Omicron,” he said. About early reports of the effects of Omicron being milder than previous strains, Fauci said that, if you are unvaccinated, it did not matter, you are vulnerable. He added it was difficult to “read the tea leaves”, but the public should do what the officials keep saying, using the tools of, particularly, vaccinations and boosters, as well as using mask indoors with crowds. Fauci said last week he wears a mask indoors if he’s at gatherings with people whose vaccination status he does not know. “If we did not have these tools I would be telling you to really, really be worried. So get vaccinated, get boosted...we take this very seriously,” he said. A press briefing is now underway by the White House Covid-19 response team and related public health officials. Rochelle Walensky, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Protection, said that cases of the Omicron variant of Covid have now been reported in 36 US states – and 75 countries around the world. The Delta variant, which emerged last spring and took hold over the summer to become the dominant source of infections in the US, still accounts for 96% of Covid cases across the country, Walensky said. Omicron, which was identified just a few weeks ago, now represents 3% of US coronavirus cases, she said. Omicron is estimated to account for higher percentages in some areas, however, particularly New York and New Jersey, where it’s about 13% of all cases. Walensky noted the tragedy that 800,000 people in the US have now died from coronavirus, since the pandemic reached the country in January, 2020. Omicron spreads more easily and quickly than Delta, which itself was a lot more contagious than the first strains of the highly-contagious Covid-19 virus. “It’s vital for everyone to get vaccinated and get boosted and continue to be vigilant,” Walensky said. Booster shots give the best protection against catching the Omicron variant of Covid-19. Walensky said 200 million Americans are now vaccinated and 55 million have received booster shots. “When boosters are used, that protection works,” Walensky said. Walensky said that US nursing home residents who have received a booster vaccine dose have a rate of catching Covid that is 10 times lower than those who have not been boosted, or are unvaccinateed. Chief medical adviser to Joe Biden, Anthony Fauci, said that at this point in the pandemic there is no need for a variant-specific booster shot – the existing booster shots are effective against Omicron. Former Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin has admitted this morning to violating George Floyd’s civil rights during the arrest that killed Floyd in May 2020, sparking mass racial justice protests across the US and beyond. Chauvin appeared in federal court in person to change his former denials to a plea of guilty. He is charged with two counts of depriving Floyd of his rights, for pinning his knee against Floyd’s neck as he held him on the ground during an arrest attempt while the Black man said repeatedly that he couldn’t breathe and cried out for help. The charges also involve Chauvin’s failing to provide medical care to Floyd during the encounter, in which he was joined by three other Minneapolis officers, on 25 May 2020 in actions that resulted in Floyd’s death. Chauvin, who is white, has already been convicted of state murder and manslaughter charges in April this year. Chauvin is serving 22.5 years for murdering Floyd. His three fellow police officers, who were also arrested and fired after Floyd died, are due to stand trial later this year. Former Trump aide John McEntee and Enrique Tarrio, the leader of the far-right Proud Boys group, were supposed to be deposed today by the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. Those depositions have now been postponed, per NBC News: The committee subpoenaed both McEntee and Tarrio last month. According to the committee’s statements, investigators wanted to ask McEntee about his participation in an Oval Office meeting where the president and his advisers discussed seizing voting motions in Georgia. Tarrio was chairman of the Proud Boys at the time of the insurrection and the committee was looking for details on his group’s involvement in the planning of the events on 6 January. Meanwhile, Democrats’ negotiations over the Build Back Better Act continue, as party leaders hope to pass the $1.75tn spending package before the end of the year. Centrist Senator Joe Manchin, the most significant holdout in the talks, met with Joe Biden on Monday to discuss his remaining concerns about the bill. Asked about Democrats’ progress, Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer said this morning, “The president and Senator Manchin are having many discussions, and we’re waiting to see the outcome of those.” If Democrats cannot pass the bill before the end of the year, families may not receive checks next month from the expanded child tax credit program, which has become a lifeline for many Americans. The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack has amassed a huge trove of evidence as it seeks to connect the Trump White House to the 6 January insurrection, three months after it issued its first subpoenas to the former president’s most senior administration officials. The select committee revealed on Monday that members had reviewed thousands of documents turned over by Trump’s former White House chief of staff Mark Meadows, which showed the White House played a far more substantial role in overturning the 2020 election than previously known. But those communications and other documents that Meadows turned over represent just a small sample of evidence potentially incriminating the Trump White House collected since September. The committee expects this week to depose more top aides, including the Trump justice department official Jeffrey Clark, from whom they hope to learn more about Trump’s efforts to reinstall himself as president – even if Clark invokes his fifth amendment right against self-incrimination. That hope stems from the fact that Clark agreed to appear for a deposition just moments before the select committee would have recommended his prosecution for defying a subpoena – a circumstance that members believe means he will cooperate. Bennie Thompson, the panel chair, said on Monday that after depositions this week, the panel was on track to interview more than 300 witnesses and add to the more than 30,000 documents already turned over. Joe Biden took a few questions from reporters as he left the White House to start his trip to Kentucky, where he will survey tornado damage. Asked whether he believes the Build Back Better Act can still pass Congress before the end of the year, Biden said, “I hope so. It’s going to be close.” Another reporter asked Biden about the House vote to refer Mark Meadows to the justice department for potential contempt charges, after the former chief of staff to Donald Trump defied a subpoena from the select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. “I don’t know enough with what — just what I’ve seen; I’ve not spoken to anyone,” Biden said. “It seems to me he is worthy of being held in contempt.” Workers at a Kentucky candle factory have said they pleaded with managers to be allowed to leave as a deadly tornado barreled towards them last weekend – but say they were told they would be fired if they left their posts. The barrage of tornadoes that tore through Kentucky and surrounding states killed a dozen children, including a two-month-old infant, Governor Andy Beshear said on Tuesday. A total of 74 people died in Kentucky, with the oldest victim at 98 years old. Eight people have yet to be identified. More than 18,000 homes remained without power on Tuesday. Beshear said the storms produced “the strongest set of tornadoes that we have ever seen in Kentucky and what we believe will probably be one of the most devastating tornado events in US history”. The fatalities included eight at a candle factory in Mayfield, Kentucky, that was reduced to rubble. Deaths at the candle factory were initially feared to be much higher, but a company spokesman said on Monday that the remaining 102 workers on duty at the time are alive and have been accounted for. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. Joe Biden will visit Kentucky today to survey damage from the tornadoes that swept through the state on Friday and killed at least 74 people. According to the White House schedule, the president will take an aerial tour of the hard-hit community of Mayfield and receive a briefing from local leaders before visiting some of the neighborhoods impacted by the tornadoes. Later in the afternoon, Biden will also deliver remarks on his administration’s response to tornadoes and other forms of extreme weather. Speaking to reporters yesterday, Biden said, “I want you to know that this administration has made it clear to every governor: whatever they need, when they need it. When they need it, make it known to me and we’ll get it to them as rapidly as we can.” The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.Climate change risk and cyber attacks could have “devastating” consequences for Australia’s financial system, the reserve bank has warned. But in a speech to the Australasian Finance and Banking Conference online on Thursday, Jonathan Kearns, the RBA’s head of financial stability, said the climate risk to banks could be “managed” because they were less exposed than other sectors in a transition to a low emissions economy. However, he warned that cyber attacks were now growing in frequency. The speech comes ahead of the release of a report into the climate policies of banks and insurers from a controversial parliamentary inquiry pushed by Nationals MP George Christensen and the resources minister, Keith Pitt. The banks fear the inquiry could result in mixed signals, with most regulators urging them to reduce their exposure to emissions intensive electricity sources, but some in the government wanting to force them not to “debank” fossil fuel companies or their enablers. The banks told the inquiry they need to actively manage climate risk because governments and regulators require it, and because the investor community is “increasingly transitioning its focus towards a net zero emissions economy”. Kearns said climate risk consisted of both a “physical risk” from the reduction in a bank’s income or the damage to its assets and a “transition risk” due to losses resulting from changes in policy, technology and behaviours to achieve a low emissions economy. Climate change could harm banks by reducing their borrowers’ income or assets due to drought, storms or policy changes affecting the value of a coalmine; by preventing them rolling over short-term funding because investors are concerned about exposure to climate change; or operational risks, such as Hurricane Sandy forcing banks to close in New York. Kearns noted banks in Australia now pay “substantial attention” to climate risk, a fact that has also been acknowledged with respect to global markets by the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg. Kearns said banks have difficulty “quantifying and pricing the impact of climate change” due to insufficient data on their emissions exposure, the location of assets and “uncertainty” about climate change policies. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Kearns said the RBA’s work on climate risk suggests there could be house price falls in regions most exposed to extreme weather but “the overall losses for the financial system appear to be manageable”. “Banks are also exposed to transition risks from their lending to emissions-intensive industries which again exposes them to credit risk, although overall, Australian banks’ portfolios appear to be less emissions-intensive than the economy as a whole.” Kearns said cyber-attacks posed considerable threat and were growing in frequency. The risk consisted of disruption, failure or misuse of IT systems including theft of funds or other valuable commercial or personal information, to disruption of services, or corruption of data, possibly for ransom. “It is difficult to assess the extent of cyber risk as firms don’t tend to publicly disclose attacks and there isn’t uniform or comprehensive reporting of cyber-attacks,” he said. “But everything points to cyber-attacks growing in frequency.” Kearns said these two risks could be systemic if the bank affected is large, if the risk is correlated across multiple banks, if there is a high degree of interconnection, if the effects are long-lasting and “if it is realised when uncertainty or risk aversion is particularly high [eg during a global pandemic]”. “The financial risks from climate change are clearly systemic as climate change will affect the portfolios of all banks. “Cyber risk need not be systemic. It could affect only one bank, but if that bank is large and interconnected, or the cyber attack affects a critical node in the financial system, it could very well become systemic.” He said big banks “have substantial resources to deploy in their cyber defences” while smaller banks have difficulty maintaining equivalent defences. He noted the council of financial regulators planned to help banks by cyberwar games testing their defences by “mimicking the tactics, techniques and procedures that are used in real cyber attacks”. “It is crucial that banks continue to adapt their risk management for these evolving risks, as those bank risks can morph into systemic risks that have the potential for dire consequences for the economy and people’s livelihoods.”Erling Haaland scored once in either half to steer Borussia Dortmund to a 3-0 victory over bottom club Greuther Fürth on Wednesday as they cut the gap to leaders Bayern Munich back down to six points. Bottom club Fürth, who beat Union Berlin for their first league win of the season at the weekend, kept their hosts at bay for the first half-hour, although Thorgan Hazard’s 25th-minute strike was ruled out for offside. Dortmund won a penalty for handball in the 33rd minute, with Haaland converting from the spot. Dortmund were made to work for the win, with Cedric Itten missing a chance to equalise before half-time. It was not until the 82nd minute that Haaland made sure of the three points, powering in a header from a Julian Brandt free-kick for his 13th league goal of the campaign, and his 53rd Bundesliga goal in as many matches. Dutch forward Donyell Malen added a third with a smart finish at the far post in the 89th minute, continuing his own hot streak with his fifth goal in six games in all competitions. Despite their first league win in three matches, Dortmund coach Marco Rose was unimpressed afterwards. “The performance was a lot of hard work. We had chances but we were a bit sloppy, not fresh enough,” Rose said. “We made too many mistakes … overall it was not the performance we wanted. Everyone felt it. It was not a good game from us and expectations are high. But I hope the result is some consolation.” Bayer Leverkusen stay in third place but again let a two-goal lead slip as they drew 2-2 at home to Hoffenheim. As with Sunday’s 5-2 defeat at Eintracht Frankfurt, Patrik Schick scored the game’s first two goals. The Czech forward has now scored all of Leverkusen’s last eight Bundesliga goals after a near-post volley and header in Wednesday’s mach. Hoffenheim struck twice in the last 10 minutes to earn a draw through Angelo Stiller’s finish from a narrow angle and Munas Dabbur’s backheeled finish. Things got worse for Gerardo Seoane’s side in stoppage time as Moussa Diaby was sent off for picking up a second booking. Frankfurt are in seventh place and firmly in European contention after a dramatic 3-2 win at Mönchengladbach. The hosts went ahead through Florian Neuhaus, but Jesper Lindstrom set up Santos Borre to equalise on the stroke of half-time, then put the visitors ahead five minutes after the break with a finish into the roof of the net. Ramy Bensebaini’s 54th-minute penalty brought Gladbach level, only for Daichi Kamada to immediately fire Eintracht back in front, his angled low shot ending a quick break downfield. The visitors held on for the win despite Tuta’s 70th-minute dismissal for a second yellow card. Elsewhere, Daniel Caligiuri’s late penalty earned struggling Augsburg a 1-1 draw at home to RB Leipzig, while Union Berlin and Freiburg played out a goalless draw.Australia and the US have signed a deal to speed up information sharing about criminal suspects between law enforcement agencies and tech companies, including social media giants. The deal under the US Clarifying Lawful Overseas Use of Data (Cloud) Act will allow Australian and US law enforcement agencies to use existing warrants to demand information from overseas-based companies to prevent, detect, investigate and prosecute serious crime. The agreement allows authorities to demand data from communications service providers operating in the other’s jurisdiction, reducing the time taken to obtain information. It means companies including email providers, telcos, social media platforms, and cloud storage services could soon find themselves answering warrants from law enforcement agencies based in the US or Australia rather than their home jurisdiction. Questions remain about the practical effects of the deal, given the drive towards encryption of information that keeps data at arm’s length from the tech companies themselves, such as Facebook’s provision of end-to-end encryption for its users on WhatsApp. In October 2019 the former home affairs minister, Peter Dutton, publicly lobbied Facebook not to roll out encryption, which he said would put users’ messages out of reach of police “even with a court-ordered warrant”. Facebook responded that people “have the right to have a private conversation online” and the Cloud Act “allows for companies to provide available information when they receive valid legal requests [but] does not require companies to build backdoors”. The home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, said the Cloud Act agreement included “important safeguards” reflecting the two countries’ “respect for the rule of law and for human rights”. “As we saw in Operation Ironside … the Australian federal police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation are already capable of smashing serious, organised crime networks using sophisticated digital techniques,” Andrews said in a statement. “This agreement brings that partnership to new heights.” The US attorney general, Merrick Garland, said the deal would ensure “more efficient cross-border transfers of data … so that our governments can more effectively counter serious crime, including terrorism, while adhering to the privacy and civil liberties values that we both share”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Andrews, who is in Washington, flagged that she will meet senior officials and law enforcement partners to discuss collaboration on cybersecurity, protecting critical infrastructure, countering terrorism and preventing serious and organised crime. The Cloud Act agreement will now undergo parliamentary and congressional review processes in both countries. No further legislation is required, after the international production orders bill passed in July pave the way for the deal, although parliament will still be able to disallow it. The safeguards in the Australia-US deal are still unclear. The US’s first Cloud Act deal with the UK mandated that each country would gain permission before using the data for death penalty prosecutions in the US, or cases implicating freedom of speech in the UK. In 2019 Labor welcomed Cloud Act negotiations but questioned whether a deal would require the Coalition to amend encryption legislation. That legislation attempts to overcome the problem of encrypted messaging by co-opting technology companies, device manufacturers and service providers into building the functionality needed for police to do their spying. The Law Council and tech firms warned the law could prevent Australia qualifying for a Cloud Act agreement because it may breach the US requirement that foreign countries have robust data privacy protections to receive data from US firms.Australia’s best-laid preparations for the second Ashes Test were thrown into disarray before the start of play at Adelaide Oval as their captain, Pat Cummins, was ruled out after being identified as a close contact of a positive Covid-19 case. Just hours before Thursday afternoon’s the toss in Adelaide, it emerged that Cummins was dining at a restaurant in the city on Wednesday night when a person at the next table was identified as a positive coronavirus case. Cummins left the venue immediately and promptly informed cricket authorities, but the exposure was deemed sufficient for the fast bowler to be forced into isolation for seven days, under South Australia Health protocols. Mitchell Starc and Nathan Lyon were dining at the same restaurant as Cummins, but Australia escaped the nightmare scenario of losing three frontline bowlers as that pair were seated at a separate table outdoors. They were deemed casual contacts and as such were free to play. Cummins, who took a five-wicket haul in the first Test at the Gabba, was replaced by Test debutant Michael Neser in Australia’s starting XI. Steve Smith stepped up to lead the team for the first time since being stripped of the captaincy in the wake of the 2018 ball-tampering scandal. Travis Head, who along with Cummins headlined the first Test in Brisbane with a century, assumed Smith’s role as temporary vice-captain. “Gutted to miss this Test but really excited to see Neser finally get his chance in the baggy green,” Cummins tweeted. “He has done the hard yards and is a seriously skilful player. Super frustrating but Covid has thrown us all some curve balls over the last couple of years. Will be cheering along!” Nick Hockley, Cricket Australia’s chief executive, lamented the situation and said it was an unfortunate case of being in the wrong place at the wrong time. “It’s a sign of the times we are in,” Hockley said. “We worked very quickly with SA Health to establish their position and everyone has been very co-operative, including the individual who tested positive. We struck a balance. We always know there is a level of risk, we’ve just been extremely unlucky. It’s a really unfortunate, really disappointing situation.” Strict biosecurity bubbles were not deemed necessary for this series, with Australia and England players afforded as many freedoms as possible. There is no suggestion Cummins broke any rules and Hockley said the 28-year-old, who has since had a PCR test and produced a negative result, had worked “completely to the protocols our medical team had prescribed”. The series moves on to Melbourne for the Boxing Day Test, where Cummins is expected to return, and then to Sydney for the fourth Test starting on 7 January. Hobart makes its Ashes debut in the series finale later in January. There is an unwillingness to overhaul protocols and completely lock down players, and Hockley said it was a “prudent approach” to keep the tour going. But CA will continue to monitor the situation, especially in Melbourne and Sydney where the Omicron strain of the virus is spreading. “We’re got protocols that flex, we’re looking at it every single day.” Hockley said. “Our protocols include the playing group dining in small groups, that is designed to mitigate the risk we have seen unfold very unfortunately here in Adelaide. “I spoke to my counterpart this morning and everyone wants to see full strength sides out on the park. Dining outside is a great way to mitigate risk.” Australia are dominant with the pink ball and are seeking to open up a 2-0 series lead under the lights in Adelaide after a convincing victory at the Gabba last week put them in the driving seat. But the loss of Cummins comes as a major blow to the hosts, who were already without fellow quick Josh Hazlewood due to an injury picked up during the match in Brisbane. Cummins, the world’s top-ranked bowler, is fearsome with the pink ball in hand and has taken 46 wickets at an average of 16.23 in day-night Tests.We will be closing off this blog and opening up a new live feed here. Thanks for following along and you can also stay up to date with all our Covid stories here. Here is a snapshot of the latest key developments: Covid cases in the UK reached record levels, with 78,610 new cases reported on Wednesday, as the Omicron variant continues its rapid spread. England’s chief medical officer warned people not to mix with others unless they have to in the run-up to Christmas after Britain recorded its most daily cases since the start of the pandemic. French President Emmanuel Macron said it was possible the Covid-19 vaccine would eventually be made compulsory in France, but said it was not the priority for now. A US appeals court revived the Biden administration’s vaccine mandate for healthcare workers in 26 states. US Secretary of State Antony Blinken cut short his trip to Southeast Asia due to a Covid-19 case among his travelling party. Moderna will start a trial of its Covid-19 vaccine across eight African countries to determine its efficacy in people who are HIV positive, Bloomberg News reported. Early data suggests Omicron is more transmissible than Delta, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said. Canadians advised against all non-essential international travel. The Omicron variant has been found to multiply about 70 times quicker than the original and Delta versions of coronavirus in tissue samples taken from the bronchus, the main tubes from the windpipe to the lungs, a study found. Covid cases in the UK reached record levels, with 78,610 new cases reported on Wednesday, as the Omicron variant continues its rapid spread. Ukraine will extend Covid restrictions for another three months, to 31 March from the end of December, because of low levels of vaccination, the prime minister Denys Shmyhal said. Italy tightens restrictions for arrivals from the rest of the EU, requiring Covid tests of everyone and a five-day quarantine for those who are not vaccinated. The Crown Princess of Denmark tested positive for coronavirus on Wednesday. The Buin Zoo on the outskirts of the Chilean capital Santiago is administering a Covid-19 vaccine to tigers and lions. The experimental formula was donated by global animal health company Zoetis Inc. On Monday, lions, tigers, pumas and even an orangutan received the vaccine. “We are using an experimental vaccine that will yield short-term results that will in turn allow us to develop a vaccine that is not on the market today,” zoo director Ignacio Idalsoaga told Reuters. “These are the first doses being produced worldwide, which will enable scientific accuracy and later allow mass production to protect every animal from this deadly virus in zoos like ours. “We are vaccinating three tigers, three lions, three pumas and our orangutan, because great apes are also susceptible to this,” he said. The Canadian government on Wednesday advised Canadians against all non-essential international travel, and the largest province of Ontario capped capacity at large events like NBA and NHL games at 50% because of the new Omicron variant. Prime minister Justin Trudeau said Canadians shouldn’t travel right now and anyone entering the country is going to face extra barriers like testing. “It’s the last thing families want to be dealing with right now, but Covid in the presence of Omicron is back with a vengeance,” Trudeau said. Ontario Premier Doug Ford said all adults in Ontario, Canada’s most populous province, can book virus booster shots beginning Monday if three months have passed since their second vaccine dose. Canada trails the US, Britain and other countries in getting citizens booster shots. Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog as my colleague Tom Ambrose takes a well-deserved break. First up, some Covid numbers out of Australia. The country’s most populous state of NSW has once again seen a significant jump in cases with q record high 1,742 new Covid cases in the latest reporting period. Victoria recorded 1,622 new Covid cases as some restrictions eased. Here’s what we know so far about Omicron’s spread in Australia. In the UK, Professor Chris Whitty has told people “don’t mix with people you don’t have to” at events that are not among the most important to them. “I really think people should be prioritising those things - and only those things - that really matter to them,” he said. Here is the full video. Crown Princess Amalia, the heir to the Dutch throne, invited 21 people to her 18th birthday party last week even as the government has asked people not to have more than four guests in the face of surging Covid cases. Amalia, who had cancelled indoor festivities because of the pandemic, held a last-minute gathering in the palace gardens, Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte wrote to parliament on Wednesday. Reuters reported: The eldest daughter of King Willem-Alexander had been expected to quietly celebrate her birthday last Tuesday. Although no rules appear to have been broken, the event came as hospitals struggled to find beds for a surge in Covid patients and concerns about the new Omicron variant. Social-distancing restrictions were in place nationwide, including the early closing of restaurants and non-essential shops. Professional sporting events were closed to the public and households had been asked not to have more than four guests. “Guests were asked to take a test. All were vaccinated. The assumption was that they would keep an acceptable distance,” Rutte’s letter to lawmakers said in reference to the party. But King Willem-Alexander “informed me that in hindsight, it was not such a good idea. I think that’s a sensible reaction,” Rutte wrote. Canada’s government called on its residents not to leave the country as provinces ramp up vaccinations to combat the fast-spreading Omicron coronavirus variant. Case numbers are increasing as Canadian hospitals struggle to clear backlogs from months of postponed procedures. Many burnt-out staff members appear ill-equipped for another surge in infections, Reuters reported. “I say very clearly: now is not the time to travel,” health minister Jean-Yves Duclos said at a news conference, adding that it’s clear there is community transmission of Omicron in Canada. Duclos also said the government is sending millions more Covid vaccine doses and rapid tests to the 10 provinces. Canada already has travel bans on 10 African countries because of concerns about the new variant. Canada advised people in March 2020 not to travel abroad unless necessary but it withdrew the notice in October of this year - before the first Omicron cases were reported - citing the success of vaccination campaigns. Meanwhile in the US and Canada, Apple has temporarily closed three retail stores in Miami, Maryland and Ottawa after a rise in employee Covid cases and exposures, Bloomberg News reported on Wednesday. The company said that all employees will take tests prior to the stores reopening and that it is staying in touch with the affected workers, according to the report. The iPhone maker said on Tuesday all customers and employees at its stores will be required to wear masks. French president Emmanuel Macron has said it is possible the Covid vaccine would eventually be made compulsory in France, but said it was not the priority for now. Like its European neighbours and countries across the globe, France is scrambling to find ways to contain a fresh surge in the pandemic. France’s seven-day average of new infections is at its highest since November 2020. Asked in an interview with TF1 and LCI television stations if Covid vaccination could become mandatory in France, Macron said: “This hypothesis exists.” But he quickly added that France was “almost there,” in practice. With nearly 90% of eligible people in France already vaccinated, France was not far from the level of take-up that would be achieved by making the jab mandatory, he said. First and foremost, he encouraged those who have not had a jab yet to get it done, Reuters reported. He said: There are a little more than 5 million of our fellow citizens who are not vaccinated and therefore really, I call on them to take responsibility because they are not protected and we see many cases today in hospital ... who have not been vaccinated. Vaccinate, vaccinate, vaccinate: this is the first pillar. Good evening, I’m Tom Ambrose and will be bringing you all the latest Covid news from the UK and around the world over the next few hours. We start with the news that England’s top medic has warned that early data from South Africa on the Omicron variant should be treated with caution as there is a danger people have over-interpreted it to mean there is no problem. Professor Chris Whitty said what is lacking currently is “clear data on some of the really key questions”. The chief medical officer said even if the new variant is milder, its ability to spread faster means there could still be an issue. He told Wednesday’s Downing Street press conference: The first caution on this is simply a numerical one - if the rate of hospitalisation were to halve but you’re doubling every two days, in two days you’re back to where you were before you actually had the hospitalisation. If the peak of this is twice as great, then halving of the size of the hospitalisation rate, you still end up in the same place. And this peak is going very fast. He said it is also important to note that immunity in South Africa is “far higher” in the face of this wave, due to a prior Delta wave and the country’s vaccination programme, adding that that makes their lower hospitalisation rate so far “unsurprising”. He stated that he remains concerned there will be a problem with Omicron, but the exact nature of it is currently unknown. He said: That doesn’t mean that there isn’t some degree of slightly milder disease, that is possible. But I just think there’s a danger people have over-interpreted this to say, ‘this is not a problem and what are we worrying about?’ I want to be clear, I’m afraid this is going to be a problem. Exact proportions of it, of course, South African scientists and UK scientists and scientists globally are trying to determine at the moment. The Omicron variant has been found to multiply about 70 times quicker than the original and Delta versions of coronavirus in tissue samples taken from the bronchus, the main tubes from the windpipe to the lungs, in laboratory experiments that could help explain its rapid transmission, a study has found. Story here. Christmas get-togethers may need to be downsized as Omicron is now “very likely” to increase the death toll in Europe even if it proves to be less severe, the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control has said. The new Covid variant’s high transmissibility means that more people are forecast by the EU agency to be admitted to hospital or killed this winter than previously projected. The risk assessment, published on Wednesday, advises governments they urgently need to reintroduce Covid restrictions, with one option being to advise families and friends to avoid mixing over the festive season. Story here. Covid cases in the UK reached record levels, with 78,610 new cases reported on Wednesday, as the Omicron variant continues its rapid spread. The caseload came as Dr Jenny Harries, the chief executive of the UK Health and Security Agency, told the Commons transport committee that Omicron was “probably the most significant threat we’ve had since the start of the pandemic” and that the data expected on growth rates over the next few days “will be quite staggering compared to the rate of growth that we’ve seen in cases for previous variants”. “The difficulty is that the growth of this virus, it has a doubling time which is shortening – ie it’s doubling faster, growing faster,” she said, adding that when Omicron first arrived the doubling time was estimated to be four or five days. Story here. Canada is set to advise its population to avoid international travel while provinces ramp up vaccinations to combat the fast-spreading Omicron variant. But efforts to head off a rising Covid wave are complicated by public pandemic fatigue. Justin Trudeau’s government, set to speak on Omicron measures Wednesday afternoon, was expected to advise Canadians to avoid non-essential international travel, a source told Reuters, speaking on condition of anonymity. Ukraine’s government will extend Covid restrictions for another three months, to 31 March from the end of December, because of low levels of vaccination, the prime minister Denys Shmyhal said. “Until the level of vaccination in Ukraine reaches 70% of the population, we must adhere to all imposed restrictions,” Shmyhal said at a televised government meeting. Italy will tighten restrictions for arrivals from the rest of the EU from Thursday, requiring coronavirus tests of everyone and a five-day quarantine for those who are not vaccinated. The new measures, valid from 16 December to 31 January, come as Europe battles a fresh wave of coronavirus infections as winter settles in and the Omicron variant takes hold. Poland brought in new restrictions on the numbers of people allowed in restaurants, hotels and theatres on Wednesday, as the daily Covid death toll hit its highest level since April. The new limits of 30% of maximum capacity don’t apply for people who have been vaccinated, putting the onus for checking vaccination status on business owners. Also from Wednesday, people flying into Poland from outside the EU’s free travel Schengen area must have proof of a negative test taken no earlier than 24 hours before crossing the border. Among other measures, schools will switch to remote learning for a few days on either side of the Christmas holidays, meaning that children will be out of school from 20 December to 9 January. Nightclubs will also have to close, except for New Year’s parties. The Crown Princess of Denmark, Mary, tested positive for coronavirus on Wednesday, the royal court said in a statement. The royal was isolating in a wing of the Amalienborg Palace in the heart of Copenhagen and the virus was not detected among other members of the family, it said. The Omicron variant has been found to multiply about 70 times quicker than the original and Delta versions of coronavirus in tissue samples taken from the bronchus, the main tubes from the windpipe to the lungs, in laboratory experiments that could help explain its rapid transmission. The study, by a team from the University of Hong Kong, also found that the new variant grew 10 times slower in lung tissue, which the authors said could be an indicator of lower disease severity. Michael Chan Chi-wai, who led the work, said the result needed to be interpreted with caution because severe disease is determined not only by how quickly the virus replicates but also by a person’s immune response and, in particular, whether the immune system goes into overdrive, causing a so-called cytokine storm. “It is also noted that by infecting many more people, a very infectious virus may cause more severe disease and death even though the virus itself may be less pathogenic,” he said. “Therefore, taken together with our recent studies showing that the Omicron variant can partially escape immunity from vaccines and past infection, the overall threat from the Omicron variant is likely to be very significant.” Read the full story here: Omicron found to grow 70 times faster than Delta in bronchial tissue Christmas get-togethers may need to be downsized as Omicron is now “very likely” to increase the death toll in Europe even if it proves to be less severe, the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control has said. The new Covid variant’s high transmissibility means that more people are forecast by the EU agency to be admitted to hospital or killed this winter than previously projected. The risk assessment, published on Wednesday, advises governments they urgently need to reintroduce Covid restrictions, with one option being to advise families and friends to avoid mixing over the festive season. Dr Andrea Ammon, director of the ECDC, based in Stockholm, said: “We assess the probability of further spread of the Omicron variant in the EU/European economic area as very high, and it is considered very likely to cause additional hospitalisations and fatalities, further to those already expected from previous forecasts that consider only the Delta variant. “In the current situation, vaccination alone will not allow us to prevent the impact of the Omicron variant, because there will be no time to address the vaccination gaps that still exist.” Beyond ensuring that masks are worn and public spaces and buses and trains remain uncrowded, Ammon said governments “should also consider advising reduced inter-household mixing”. She added: “Exercising additional caution is recommended when travelling and when there is contact between people of different ages during the holiday season”. Read more here: Omicron likely to accelerate death toll in Europe, says health agency People who have cold-like symptoms in London are more likely to have Covid than a cold, according to the scientist behind the Zoe coronavirus symptom tracker app. Prof Tim Spector told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that most of the symptoms of Omicron were the same as those of a common cold, including headaches, sore throat, runny nose, fatigue and sneezing. Spector urged people with cold symptoms – and not just the classic Covid symptoms – to take a test. “Things like fever, cough and loss of smell are now in the minority of symptoms we are seeing,” he said. “Most people don’t have classic symptoms.” He added: “In London, where Covid is increasing rapidly, it’s far more likely to be Covid than it is to be a cold. We’re seeing doubling in the numbers equivalent to what’s being seen elsewhere, every two and a half days.” Read the full story here: Londoners with cold symptoms more likely to have Covid, says expert Covid cases in the UK have reached record levels, with 78,610 new cases reported on Wednesday, as the Omicron variant continues its rapid spread. The figure surpasses the previous peak in UK cases – infections that are picked up through testing – of 68,053 reported on 8 January this year. That compares with 59,610 infections and 150 fatalities reported in the 24 hours prior. The UK also recorded a further 165 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest data from the government’s coronavirus dashboard. The caseload came as Dr Jenny Harries, the chief executive of the UK Health and Security Agency, told the Commons transport committee that Omicron was “probably the most significant threat we’ve had since the start of the pandemic” and that the data expected on growth rates over the next few days “will be quite staggering compared to the rate of growth that we’ve seen in cases for previous variants”. “The difficulty is that the growth of this virus, it has a doubling time which is shortening – ie it’s doubling faster, growing faster,” she said, adding that when Omicron first arrived the doubling time was estimated to be four or five days. More to follow here: UK Covid cases at record level with 78,610 new infections A lioness in a Belgian zoo has been diagnosed with Covid-10 and the members of her pride have gone into isolation in individual enclosures away from the public, the Pairi Daiza Park said. Dana, one of four lions at the park, was suffering from fever, a cough and loss of appetite, according to vets. None of her keepers has tested positive. In June, a lioness in a zoo in the Indian city of Chennai died from coronavirus and cases have been reported in other big cats. Travellers to Greece from the UK and Denmark will need a negative PCR test to enter the country, the health ministry said on Wednesday. The measure will be in effect from 19 December as part of efforts to curb the spread of the coronavirus, the ministry said. The tests will need to be no more than 48 hours old. The quickly spreading Omicron variant is expected to become the dominant strain in Denmark this week. In the UK, at least one person has died after contracting Omicron, the prime minister, Boris Johnson, said on Monday, the first publicly confirmed death globally from the variant. As Omicron continues its rapid spread, the UK Health Security Agency has announced it will double the availability of home delivery of Covid test kits to 900,000 a day by Saturday so that more people can get lateral flow or PCR tests delivered to their door. Test availability will also expand at pharmacies, PCR testing sites and local authorities, the UKHSA said. “Pharmacies are now be able to access 10.5 million lateral flow tests per week, an increase of 5.5m tests per week,” the agency stated, adding booking slots for PCR tests will also increase. However, while the UKHSA said they are working to “secure a further hundreds of millions of lateral flow tests and an increase in PCR laboratory testing capacity of up to 150,000 tests per day” others have warned the system will not hold up against Omicron. Dr Jeffrey Barrett, who is leading the Covid-19 genomics initiative at the Sanger Institute, tweeted that testing capacity will almost certainly fail to keep up with the variant. “Even with best efforts we can scale supply linearly, but demand will grow exponentially. This will happen everywhere at [almost] the same time, so global supply chains of reagents, plastics, etc will struggle,” he wrote. A retired court of appeal judge and crossbench life peer has been announced as the chair of the UK’s public inquiry into the Covid-19 pandemic, PA Media reports. Baroness Heather Hallett, who previously acted as coroner at the inquests into the deaths of the victims of the 7/7 bombings, will lead the investigation due to begin next year, Boris Johnson announced on Wednesday. He said she will bring “a wealth of experience to the role and I know shares my determination that the inquiry examines in a forensic and thoroughgoing way the government’s response to the pandemic”. The campaign group Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice welcomed Lady Hallett’s appointment, but said it comes “far too late”. Co-founder of the group Matt Fowler said: Whilst this news is very welcome, unfortunately it comes far too late. We’ve been calling for an inquiry since the end of the first wave, and we will never know how many lives could have been saved had the government had a rapid review phase in summer 2020. With the Omicron variant upon us, the inquiry really cannot come soon enough. This is a one-off, historic opportunity to learn lessons to protect lives across the country. We cannot afford to get it wrong and we look forward to working closely with Baroness Hallett to make it a success. Baroness Hallett said: I am honoured to be appointed to chair the Covid-19 inquiry. The pandemic has affected us all, some much worse than others. I am acutely conscious of the suffering it has caused to so many. In the new year I shall be seeking views from those who have lost loved ones and all other affected groups about the inquiry’s terms of reference. I want to assure the British public that once the terms of reference are finalised, I shall do my utmost to ensure the inquiry answers as many questions as possible about the UK’s response to the pandemic so that we can all learn lessons for the future. For more updates from the UK, here is my colleague Andrew Sparrow’s Covid live blog: Canada will advise citizens on Wednesday to avoid non-essential international travel to help reduce the threat from the Omicron variant, a government source has told Reuters. The source, who requested anonymity because of the sensitivity of the situation, did not give more details. The prime minister, Justin Trudeau, spoke with the premiers of the 10 provinces on Tuesday to discuss ways of countering Omicron, which is spreading rapidly. A statement from Trudeau’s office said those on the call noted “the potential for a rapid and strong resurgence of Covid-19 cases in Canada that could put a strain on our health-care systems”. Canada initially advised people not to travel abroad unless necessary in March 2020 but in late October this year withdrew the notice, citing the success of national vaccination efforts. More than two-thirds of community pharmacies in England that offered to help deliver Covid booster jabs are still waiting for permission or have been refused, ministers have admitted, with some chemists having to wait 11 weeks. The Liberal Democrats’ health spokesperson, Daisy Cooper, uncovered the low approval rate and long delays through a written parliamentary question answered by the vaccines minister, Maggie Throup. The failure to give the green light to more pharmacies to become vaccination sites has raised questions about the NHS’s ability to deliver the 1m boosters a day that Boris Johnson has pledged. Fewer GPs are involved in the programme now than when first and second doses were given. Throup said that by the end of September, 4,733 pharmacies had between them submitted 5,376 expressions of interest to deliver Covid jabs, but only 1,454 had been accepted – a 30.7% approval rate. Some applications were decided by NHS England rather than the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC). Cooper said the delays were “shocking” and urged NHS England to speed up its decision-making to help the health service administer as many top-ups shots as possible. The Omicron variant is spreading rapidly and is forecast to be causing 1m infections a day by New Year’s Eve. Here is the full story: 70% of English pharmacies who want to give booster jabs not yet given go-ahead Boris Johnson’s cabinet has been told that rising Covid-19 infections as a result of Omicron are likely to mean staff shortages across industries and sectors in the UK, similar to the “pingdemic” that was set off by millions self-isolating over the summer. Schools and healthcare setting are also likely to face a significant challenge. Here’s a look at each sector from the Guardian’s chief political correspondent, Jessica Elgot. Ukraine’s government will extend Covid restrictions for another three months, to 31 March from the end of December, because of low levels of vaccination, the prime minister Denys Shmyhal said on Wednesday. “Until the level of vaccination in Ukraine reaches 70% of the population, we must adhere to all imposed restrictions,” Shmyhal said at a televised government meeting. According to Ukrainian health ministry data, 12.6 million people have received two shots of Covid vaccines out of a population of 41 million, while 3.6 million cases of infection and about 92,000 deaths have been registered. Google has told its US staff they must be vaccinated against Covid by the middle of January or face serious repercussions including a pay cut and ultimately the loss of their job. Employees were told they were required to have declared their vaccination status and uploaded proof of it, or to have applied for a medical or religious exemption, by 3 December, according to an internal memo obtained by CNBC, which first reported the story. After that date, Google said, it would start to contact workers who were unvaccinated or had not uploaded proof of vaccination, or whose exemption requests had not been approved. According to the memo, employees who missed a deadline of 18 January to comply with the rules would initially be placed on “paid administrative leave” for 30 days, followed by six months of “unpaid personal leave”. In the final step, Google would terminate the person’s employment. Google is one of several large US employers to have adopted a “no jab, no job” policy for their workforce, although it appears to have gone a step further than some other firms. Google declined a request to comment. It had already informed its US workforce that they would need to be vaccinated to return to its corporate buildings. The chief executive, Sundar Pichai, told staff in a memo in July that the policy would initially be implemented in the US before being adopted globally. Vaccination has also been made a requirement by other US tech companies including Uber and Facebook. Read more: Google tells US staff to get vaccinated or face losing job The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, has cut short his trip to south-east Asia due to a Covid case among his travelling party, a state department official said on Wednesday. The decision was made to mitigate the Covid risk and prioritise health and safety, and Blinken had expressed by phone his deep regret to the foreign minister of Thailand, where he was due to attend meetings on Thursday, state department spokesperson Ned Price said. The positive case was confirmed on Wednesday while Blinken was in Malaysia. He was in Indonesia the previous two days. [see 9.44am.]. Italy will tighten restrictions for arrivals from the rest of the EU from Thursday, requiring coronavirus tests of everyone and a five-day quarantine for those who are not vaccinated, AFP reports. Previously, EU arrivals had to show proof of vaccination, recent recovery or a negative test. The decree signed by the health minister, Roberto Speranza, late on Tuesday “provides for the obligation of a negative test on departure for all arrivals from European Union countries”, a spokesperson said. “For the unvaccinated, in addition to the negative test, a five-day quarantine is planned.” Unvaccinated people arriving from outside the bloc must already quarantine, and tests are required of those with jabs. The new measures, valid from 16 December to 31 January, come as Europe battles a fresh wave of coronavirus infections as winter settles in and the Omicron variant takes hold. Early data suggests two vaccine doses may not offer as much protection against Omicron and is more transmissible than the Delta variant, which currently accounts for the bulk of the world’s Covid cases. Italy was the first EU country to experience a major outbreak of Covid-19 in early 2020. In recent months, it has sought to control infections through the use of health passes showing proof of vaccination, recent recovery from Covid or a negative test for everything from going to work to eating in restaurants. European Commission spokesperson Christian Wigand said they had not yet been notified of Italy’s new temporary restrictions, despite what he said was the obligation of member states to inform the Commission 48 hours in advance. “Additional restrictions on certificate holders are only possible where this may be necessary and proportionate to safeguard public health in response to the Covid-19 pandemic,” Wigand said. “It remains crucial to ensure the proportionality of any measures taken”. More than 20,000 new cases were reported in Italy on Tuesday, and another 120 deaths. Kenya has detected its first three cases of the Omicron variant, the country’s health minister said on Wednesday. “We have at least three cases so far, and have a lot of other samples that we are sequencing,” said Mutahi Kagwe. He said Omicron was detected among travellers – two Kenyan and one South African – at airports, but did not specify when and where in Kenya the cases were detected. Kagwe said those hospitalised with Covid in Kenya were still suffering from the Delta variant, but cases of Omicron were expected to quickly rise. “It is just a matter of time before Omicron becomes the dominant variant,” he told reporters in Mombasa. The east African country has seen a surge in Covid infections in recent days after a lull lasting several months. On Tuesday, the health ministry said the number of tests returning positive results stood at 11.5% – a roughly ten-fold rise on a week earlier. Kagwe ruled out taking “knee-jerk reactions” in response to the Omicron detection, saying any measures taken would be based on science. “From where we sit, variants will come and variants will go...the decisions we make as a government in order to protect our people must also be measured and calculated,” he said. The WHO warned Tuesday that the variant was spreading at an unprecedented rate and urged countries to act swiftly to rein in transmission and protect their health systems. Since the variant was first detected last month, it has been reported in 77 countries, according to the WHO. Early data suggests it can be resistant to vaccines and is more transmissible than the Delta variant, which accounts for the bulk of the world’s coronavirus cases. Kenya has fully vaccinated only 3.27 million people, or 12% of the adult population, according to official figures. The government hoped to vaccinate 10 million people by Christmas, and 27 million by the end of 2022. This week, the high court in Nairobi struck down a government order to prevent unvaccinated Kenyans from accessing services and entering public places such as national parks, bars and restaurants. In total, the country has recorded 256,815 infection, of which 5,349 have been fatal. Poland brought in new restrictions on the numbers of people allowed in restaurants, hotels and theatres on Wednesday, as the daily Covid death toll hit its highest level since April [see 10.10am.], AFP reports. The new limits of 30% of maximum capacity don’t apply for people who have been vaccinated, putting the onus for checking vaccination status on business owners. Legislation allowing employers to verify whether employees have been vaccinated or had a recent test showing they do not have Covid is also making its way through parliament. The health ministry on Wednesday reported 660 Covid deaths in Poland in the last 24 hours – the highest daily tally since April. “The overwhelming majority are unvaccinated people,” government spokesman Piotr Muller told private broadcaster Radio Zet. “The only scientific solutions that are known at the moment are to vaccinate and react quickly when you get sick,” he said. The health ministry has said it would also like to introduce mandatory vaccination for health workers, teachers and the military from 1 March but the cabinet is divided on the issue. Also from Wednesday, people flying into Poland from outside the EU’s free travel Schengen area must have proof of a negative test taken no earlier than 24 hours before crossing the border. Among other measures, schools will switch to remote learning for a few days on either side of the Christmas holidays, meaning that children will be out of school from 20 December to 9 January. Nightclubs will also have to close, except for New Year’s parties. Poland’s rightwing populist government has so far been very cautious about following other European countries in embracing vaccine certificates and mandatory vaccinations. Vaccination hesitancy is still very high in Poland, a country of 38 million people where only around 54% of the population is fully vaccinated – one of the lowest levels in the EU. Most of the opposition is calling on the government to impose tougher restrictions and the Left party has presented proposals for obligatory vaccinations for all adults in Poland. Some clinically vulnerable patients say their third Covid vaccine dose has been wrongly recorded as a booster jab, resulting in them being turned away, writes Dr Frances Ryan in her column this week. Here is an extract: Most worryingly, large numbers of clinically vulnerable people are missing out on their booster. Take those whose health or age means they are unable to leave the house to go to a vaccine centre. Nearly two-thirds of housebound people are yet to receive their booster after many already stretched GPs opted out of delivering top-up jabs. That translates as about 300,000 of the most clinically vulnerable people in the country having not yet received their extra protection. In March, I reported how some people who were housebound were missing out on the first and second vaccines, and in an all too predictable tragedy it is happening again. I spoke to the family of an 81-year-old woman this week who missed out on her Covid jabs last year because she was unable to leave her home and her GP “didn’t have her down as housebound on the system”. After developing bedsores, she was admitted to hospital and caught Covid while there. Unvaccinated, she died soon after. “Covid safety measures meant we had to have a funeral with no wake and the whole thing was just horrific,” her granddaughter told me. “My step-grandad sat there and cried and said, ‘I just want to kiss her goodbye.’” Elsewhere, immunocompromised patients report they are now missing out on additional doses of vaccines after confusion over who is eligible for a third dose followed by a booster jab. Some patients say their third dose has been wrongly recorded on their medical records as a booster jab, resulting in them being turned away. One woman with lupus, who has to take multiple medications to suppress her immune system, told me she’s due her booster this week – but her GP can’t give it to her because the system didn’t record her third dose correctly. “My GP is amazing – if she could find a way to give it to me she would – but the system just won’t allow it.” Or consider vulnerable infants, who have not even had their first vaccine dose. Leading scientists this week called for the vaccination of young children in a bid to tackle the new variant and keep schools open, with the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) said to be currently reviewing data on Covid jabs for children over five as a “matter of urgency”. Remarkably, however, there has been no word on the need to specifically protect children with disabilities. Unlike other nations, such as the US, where vaccines have already been rolled out to children as young as five with no underlying health condition, in the UK a vaccine has still not been approved for under-12s – even if a child is extremely vulnerable. Read the full column here: Booster jabs are vital – why is it so difficult for clinically vulnerable people to access them? Omicron will likely be the dominant Covid variant in Ireland by next week, the deputy prime minister, Leo Varadkar, has said, after it rose to accounting for 14% of cases from just 1% a week ago. Varadkar told the Newstalk Radio station that he expected the country’s health chiefs to recommend a tightening of Covid restrictions on Thursday around the managing of close contacts, decreasing social mixing and on international travel. The government also plans to increase the number of booster doses administered to 1.75 million by Christmas and possibly 2 million by year-end, Varadkar said, up from a previous target of 1.5 million. Almost 1.3 million of Ireland’s 5 million population has received a booster jab to date. Japan’s health ministry said its panel of experts had agreed Moderna Inc’s Covid-19 vaccines could be used for booster shots, setting the stage for official government approval. Japan started administering booster shots this month with Pfizer Inc vaccines. The panel agreed on Wednesday that Moderna vaccines could be used on those aged 18 or older for booster shots, the ministry said. The same age restriction is being applied to Pfizer vaccines for booster shots. Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, has warned that Omicron could become dominant in Europe by mid-January. But she insisted that the 27 nations have sufficient vaccines to fight the coronavirus pandemic. Poland’s daily Covid death toll has hit a fourth wave record as 660 more people died with the virus and 24,000 new cases were reported. It comes as the country tries to battle high infection rates with tighter restrictions. The World Health Organization (WHO) has said that preliminary evidence indicates that Covid vaccines may be less effective against infection and transmission of the more infectious Omicron variant. In its weekly epidemiological update, the WHO said more data is needed to better understand the extent to which Omicron may evade immunity from vaccines or previous infection. A journalist accompanying US secretary of state Antony Blinken on a trip to the UK and south-east Asia has tested positive for Covid. A spokesperson for the state department, Ned Price, said one of 12 members of the travelling press corps on Blinken’s trip tested positive on Wednesday in Malaysia. EU countries including Greece, Italy, Spain and Hungary have started vaccinating five- to 11-year-olds. The vaccination campaign expansion comes after the EU regulator last month approved a reduced-dose vaccine by Pfizer-BioNTech. German chancellor Olaf Scholz today promised that the country “we will win the fight against this pandemic” in his first major address to parliament. He urged Germans to get vaccinated, telling them it is the only way out of the Covid crisis. German police have searched several locations in the eastern state of Saxony as part of an investigation into what they said was a plot by anti-vaccination activists to murder the state’s leader, Michael Kretschmer. A UK government adviser, Prof Adam Finn, has warned that the latest Covid wave is moving “faster than ever” amid warnings that Omicron infections could reach 1m a day by the end of December. The UK transport secretary has said that “with some confidence” people in the UK will be able to enjoy Christmas, despite soaring Omicron cases, and claimed the country is in a “much better position” than last year. Grant Shapps told Sky News that ministers “want people to enjoy Christmas this year”, adding: “We want people to be sensible but to enjoy their Christmas.” That’s it from me for today. Handing over now to my colleague Lucy Campbell. Thanks for reading. The UK’s independent NHS Race and Health Observatory has today announced it has signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the US Centres for Disease Control and Prevention’s Office of Minority Health and Health Equity (CDC) to improve long standing ethnic health inequalities. The organisations, based in London and Atlanta, Georgia, will join efforts from January 2022. Dr Habib Naqvi, Director of the NHS Race and Health Observatory, said: As we face the developing emergence of the Omicron variant globally, this is a pivotal time to seal our commitment to address long-standing ethnic health inequalities as well as being responsive to immediate health challenges, working with our US counterpart. We are thrilled to have this landmark exchange framework in place which will allow us to collaborate with CDC in improving the future health prospects and outcomes for our respective Black, Asian and minority ethnic communities and patients. It is an important step in cultivating collaborative learning for tackling ethnic health inequalities across the globe. The European Union’s drug regulator has recommended that a booster dose of Johnson &amp; Johnson’s Covid vaccine may be given to adults at least two months after a first dose. A booster dose of the vaccine may also be given after two doses of either Pfizer-BioNTech or Moderna’s vaccines, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) concluded, reports Reuters. How do young children cope with Covid anxiety? Sally Weale reports: European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, has warned that Omicron could become dominant in Europe by mid-January. But she insisted that the 27 nations have sufficient vaccines to fight the coronavirus pandemic, reports AFP. “If you look at the time it takes for new cases to double in number, it seems to be doubling every two or three days. And that’s massive. We’re told that by mid-January, we should expect Omicron to be the new dominant variant in Europe,” she told the European Parliament, citing scientific data. “But over the last year, we’ve worked hard and we’ve achieved a great deal and that is why Europe is in a better position now to fight the virus.” She said there were “enough vaccines doses for every European” as EU countries try to speed up booster rollouts to stop the spread of the new variant. “We’re now in a position to produce 300m doses of the vaccine per month here in Europe,” von der Leyen said. To date, 66.6% of the EU population have had two doses of a Covid-19 vaccine and 62 million had received a third booster jab, she said, adding that the priority now is to increase vaccination rates, including among children, and overcome scepticism. It comes after the World Health Organization (WHO) yesterday said that Omicron was spreading at an unprecedented rate and was “probably” in most countries. Poland’s daily Covid death toll has hit a fourth wave record as 660 more people died with the virus and 24,000 new cases were reported. It comes as the country tries to battle high infection rates with tighter restrictions, reports Reuters. “This is the effect of these last weeks, when the number of cases has accumulated. They are mainly unvaccinated people,” a government spokesman, Piotr Muller, told private broadcaster Radio Zet. Poland’s highest daily death toll of the pandemic was recorded in April when 954 people died. The country brought in new restrictions today – including on capacity limits for public spaces and closing nightclubs – in an attempt to prevent the virus from spreading. “There is no doubt that Omicron is already in Poland … Within the EU, we have free movement of people, so it is obvious that this mutation should be in Poland,” Muller said. The World Health Organization (WHO) has said that preliminary evidence indicates that Covid vaccines may be less effective against infection and transmission of the more infectious Omicron variant. In its weekly epidemiological update, the WHO said more data is needed to better understand the extent to which Omicron may evade immunity from vaccines or previous infection, reports Reuters. “As a result of this, the overall risk related to the new variant of concern Omicron remains very high,” the WHO said. A journalist accompanying US secretary of state Antony Blinken on a trip to the UK and southeast Asia has testing positive for Covid. A spokesperson for the state department, Ned Price, said one of 12 members of the travelling press corps on Blinken’s trip tested positive on Wednesday in Malaysia, reports the Associated Press. He said that neither Blinken, any of his senior staff or other members of the press corps have tested positive. Blinken arrived in Kuala Lumpur late last night from Jakarta, Indonesia and is due to arrive in Bangkok, Thailand later today. The first stop of his trip was in Liverpool, England, where he took part in a G7 summit over the weekend. EU countries including Greece, Italy, Spain and Hungary have started vaccinating five- to 11-year-olds, reports the Associated Press. The vaccination campaign expansion comes after the EU regulator last month approved a reduced-dose vaccine by Pfizer-BioNTech. A children’s hospital in Athens started administering jabs early on Wednesday – hours after Greece reported 130 Covid deaths, its highest daily death toll since the start of the pandemic. More than 30,000 vaccination appointments for children aged under 12 have been booked. Greek education minister Niki Kerameus said: I won’t hide the fact that on a personal level after having talked with doctors and receiving scientific data, our family decided to vaccinate our son who is five-and-a-half years old. The UK Covid blog with Andrew Sparrow is now up and running: This blog will continue with global Covid news. The Scottish government has appointed a chair and published the terms of reference for the country’s public inquiry into the handling of coronavirus. In a statement to parliament, deputy first minister John Swinney confirmed that the Hon Lady Poole QC, senator of the College of Justice of Scotland, will chair the inquiry. He also published the inquiry’s terms of reference including 12 areas of investigation for the inquiry, which will span 1 January 2020 to 31 December 2022. Swinney said: From my own and the first minister’s interactions with Lady Poole, I am in no doubt that she has the necessary leadership skills, integrity and deep technical knowledge to undertake this inquiry. Her expertise in administrative and human rights law is exactly in line with our expectations of a human rights-based approach to the inquiry. We are committed to working with the UK government to develop the approach to the UK-wide inquiry and expect the chair of the Scottish public inquiry to coordinate with the chair of the UK-wide inquiry. Poole said: I am honoured to chair this independent public inquiry examining the strategic response to the Covid-19 pandemic in Scotland … The inquiry will work independently to establish the facts in an open and transparent way in order to determine what lessons can be learned for the future. There is a great deal to be done in a short space of time. I will continue to give considerable thought as to how best to conduct the inquiry to ensure it fully achieves its aims, including a careful and thorough examination of the terms of reference. German chancellor Olaf Scholz today promised that the country “we will win the fight against this pandemic” in his first major address to parliament. He urged Germans to get vaccinated, telling them it is the only way out of the Covid crisis. “I tell citizens of our country, ‘yes it will get better, yes we will win the fight against this pandemic with the biggest determination, and yes we will win this fight, we will overcome the crisis.” He said there were “no red lines” for his government in tackling the pandemic’s fourth wave, which experts say is predominantly driven by high numbers of unvaccinated people. Soaring Covid cases could cause major shortages across industry, hospitality and healthcare in the UK, ministers have been told, as rail companies cancelled services and Royal Mail said it was experiencing high staff absences. UK transport secretary Grant Shapps has denied that Boris Johnson’s authority has been undermined by last night’s Conservative rebellion over Covid passes. He told LBC: In terms of his authority, I saw the prime minister on Sunday night asking the country to get the booster jab and yesterday walked past huge queues around the block of people responding to the prime minister’s plea. Having been the person to get this country first of all jabbed ahead of every other major economy and now booster jabbed ahead of every other country, comes down personally to the authority of the prime minister. A UK coronavirus expert has said the virus is so widespread in London that those with cold symptoms are more likely to have Covid than a cold. Prof Tim Spector, a professor of genetic epidemiology at King’s College London, who runs the Zoe Covid symptom app, told the BBC’s Today programme: In London, where Covid is increasing rapidly, it’s far more likely to be Covid than it is to be a cold. We’re seeing doubling in the numbers equivalent to what’s being seen elsewhere, every two-and-a-half days, and that really means numbers are going up. If we look at our regional charts we see London accelerating more than we’ve seen it since the very first wave and this now means that Omicron is the predominant variant already. We’ll be at 100% very soon, so that’s happened in just a matter of days – that’s is why so many people are going down with infections. The UK transport secretary, Grant Shapps, has said that parliament will be recalled if further Covid restrictions are required during the Christmas recess. “We have got in place now the measures that we believe will see us through to the new year,” he told BBC Breakfast. “If we did need to do anything else, parliament would be recalled too in order to vote on doing that, so it won’t just be an automated thing. We want people to be able enjoy Christmas this year. We are definitely in a better position than we were last year.” German police have searched several locations in the eastern state of Saxony as part of an investigation into what they said was a plot by anti-vaccination activists to murder the state’s leader, Michael Kretschmer. Reuters reports that searches in the city of Dresden targeted individual members of a group on the messaging service Telegram, where plans for the killing were discussed in connection with the state government’s coronavirus curbs, police said. The group Dresden Offlinevernetzung, or Dresden offline networking, came to the attention of authorities after an investigation published last week by the broadcaster ZDF. A UK government adviser has warned that the latest Covid wave is moving “faster than ever” amid warnings that Omicron infections could reach 1m a day by the end of December. Prof Adam Finn, from the University of Bristol and a member of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI), told BBC Breakfast: The wave is coming very fast and in fact alarmingly fast – if anything faster than ever. So it really is a race at the moment. The more immunity that we’ve all got the less of a problem this is going to be but I’m afraid it is going to be a serious problem either way. He said boosters take effect quickly – expected to reach full protection after two weeks and partial protection after a week. It does come through very fast because you’ve got immunological memory, you’ve seen the antigen before from your previous doses, so the level of protection goes up pretty quick. We generally look for the level of protection around two weeks, because that’s probably when you get to pretty much maximum levels, but already at a week your antibody levels will be much higher than they were before you had the booster. So it does get going pretty quick. As people across the UK rush to get their Covid booster doses, Sky News reports that people have been queuing in Ealing from 6.15am today. The UK transport secretary has said that “with some confidence” people in the UK will be able to enjoy Christmas, despite soaring Omicron cases, and claimed the country is in a “much better position” than last year. Grant Shapps told Sky News that ministers “want people to enjoy Christmas this year”, adding: “We want people to be sensible but to enjoy their Christmas.” He said problems with lateral flow tests on the NHS website are a distribution issue, saying: “There’s plenty of supply in the country.” England, he said, would not be following in the footsteps of Scotland, which is advising people to limit socialising to three households before Christmas. He said the number of people hospitalised by Omicron is still 10 and that around 9,000 people have tested positive for the variant. Shapps said Shaun Bailey, the Conservative candidate for London mayor, did the “right thing” to resign after a photograph emerged of him at a “raucous” party during lockdown last year. Hi, I’m looking after the global Covid blog for the next few hours. Please get in touch with any tips or suggestions: miranda.bryant@guardian.co.uk Pfizer and BioNtech are set to displace AstraZeneca as the main suppliers of Covid-19 vaccines to the global Covax programme at the start of 2022, Reuters reports. The expected change comes with headaches for receiving countries that lack sufficient cold storage capacity to handle the Pfizer vaccine, and amid risks of a shortage of syringes needed to administer that shot. AstraZeneca is currently the most distributed vaccine by Covax, according to data from Gavi, the vaccine alliance that co-manages the programme with the World Health Organization (WHO). The programme has so far delivered more than 600m shots to nearly 150 countries, of which more than 220m are AstraZeneca’s and about 160m Pfizer’s. But in the first quarter of next year Pfizer is set to take over, according to Gavi and WHO figures on doses assigned by the Covax programme for future supplies. Soaring Covid cases could cause major shortages across industry, hospitality and healthcare, UK ministers have been told, as rail companies cancelled services and Royal Mail said it was experiencing high staff absences. According to cabinet sources, Boris Johnson and England’s chief medical officer, Chris Whitty, said at a briefing that rising cases would be likely to affect businesses with mass worker absences. Whitty also told ministers to expect a “significant increase” in hospital admissions. West End shows have been cancelled because of the surge in suspected Omicron cases, while waste collections, deliveries and schools are all under threat from shortages. No 10 emphasised there had not been “any discussion or any warning about hospitals or clinical settings having to close as a result of this variant”. Read the full story here. Hello and thanks for following along. If you’ve just joined here’s a quick snapshot of the main developments so far. All adults in England must now show a Covid pass detailing proof of double-vaccination or a negative PCR or lateral flow test result within the last 48 hours in order to enter nightclubs and other large events. The new measures come into force today and apply to nightclubs, indoor unseated venues with a capacity of more than 500 people, unseated outdoor venues that hold more than 4,000 people, and any venue with more than 10,000 people. A warning from the World Health Organization (WHO) cautioned that the Omicron variant is spreading at an unprecedented rate. “The reality is that Omicron is probably in most countries even if it hasn’t been detected yet,” WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus told reporters on Tuesday. “Omicron is spreading at a rate we have not seen with any previous variant,” he added. Heres a rundown of everything you might have missed: Almost 100 Conservative lawmakers voted against new coronavirus restrictions, dealing a major blow to British prime minister Boris Johnson’s authority and raising questions about his leadership. Australia reopened borders to vaccinated skilled migrants and foreign students after a near two-year ban on entry. New Zealand has fully vaccinated 90% of its eligible population, prime minister Jacinda Ardern announced. Auckland also reopened its border. Italy extended a Covid-19 state of emergency to March 31 and ruled that all visitors from EU countries must take a test before departure. South Korea reported its highest daily total of cases, as breakthrough infections among those already vaccinated continue to spike. Cambodia detected its first case of the Omicron variant in a local woman who had travelled from Ghana. The Philippines also detected two imported cases of Omicron. Rwanda confirmed six cases of the Omicron variant of coronavirus, the health ministry said. Low vaccination rates in regions including Africa – where Omicron was first detected and which has recorded a massive rise in cases over the past week – would provide breeding grounds for new variants, the World Health Organization warned. Africa is experiencing its fastest surge in cases this year, with the number up 83% in the past week, although deaths remain low, the WHO said. Canada is expected to toughen restrictions on international travel with new measures to be announced on Wednesday, CBC News reported. Pfizer-BioNTech’s vaccine has been less effective in South Africa at keeping infected people out of hospital since the Omicron variant emerged last month, a study showed. All three US-authorised vaccines appear to be significantly less protective against Omicron in laboratory testing, but a booster dose likely restores most of the protection, a study showed. Pfizer’s antiviral Covid-19 pill showed near 90% efficacy in preventing hospitalisations and deaths in high-risk patients, and recent lab data suggests the drug retains its effectiveness against Omicron. The US surpassed 50 million coronavirus cases, according to Johns Hopkins University data. The Philippines has detected two imported cases of the Omicron coronavirus variant of concern, its first reported cases, the Department of Health said on Wednesday. The two Omicron variant cases, detected from 48 samples sequenced on 14 December were currently isolated in a quarantine facility, the department said in a statement. The news comes as an incoming typhoon has forced the Philippines to delay Covid-19 vaccinations of millions of people living in the path of the storm, as authorities hastened preparations in anticipation of its arrival this week. New Zealand’s prime minister Jacinda Ardern announced the country has fully vaccinated 90% of its eligible population. In her final speech to Parliament for the year, Ardern said: “That 90% puts us above the United States, the UK, Israel...we are now finishing with a rate much higher than them.” “And we have not finished. In Tāmaki Makaurau (Auckland), we are seeing some [District Health Boards] reach 97%, so let’s keep going.” Ardern concluded her speech by thanking New Zealanders for putting in the hard work to get through the Covid-19 outbreak. “It’s been hard, people have been weary, but Kiwis have done what it takes to put us in the best possible place for us to keep moving...and I for one will never underestimate New Zealanders. So to everyone, I wish you a wonderful break, you bloody deserve it.” California is exempting San Francisco from a rule that takes effect on Wednesday requiring all people to wear masks indoors in a bid to contain a troubling rise in new coronavirus cases, the Associated Press reports. San Francisco will continue to allow fully vaccinated people to remove their masks in gyms and workplaces while its overall masking mandate remains in effect, the city Department of Public Health announced. “It’s a recognition of all of the thought and care that San Francisco residents have been putting into staying as safe as possible,” said Dr Susan Philip, San Francisco’s health officer. About 86% of eligible San Francisco residents have received at least one vaccine dose, according to the public health department. Rwanda has just confirmed six cases of the Omicron variant of coronavirus, the health ministry said, pushing for authorities in the small East African nation to urge people to get vaccinated. “All arriving passengers must quarantine for three days at a designated hotel at their own cost,” the cabinet of ministers said in a resolution on Tuesday, adding that it had suspended night club operations and live band entertainment elsewhere. A member of United States secretary of state Antony Blinken’s travelling press pool has tested positive for Covid-19 on arrival in Kuala Lumpur and is isolating, a state department spokesperson said. Secretary Blinken and his senior staff were also tested upon arrival in Kuala Lumpur and were all tested negative, Reuters reports. The Chinese vaccine Sinovac, which has been administered to millions of people around the world, does not provide enough antibodies to neutralise the Omicron variant, according to researchers in Hong Kong. In a sample of 25 people, initial findings revealed that none of them showed sufficient antibodies in their blood serum to take out the threat of the Omicron variant, researchers at the University of Hong Kong said on Tuesday night, Bloomberg reported. Out of another group of 25 people double-dosed with the Pfizer jab, Inc. and BioNTech SE, five had neutralising ability against the new variant, the scientists said. Do Covid vaccine mandates work? In Australia, where employment-related mandates on the coronavirus vaccine were introduced months ago, the stories of two women demonstrate how such measures can work – and how they can backfire. The Guardian’s science correspondent, Nicola Davis, explains that vaccine mandates are nothing new: governments around the world have long imposed vaccination requirements in different areas of life. Such policies can be effective – but health officials must be prepared to confront misinformation and public mistrust. Listen to the latest Today in Focus podcast here. South Korea will clamp down on social gatherings and cut the hours of some businesses to fight a record-breaking surge of the coronavirus that has led to a spike in hospitalisations and deaths. Prime minster Kim Boo-kyum confirmed the government’s intent to restore stricter social distancing measures during a meeting on Wednesday as the country set another new one-day record in infections with 7,850 cases, the fourth time this month the daily tally exceeded 7,000. The country’s death toll is now 4,456 after 70 virus patients died in the past 24 hours, while a record 964 patients were in critical or serious condition. Officials previously said the country’s medical system could buckle if the number of serious cases topped 1,000 because it would greatly hamper hospitals’ ability to respond not only to Covid-19 but also to other medical conditions. Kim Boo-kyum said: The government sees the current virus situation as serious and plans to enforce stronger social distancing measures. We are considering measures that include further reducing the size of allowable social gatherings and imposing business-hour restrictions, and these steps will be confirmed and announced soon.” A third booster Covid-19 vaccine dose will be essential to get high protection against symptoms from the Omicron variant and it appears likely the variant will become the dominant strain in Australia, virologists from the Kirby Institute say. The new data from the Kirby Institute comes as Covid-19 case numbers in New South Wales jumped again on Wednesday to 1,360, 25 of them are the Omicron variant. There are now 89 Omicron cases in NSW. The researchers also said Covid boosters may be required every six months to protect against the variant. Virologists from the Kirby Institute presented new data on Wednesday after growing the Omicron variant in a laboratory and testing how it responded to various samples, including from the fully vaccinated, from those who had recovered from the virus but were unvaccinated, and those who had recovered from the virus and also received two vaccine doses. Read the full story here. There were tears of joy, long embraces and sighs of relief, as thousands of New Zealanders boarded flights or hit the road on Wednesday, in what was, for many, the first reunion with friends and family in four months. The wider Auckland region was closed off in August as the city tried to contain an outbreak of Covid-19. In November, the government announced it would relax the border from 15 December to allow people to travel, due to the eligible population nearing the 90% double-vaccination rate. At midnight, the road checkpoints at the edge of the city were removed, and the queues of cars, some with boats and trailers attached, were given the green light to move. On Wednesday morning, airport terminals around the country buzzed with Aucklanders eager to leave and reunite with loved ones. About 12,000 people were expected to fly out of Auckland on Wednesday. It will mark the beginning of a 4000% increase in movement through the airport over the summer period, the airport said. Read the full story from our reporter in New Zealand, Eva Corlett, here. Cambodia has just detected the country’s first case of the Omicron variant in a local woman who had travelled from Ghana. The 23-year old woman had returned from Ghana via Dubai and Bangkok, the ministry of health said in a statement issued on Tuesday. The woman, who was 15 weeks pregnant, had been admitted to hospital for treatment, it said. Low vaccination rates in regions including Africa - where Omicron was first detected and which has recorded a massive rise in cases over the past week - would provide breeding grounds for new variants, the World Health Organization has warned. WHO estimated it will take Africa until May 2022 to have 40% vaccination coverage and until August 2024 to reach 70% as countries with plentiful vaccine supplies raced to administer third doses to beat Omicron. Although Africa has recorded a massive rise in cases over the past week, the region is reporting a lower number of deaths compared with previous waves. The World Health Organization (WHO) has warned that the Omicron variant is spreading at an unprecedented rate and had “probably” spread to most nations undetected. WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus told reporters on Tuesday: The reality is that Omicron is probably in most countries even if it hasn’t been detected yet. Omicron is spreading at a rate we have not seen with any previous variant.” The WHO urged countries to act swiftly to rein in transmission and protect their health systems and warned against complacency. WHO expert Bruce Aylward strenuously warned against “jumping to a conclusion that this is a mild disease”. “We could be setting ourselves up for a very dangerous situation,” he added. Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you as we go through all the latest coronavirus developments. Let’s start with the news that the United States has just surpassed 800,000 coronavirus-related deaths, according to recently updated data from Johns Hopkins University. The grim milestone means the country now has the highest number of reported total Covid-19 deaths in the world, followed by Brazil and India. On Monday, the US reached 50m confirmed cases of Covid-19. Covid deaths this year were mostly in unvaccinated patients and may have been preventable, health experts say. Roughly 60% of the US population has been fully vaccinated against Covid-19, CDC data shows. A warning from the World Health Organization (WHO) has also cautioned that the Omicron variant is spreading at an unprecedented rate. “The reality is that Omicron is probably in most countries even if it hasn’t been detected yet,” WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus told reporters on Tuesday. “Omicron is spreading at a rate we have not seen with any previous variant,” he added. The WHO also noted that low vaccination rates in regions including Africa - where Omicron was first detected and which has recorded a massive rise in cases over the past week - would provide breeding grounds for new variants. Here is a snapshot of all the key Covid developments: The US surpassed 50 million coronavirus cases, according to Johns Hopkins University data. The UK has recorded another 59,610 Covid cases, the highest figure since early January. A further 633 confirmed Omicron cases were reported, taking the total to 5,346, according to the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA). In England, MPs have backed Covid passes being required at nightclubs and large venues as dozens of Tories rebelled against the government’s ‘plan B’ winter Covid measures. Germany will exempt people who have had a booster jab from having to take a Covid test before entering some leisure facilities, federal and regional health ministers agreed on Tuesday. Italy has extended a Covid-19 state of emergency to 31 March. Denmark and Norway announced stricter Covid measures to battle soaring infection numbers. Austria is likely to recommend Covid booster shots for children aged 12 and over once four months have passed since their second vaccine dose, putting the country ahead of most European countries in terms of vaccinating children. Moderna’s chief medical officer, Dr Paul Burton, said Omicron “poses a real threat” and cautioned against claims it causes milder disease, warning that Omicron and Delta are likely to circulate together for some time. The UK will need a mini-furlough in the event that the Omicron variant forces the government into closing parts of the economy, the International Monetary Fund has said. Pfizer says its antiviral Covid-19 pill showed near 90% efficacy in preventing hospitalisations and deaths in high-risk patients, and recent lab data suggests the drug retains its effectiveness against the Omicron variant. France detected 130 cases of the Omicron variant but so far has no plans to impose new restrictions. South Korea marked its deadliest day since the start of the pandemic. Israel’s prime minister Naftali Bennett is in quarantine after catching a flight with someone who tested positive for Covid. Billie Eilish revealed that she had Covid-19 in August, and said that she felt sure she “would have died” had she not been vaccinated. China’s economically important Zhejiang province is battling a Covid outbreak that has left half a million people quarantined and some districts under business shutdown. The US air force discharged 27 people for refusing to get the Covid-19 vaccine, making them what officials believe are the first service members to be removed for disobeying the mandate. Mainland China detected its second imported case of the Omicron variant, this time in its southern Guangdong province, following reports of the first case in the northern city of Tianjin on Monday. Africa is experiencing its fastest surge in Covid cases this year, with the number up 83% in the past week, although deaths remain low. High levels of previous exposure to three previous waves of Covid infection in South Africa may explain the relatively low levels of hospitalisation and severe disease in the current outbreak of the Omicron variant, rather than the variant itself being less virulent.The Indigenous health workforce is stretched and faces a “huge vaccination workload” as it scrambles to close the Covid-19 vaccination gap and administer boosters to Aboriginal communities, health advisers say. The peak body for general practitioners has also issued a dire warning about the lack of funding its members are being given to participate in the booster rollout, saying half of Australia’s participating clinics are losing money by administering Covid-19 jabs. Demand for boosters has soared this week amid Omicron variant fears and the government’s decision to shorten the gap between the second and third shots. The number of Australians with a third dose jumped from 687,067 on Saturday to 868,122 on Tuesday, an increase of almost 200,000 in four days. The sudden demand has put pressure on GPs and pharmacists, and the Australian Medical Association on Wednesday warned that booster rollout risked falling behind. Attention has also turned to the key priority groups for vaccination, including Indigenous Australians. A huge gap still exists between primary Covid-19 vaccination rates for the general population and those for Indigenous Australians, a failing that experts have labelled a “national shame”. Just 77% of Indigenous Australians have received a first dose, compared with 93.5% for the general population. The double-dose rate for Indigenous Australians is 67.8%, compared with 89.7% nationally. The Aboriginal healthcare sector faces a “huge vaccination workload” in 2022, Dr Jason Agostino, a National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation (Naccho) medical adviser, said. “We have regular childhood vaccinations, flu vaccines, boosters to deliver, as well as continuing to target the 25% of our population over 12 who are unvaccinated,” Agostino said. “It’s a large workload, bigger than the previous six months because we still have to do that intense outreach to the unvaccinated, plus deliver boosters and vaccines to kids as well. Agostino said these issues have been raised at the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Advisory Group on Covid-19, which advises the Department of Health. The group meets weekly. “They are very aware of the challenges we’ve got. We’re glad of some additional funding released this week to assist, but this is a long-term problem, with long-term workload solutions,” he said. Amsant, the Northern Territory’s peak Aboriginal health body, has called for the federal government to bring back its international workforce. The NT has been reliant in the past on a regular supply of nurses, mostly from New Zealand, to boost local primary healthcare staff numbers. Amsant also called for the government to increase the scope of practice for Aboriginal health workers and healthcare practitioners, so they can administer vaccines. Agostino said he supported those calls. “Our workforce is stretched, and our primary healthcare workforce is exhausted. And it remains so important for us to get the five- to 11-year-old cohort vaccinated,” he said. “The important thing to be said is, boosters are not an optional extra,” he said. “They are essential.” Meanwhile general practitioners, who are the backbone of the booster rollout, have warned they are not being adequately funded to meet the costs of the next phase in the vaccination program. Royal Australian College of General Practitioners president, Dr Karen Price, said many GP practices had operated on paper thin margins in the past two years of the pandemic. One in every two clinics, she said, were losing money on the vaccine rollout. “And while GPs are not in the job for the money, by any means, we need to make ends meet,” Price told the Guardian. “GPs remain the backbone of the vaccine rollout, we’ve delivered over half of all vaccines across the country to date. We know the booster rollout is critical to protect our community as Australia opens up and we see increasing cases in the community.” “We need to fight this with all we have, not with one arm tied behind our backs.”Australia’s climate wars may not be over but, as key targets and policies from the two main parties are now out, there does appear to be a quietening of the political gunfire. But Queensland coalition senator Matt Canavan was still looking to fire shots, with a front page claim that Labor’s new climate policy constituted “revenge” on his home state. In a story in the Courier Mail, Canavan claimed Labor’s policy would let “other states off the hook” and leave the state “marooned” with its “radical carbon cuts”. Last week the opposition announced it would cut emissions by 43% from 2005 levels by 2030 if it wins the next election. This compares to the Morrison government’s target of 26% to 28%. Canavan claimed Labor was looking to target 215 high-emitting facilities, and that almost one-third of those were in Queensland. This apparently equalled revenge for the state rejecting the opposition during the 2019 federal election. The Nationals senator said Labor’s “radical carbon cuts” would cause “massive job losses” in the state. Yet Labor’s proposal is based on a suggestion from the Business Council of Australia (BCA) to tighten a policy that was legislated in November 2014 by the Coalition, and came into force when Malcolm Turnbull was prime minister. That policy is known as the safeguard mechanism, under which facilities such as mines and smelters that emit more than 100,000 tonnes of CO2 equivalent a year have to buy carbon credits if their emissions go above a predetermined cap. The BCA has also suggested the threshold for the mechanism be dropped below 100,000 tonnes, but Labor has said it will not do that. Labor does want to tighten this mechanism by reducing the caps each year, but hasn’t decided yet exactly how the cuts will be distributed across the facilities. So the list of facilities Canavan says Labor is using to exact revenge on his own state, is in fact a list of companies compiled through the policy of his own government. AngloAmerica’s Capcoal mine in the Bowen Basin, producing coal for steel-making, was top of a list of “Queensland’s heaviest emitters” published in the Courier Mail, with emissions at 3.15m tonnes of CO2-equivalent a year. Capcoal’s owner, Anglo American, has a target to be carbon neutral across its worldwide operations, including its Australian mines, by 2040. Radical carbon cuts, anyone? But the Courier Mail’s list was not a rundown of Queensland’s heaviest emitters (and nor was it ‘revealed’ as the newspaper claimed), but rather a list of the highest emitting facilities that are registered under the safeguard mechanism. Queensland’s biggest corporate emitter of greenhouse gases, according to federal government data, is actually Stanwell – the state-owned coal power generator that emits 17.1Mt of CO2e a year. Stanwell’s coal power units at Tarong alone emit 9.7Mt, but electricity generators are not currently covered by the safeguard mechanism. Off the hook? How about Canavan’s claim that using the safeguard mechanism lets other states “off the hook”? First, it should be no surprise that as the state with the highest emissions, accounting for almost a third of the nation’s entire footprint, Queensland will need to see greater cuts than elsewhere (the state’s 2030 target is still stuck on 30%). But in fact the state with the highest emissions under the safeguard mechanism is Western Australia, with 66 facilities generating 46.2Mt of CO2e last year, according to the Clean Energy Regulator’s data. Queensland had the second highest emissions, with 65 facilities generating 37.7Mt. There are 38 facilities in New South Wales generating 25.6Mt. Saying that using the safeguard mechanism to cut emissions allows other states “off the hook” isn’t an argument that’s based on any objective reality. No hiding net zero There are fewer things more likely to get your audience angry than telling them something is really big and scary, and also that this big and scary thing is being hidden from them. No longer on Sky News and dropped from his Daily Telegraph column, Alan Jones – a longtime denier of climate change science – has a new streaming show Direct to the People that shuddered to a start this week. Jones told his new online audience that the world’s financial giants were being geared up for net zero, with $130tn of financial might signing up to the Glasgow Financial Alliance for New Zero. Jones asked his guest, Canavan, “why aren’t the public being told” and raged that banks were “playing this ideological game with our deposits”. “This is happening behind the scenes,” said Jones, adding that “we really have the makings of a financial crisis.” In reality, the shifting of global capital away from fossil fuels is motivated largely by avoiding a crisis where investments in dirty energy sources become stranded, sparking an actual financial crisis. Shareholders have been pushing major energy companies for years to transition their businesses to renewable energy. This apparently secretive deal that is being hidden from Australians is so clandestine that it has featured in news outlets across the world and is just the latest instalment in an issue that has been widely reported for years. The coalition has even led a parliamentary inquiry, due to report soon, on the issue of banks and insurers moving investments away from coal projects. Why are we not being told? The media release from the UK’s chancellor, Rishi Sunak, was presumably issued by mistake?His meeting with new American ambassador to Australia, Caroline Kennedy, will likely be the happiest event in the prime minister’s diary, flavoured with election and budgetary pressures. But Scott Morrison might attach a coda to their conversation. It should be about the continuation of the US bid to extradite Julian Assange from the United Kingdom to face a possible 175-year sentence in the US. This extradition was recently given new life by a decision of British judges that the US action has merit. “We think this thing has gone on long enough,” Morrison might say. “Members of my own government including my deputy Barnaby Joyce are saying it’s wrong. We’ve got war crimes trials pending for Australian troops in Afghanistan who might have done the very things Assange exposed in Iraq. Washington can turn this guy into a martyr.” It’s what one ally, confident of its contribution to the alliance, can say to the other, a small transaction under the architecture of what each sees as a mutually beneficial relationship. If we can’t take up the cause of an Australian passport holder, what scope for any independent action do we now allow ourselves? Is everything subsumed by alliance loyalties? The bloodlust of an offended US security state might have been weakening. In July the US Justice Department said America would settle for Assange serving his sentence in an Australian prison. A concession, because spending the rest of his life in cruel isolation in a maximum security penitentiary on the plains of Oklahoma seemed part of this punitive project. Assange has been enfeebled by two years in a harsh UK prison, to the point allegedly of suffering a stroke, forced to sustain strip searches and handcuffs as if the British were processing a Hannibal Lecter and not just a troublemaking advocate of the media freedom the first amendment appears to guarantee. In all the shaking of evidentiary files the American prosecutors have failed to find any smoking gun. In 2013 a Pentagon counter intelligence chief was forced to concede there was no evidence of any lives being lost as a result of Assange’s spilling of secrets. Freedom of information revealed this was also the Australian army view. The US prosecution is not about charges of sexual assault levelled at Assange – they were dropped by Sweden in November 2019 – or about the leaking of Hillary Clinton’s 2016 emails which have never figured in indictments. The case against Assange is about one action: he published 2007 footage of US soldiers in an Apache helicopter aiming guns at unarmed Iraqi civilians including children. The only US defence for this casual slaughter is Robert Gates, former defence secretary, saying it was just part of “the fog of war”. This is precisely the defence that Australian servicemen in Afghanistan might hope to make if any war crimes trials are brought against them following the Brereton report. In other words, Assange is to be put in prison for the rest of his life for exposing behaviour that Australia considers, when committed by its own troops, worthy of prosecution. Former US president Obama pardoned the astonishingly brave Chelsea Manning who had been the source of the helicopter footage. And in June an Icelandic newspaper reported that a key witness in the United States’ case admitted in an interview with them to fabricating key accusations in the indictment against the WikiLeaks founder. When the US stated it was no longer itching to install Assange in one of its prisons, our foreign minister Marise Payne was entitled to ring the secretary of state, remind him of all the things Australia does for the US and say Australian public opinion would prefer to have the extradition quietly dropped. Since George W Bush the US has had three presidents; each opposed or regretted the war. Senator Ted Kennedy in a prescient speech at Johns Hopkins in September 2002 warned an invasion of Iraq would be a strategic error. He warned of the immense postwar commitment that would be required to create a stable Iraq. It was the strongest statement of opposition from the Democrats to the March 2003 invasion. His niece would remember it and be receptive to a friendly suggestion to set aside proceedings against an Australian who exposed one small part of its horrors. And Australians might breathe a sigh that there is one tiny corner of our alliance partnership where we can behave like a sovereign nation. • Bob Carr is a former premier of New South Wales and foreign affairs minister of Australia. He is professor of business and climate change at University of Technology, SydneyOn Thursday the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, gave a mid-year economic update predicting a solid economic bounceback from Covid restrictions. We’ve looked under the hood to see what the treasury’s crystal ball says is in store for the economy, what might go wrong, and how government finances will fare if they’re right. Forecasts The budget papers project the Australian economy will grow in real terms by 3.75% in 2021-22 and 3.5% in 2022-23, before easing back to 2.25% and 2.5% in the final two years of the forward projections. The unemployment rate is tipped to fall to 4.25% in that time. The treasury thinks Australians will be ambitious with their pay demands and bosses generous in a bid to keep workers, because wages growth is supposed to take off from 2.25% in 2021-22 to 3.25% in 2024-25. Inflation is projected to reach and stay at the mid-point of the reserve bank’s target range (2.5%) in 2022-23. Assumptions The treasury has assumed that with more than 80% of Australians aged 16 and above now vaccinated, rates will climb to more than 90%. So far so good. But the rest of the assumptions are … a little rosy. The treasury assumed lockdowns will no longer be required, with “most domestic activity restrictions” lifted by the start of 2022 and only basic density restrictions in place. There may be “temporary strengthening of activity restrictions” to contain localised outbreaks – but these short, sharp lockdown-like restrictions are assumed to have no material impact on the outlook. Remaining state border restrictions are assumed to be lifted by early 2022 and the Omicron variant “is not assumed to significantly alter current reopening plans or require a reimposition of widespread health and activity restrictions”. Migrants will start returning from 2022, with international students ready to go for the first semester of next year. What could go wrong In a word: Covid. If a new variant of concern emerges (beyond Omicron) requiring more significant health responses, the international border could be closed for another six months and public health orders and precautionary behaviour could drive down spending. The treasury projects this could mean 1% is shaved off gross domestic product in 2021-22, and unemployment is about 1% higher. The rebound would instead come in the second half of 2022. The papers also note that revenue assumptions and nominal GDP are also sensitive to changes in the iron ore price, with a US$10 fall shaving $3.9bn off GDP this year and $0.9bn off tax receipts next financial year. If the government has to pay higher interest rates on bonds, then debt could blow out by a further 5.4% of GDP by 2032. $16bn of mystery spending The budget papers reveal that there is about $16bn of mystery spending over the next four years, consisting of decisions taken but not announced, or measures for which the cost is not-for-publication. That’s more than 10 times the size of mystery spending last year. The papers make it impossible to calculate the size of the war chest for announcements to be made before the election, by mixing in a bunch of commercially sensitive spending items like vaccine purchases. But a treasury official in the lockup suggested it was about half and half … so, an $8bn war chest for the election. There will also be $940m more revenue collected due to decisions taken but not announced or not for publication measures. Debt and deficit For a government previously concerned with the debt and deficit disaster, there is still red as far as the eye can see. The deficit is tipped to be $99.2bn in 2021-22, an improvement of $7.4bn since the budget despite the Delta lockdowns. The deficit will still be $57.5bn in 2024-25 (or 2.3% of GDP), and only shrinks to 1.8% of GDP in 2031-32. Net debt is projected to be 30.6% of GDP at June 2022, rising to a peak of 37.4% in 2025, then down to 35.5% in 2032. The papers say that despite the economic recovery the government is sticking with the first plank of its budget plan – strong and sustained recovery – so don’t expect austerity measures to try to cut the debt and deficit.Australia’s jobless rate plunged in November as locked down states opened up, with employers defying expectations to add a record number of jobs. Last month, the unemployment rate came in at 4.6%, a 0.6 percentage point improvement on the October figures, with 366,100 jobs added, the Australian Bureau of Statistics said. Economists had predicted a 5% rate and about 200,000 new jobs for the month. The new jobs smashed the previous high for any month, beating the 237,600 tally added in June 2020 after the first economic snap-back after the arrival of Covid. The dive in jobless numbers came even as many more people resumed the search for work, a shift that typically nudges the rate higher. The participation rate surged 1.4 percentage points in the month, to 66.1%, and is now higher than pre-Covid pandemic levels, the ABS said. Westpac, which had predicted the jobless rate would edge higher to 5.3%, with 200,000 jobs, said the labour market had significantly outperformed expectations. “Total employment is now higher than it was back in June 2021, [before] the latest round of lockdowns,” Justin Smirk, a senior Westpac economist, said in a briefing note. He also noted most of the gains were in part-time employment, with 237,800 such positions added. Bjorn Jarvis, head of labour statistics at the ABS, said: “The latest data shows the extent of recovery between early October and early November in jurisdictions coming out of Delta lockdowns.” “The easing of restrictions in both NSW and Victoria had a large influence on the national figures, with employment in the two states increasing by 180,000 people and 141,000 people between October and November,” he said. According to Westpac, underemployment also had a meaningful shift during the month, falling 2 percentage points to 7.5%, the lowest level of underemployment since January 2014. The Australian dollar rose on the news to 71.8 US cents in recent trade as investors increased their bets on an earlier official interest rate rise than has so far been flagged by the Reserve Bank of Australia. In a speech on Thursday, RBA governor Philip Lowe said the labour market was expected to tighten further over the next couple of years, and the bank’s “central scenario” is for the jobless rate to reach 4.25% by the end of 2022, and 4% by the end of 2023. “If we could achieve this, these would be good outcomes – Australia has not experienced a sustained period of unemployment at levels this low since the early 1970s,” he said. “As the unemployment rate declines and workers become harder to find, greater attention will need to be paid to training and skills development than has been the case over the past few decades,” Lowe said. The November jobless rate is not far shy of the 4.5% posted in August, which itself was the lowest in more than a decade. The last time the jobless rate was lower was in October 2008, when it was 4.3%, Jarvis of the ABS said. The latest jobs data comes as the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, indicated today’s release of the mid-year economic and fiscal outlook would show the unemployment rate dropping below 5%. They also add to signs that the economy – shy of further Covid disruptions – could be running strongly by the time of next year’s elections. If workers are likely feeling better about their job prospects, households as a whole might also be cheered by signs that their wealth is on the rise as well – at least if they own a home or are paying one off. In separate figures out today, the ABS said total household wealth increased 4.4%, or $590bn, in the September quarter, to a record $13.92t. Wealth per capita also rose to a record of $540,179. “Residential property assets contributed 3.5 percentage points to the quarterly growth in household wealth,” the ABS said, with deposit and superannuation balances adding at 0.6 and 0.4 percentage points, respectively. An increase in household loans detracted 0.3 percentage points from growth. “Residential property prices continued to drive household wealth, with prices increasing by 5% during the quarter,” head of finance and wealth at the ABS, Katherine Keenan, said. “Property prices continued to grow strongly, reflecting continued low interest rates and strength in the housing market.” The $72bn increase in household deposits was the largest on record as people stocked up on cash that was difficult to spend during lockdown and government assistance grew, the ABS said.Less than a week after a swarm of powerful tornadoes devastated Kentucky and four other states, a freakish wind storm has brought “Dust Bowl” conditions and gusts of more than 100 mph to parts of the Great Plains and upper midwest, meteorologists said on Wednesday. The low pressure wind system, driven by unseasonably high temperatures, closed highways in western Kansas, spawned reported tornadoes in Nebraska and Iowa and raised concerns about fires because of the unusual heat. The powerful storm system triggered power outages in four US states, including more than 100,000 homes and businesses in Colorado by Wednesday evening. The winds whipped up dust that reduced visibility to zero west of Wakeeney, Kansas, according to state officials, and caused at least four semitrailers to blow over. Kansas officials closed Interstate 70 from the Colorado border to Salina, as well as all state highways in nine counties in north-west Kansas. The National Weather Service said there have been 13 tornado reports in the Plains states, scattered through eastern Nebraska and Iowa. Winds topped 70 mph through much of Kansas, Nebraska and Iowa. “To have this number of damaging wind storms at one time would be unusual anytime of year,” said Brian Barjenbruch, a meteorologist with the National Weather Service in Valley, Nebraska. “But to have this happen in December is really abnormal.” The storm system could also pummel the region with thunderstorms and snow, the National Weather Service said in an advisory. “There have been historic ‘Dust Bowl’ conditions with no visibility in parts of New Mexico and Colorado,” said Marc Chenard, a forecaster for the National Weather Service’s Weather Prediction Center in College Park, Maryland. “This is highly unusual,” Chenard said. “It’s shifting east and is unusual for this large of an area, it will be going through the Great Lakes area, Michigan and into Canada by Thursday morning,” he said. The system came on the heels of devastating tornadoes last weekend that cut a path through states including Arkansas, Missouri, Tennessee, Illinois and Kentucky, killing more than 85 people. Joe Biden toured the hard hit communities on Wednesday, saying he had “not seen this much damage from a tornado” before. The National Weather Service issued a high wind warning for an area stretching from New Mexico to upper Michigan, including Wisconsin and Illinois. Gusts topping 80 mph were recorded in the Texas Panhandle and western Kansas. The weather service said an automated observation site in Lamar, Colorado, recorded a gust of 107 mph Wednesday morning. Wind gusts of 100 mph were reported in Russell, Kansas. Greg Butcher, the city administrator in Seward, Nebraska, said he was standing in his office at city hall Wednesday when he saw a giant wall of cloud rolling toward him. Butcher said he braced for a major hit but so far the worst damage appears to be a few toppled telephone poles. “We lucked out,” Butcher said. “It came in really fast.” Scientists say extreme weather events and warmer temperatures are more likely to occur with human-caused climate crisis. “I think we also need to stop asking the question of whether or not this event was caused by climate change. All events nowadays are augmented by climate change,” said Victor Gensini, a meteorology professor at Northern Illinois University. “We need to be asking, ‘To what extent did climate change play a role and how likely was this event to occur in the absence of climate change?’”The government has set aside an election war chest from $15.9bn in mystery spending in a mid-year budget update that warns of significant economic risks ahead. But despite the treasurer hailing an “incredible” set of job numbers, which shows Australia’s unemployment rate will fall comfortably below 5% next year, the government is holding off the task of budget repair until “economic recovery is secure”. “These gains are not yet locked in,” Josh Frydenberg said on Thursday as he announced the mid-year economic and fiscal outlook (Myefo). “The pandemic is still with us and we must continue to learn to live with the virus as demonstrated by the recent emergence of the Omicron variant.” The economic update – potentially the last before the election – shows a combined $15.9bn in expenditure for decisions “taken but not yet announced” and other mystery spending that is not for publication. Treasury officials suggested the spending was split about 50-50 between these two categories. Frydenberg dismissed suggestions this was an election fighting fund, and refused to provide a breakdown of the figure, which allocates almost $10bn to spending this year and next year across both categories. “They are measures that we expect to eventuate, but at this point, we can’t allocate and confirm to specific programs,” he said. “What goes into a contingency reserve can be a number of specific initiatives, including those that are commercial in confidence and therefore can’t be revealed.” Last year’s Myefo allocated just $1.5bn for similar unannounced measures, but the figure routinely balloons ahead of each federal election. Frydenberg said this spending could include the purchase of vaccines or other necessary health supports, as well as reserves for decisions made that would be confirmed in the March budget. There is also $940m in unknown revenue measures due to decisions taken but not announced or not for publication. Labor’s shadow treasurer Jim Chalmers slammed the government’s economic update, saying it was “more of the same rorts, more of the same waste, more of the same missed opportunities” that had characterised the government. “What they don’t understand is this. You can’t rort your way to recovery. We don’t want to see secret slush funds before the election and secret cuts to the budget after the election,” he said. He said there was little focus on trying to build an economy and society that was better than before the pandemic, saying it “completely ignores” the issues of stagnant wages, skills shortages and job insecurity. The unemployment rate in 2021-22 is expected to be 4.5%, down from the 5% forecast in the May budget, dropping to 4.25% in 2022-23. Frydenberg said the “record high” employment means there were now 180,000 more people in work than at the start of the pandemic. Wage growth will begin to outpace inflation in 2022-23 when wages are expected to grow 2.75% compared to an inflation rate of 2.5%. Wages then grow 3% in 2023-24 and 3.25% in 2024-25, compared to inflation of 2.5% in both of these years. In 2020-21, inflation was more than double the rate of wage increases. The government has downgraded its growth forecasts to 3.75% in the current financial year, down from 4.25% forecast in the May budget, but has upgraded its gross domestic product forecasts for next year to 3.5%, up from 2.5%. The following year, in 2023-24, growth then falls to just 2.25%, below Australia’s average pre-pandemic growth rates, before lifting to 2.5% in 2024-25. Frydenberg flags uncertainty While the treasurer said Australians had reason to feel confident about the forthcoming recovery, the budget papers warn that the government numbers could be “substantially different” to those forecast, depending on what happens with the pandemic. It assumes that lockdowns and state border closures are no longer required, most domestic restrictions are lifted by early in 2022, and “only baseline levels of physical distancing and density restrictions” remaining in the first half of next year. “The Omicron variant is not assumed to significantly alter current reopening plans or require a reimposition of widespread health and activity restrictions,” the document says. However, after the Delta variant proved more of an impediment to the global economic recovery than anticipated at the budget, the papers also warn that the global economic outlook will remain “susceptible to new waves of the virus for some time”. “The ongoing impact of the pandemic means the economic outlook remains highly uncertain,” the Myefo papers say. Myefo outlines two different scenarios – one better, and one worse than the budget papers forecast. In a “downside scenario” predicated on new variants of concern requiring a significant response and local lockdowns, economic activity would be around $20bn lower in 2021-22, wiping 1 percentage point off GDP in 2021-22 and hiking unemployment up by 1%. In a possible “upside scenario” where households and businesses started to spend savings more quickly, economic activity could increase by around $30bn across 2021-22 and 2022-23, a GDP increase of 0.5% this year and 1% next year compared to forecasts. Employment would be stronger in this scenario, putting downward pressure on unemployment, but the impact is likely to be small as it would also encourage greater participation. “On the downside, the new Omicron variant highlights the ongoing risk of outbreaks which have the potential to damage confidence or require a reimposition of health measures and activity restrictions,” the papers say. Despite a $95bn upgrade in tax receipts over the four-year forward estimates, spending on the NDIS of $26.4bn and $25bn in extra Covid support payments has seen the government deficits across the forward estimates remain relatively unchanged. Budget deficits set to continue for years The government has posted a revised deficit of $99.2bn for this year, a $7.4bn improvement since May. But across the forward estimates, the cumulative deficits are only $2.3bn better than forecast, leaving a $57.5bn deficit in 2024-25, the equivalent of 2.3% of GDP. The cumulative budget deficits, which were forecast at $342.4bn in the May budget, now total $340bn. Over the medium term, the budget is still expected to remain in deficit by 2031-32, improving to a deficit of 1.8% of GDP in ten years’ time. Gross debt, which tops $1tn in 2022-23 and is expected to stabilise at about 50% of GDP in the medium term, has come down slightly since the May budget. Confirming another element of the government’s deal with the Nationals to secure their support for the government’s net zero emissions target, the Myefo also includes an extra $300.1m to the building better regions fund. This is in addition to the $250m committed in the May budget for a sixth round of the project, taking the total to about $1.4bn. The Myefo papers also show the government has agreed in principle to the extension of inland rail from Toowoomba to the Port of Gladstone in Queensland – a project long promoted by Barnaby Joyce – “subject to the outcomes of the business case demonstrating the project is economically beneficial”. The improved unemployment rate – which refers to the share of the labour force that is without work and seeking employment – suggests an extra 150,000 people will be employed by 2024-25 across the economy than forecast in the May 2021-22 budget. The strong jobs growth will result in a record employment-to-population ratio of 63.1% by the September quarter next year. The lower than forecast unemployment rate is in line with the government’s updated “non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment”, called the Nairu, which is the jobless rate at which inflation and wages are then expected to rise. But the treasurer, who had previously flagged the government would turn to the second phase of its economic recovery plan once the unemployment rate was about 4%, said there remained much uncertainty in the economy. “There’s a great deal of uncertainty right now. We’re living in the middle of a pandemic, the biggest economic shock since the great depression,” Frydenberg said. The Myefo papers show a total of $337bn in commonwealth support has been spent as a result of the pandemic, equivalent to 16.3% of GDP.The scheduling of Super Netball matches at the same time as grassroots leagues – in the traditional early Saturday afternoon slot – has long been perceived as a handbrake on the growth of the world’s premier netball competition, by restricting rusted-on fans’ ability to attend or watch on TV live. The issue has finally been addressed after Super Netball revealed the 2022 draw on Thursday and a move away from 3pm starts on Saturdays in favour of matches predominantly at 5pm and 7pm. The grand final will also be played at night next season, the first since 2017. Super Netball’s executive general manager of events and commercial Adam Richardson said the switch-up was an acknowledgement of the importance of the sport’s traditional fans and advocates at the community level. He said one of the key criteria in negotiating the fixture – which meets 85% of all specific requests from clubs – was the needs of the tens of thousands of Australians who play netball, an obvious untapped market for the league. “The new time slots will make Super Netball more accessible to fans across the country, with community players able to attend or watch the netball after their matches during the day,” he said. “We absolutely have heard [fan complaints] and the introduction of 5pm and 7pm time slots is a real testament to that. “Saturday is still a space we unequivocally want to own and we’re confident we can do that in those prime time slots.” The later Saturday games – to be broadcast live on Fox Sports through Foxtel and Kayo, two each round for free – will see netball go head-to-head with several other major sporting codes, including the AFL and NRL. “We are unbelievably proud and overtly confident in our product; that it stands up under any scrutiny,” Richardson said. “It’s the best netball league in the world, with the best players in the world and the pre-eminent watched female sport in this country. “We should not be at all concerned how we position that in the market. We know where we stand and we’re up for the challenge,” he said. On the back of several “very well received” midweek games in season 2021, Tuesday and Wednesday fixtures will again feature in 2022, despite league bosses being cognisant the uptick in viewers this year may be a Covid outlier. Richardson said the midweek fixtures provide a chance to attract a “broader fan base” given the clear air that is available. The sixth iteration of Super Netball, which marks the start of the league’s new five-year broadcast deal with Foxtel, will begin on Saturday 26 March and conclude with a grand final on Saturday 2 July, just 26 days before the Commonwealth Games in Birmingham – a pinnacle event for the sport internationally. This is in contrast to the approach the league took in 2019 when the season was split in two to accommodate the Netball World Cup in Liverpool. Round one will feature a grand final rematch between 2021 premiers the NSW Swifts and state rivals the Giants at what should be a sold-out Ken Rosewall Arena. Briony Akle’s Swifts have three straight games at home in Sydney to begin their title defence. The other round one matches will see the Adelaide Thunderbirds host Collingwood at home, the Melbourne Vixens travel to Queensland to take on the Firebirds and West Coast Fever playing Sunshine Coast Lightning in Perth. There will again be themed matches in 2022, including several to honour the 25-year anniversaries of the Swifts, Vixens, Thunderbirds and Firebirds in early April. The controversy-plagued Indigenous round has been rebranded to First Nations round and will be held across rounds 12 and 13 in late May and early June. After the success of the last season’s history-making Pride game, between the Queensland Firebirds and Collingwood – a result of Netball Queensland’s commitment to the Pride in Sport Australia program – it will be held again, to further celebrate the LGBTIQA+ community in netball. Richardson said the league looked at making the round league-wide this season, but ultimately did not. He expects that to happen in the “not too distant future”. In June, matches between New South Wales and Queensland sides will align with the NRL’s State of Origin and the Victorian derby between the Melbourne Vixens and Collingwood will be played on the Queen’s birthday public holiday.More than 60% of super fund investment options where members can choose how to invest their money fail to deliver good returns, statistics released by the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (Apra) show. Poorly performing funds in the “choice” sector also tend to have higher fees that eat into their returns, the data reveals. It is the first time Apra has examined the performance of choice funds, which allow members to choose from a menu of investment options. The funds contained in the data manage $394bn of retirement savings, which is about 40% of the choice market. Apra plans to expand its coverage of the choice market in future reports, but has started with products where retirement savers put their money into a basket of different types of assets. This is because data is available on these funds and they are comparable to MySuper products, which are supposed to be simpler low-fee investments. Apra said there were eight choice products with consistently bad returns over seven years: EISS, Aware Super – Tailored, BT Super For Life, Australian Catholic Super – Personal, Christian Super, OnePath OneAnswer Frontier, Zurich and Perpetual WealthFocus. BT is owned by Westpac, which is trying to sell the business; OnePath is owned by insurer Zurich, which is also on the list in its own right; and Perpetual is a stand-alone investment advice company. The remainder are profit-to-member funds. Along with the choice fund data, Apra updated its heatmap of the performance of MySuper products. Christian Super, EISS and Australian Catholic Super, which is not to be confused with the similarly named Catholic Super, also offer MySuper products that failed Apra’s performance test. Among the choice products Apra looked at, 61% had consistently poor performance, delivering returns to members that were below a benchmark set by the regulator for seven years. A quarter delivered what Apra described as “significantly poor performance” of 0.5% or worse below the benchmark over the seven year period. This is worse than the situation among MySuper funds, where 45% of products underperformed and 16% delivered returns 0.5% a year worse than the benchmark. Fees are also higher in choice funds. The median administration fee for a choice fund with a $50,000 balance is $218 a year, compared to $168 for a Mysuper product. Apra has slapped a “crimson” fee warning on 30 choice products that charge more than $300 a year on a $50,000 balance. Eight products combined high fees with poor performance. The regulator said that although choice funds often offered extra services to members, their trustees still needed to be able to justify what they charged as being in the best financial interests of members. If they could not do this they should cut fees, it said. It also called on fund trustees in charge of underperforming products to take action to improve returns to members. Apra executive board member Margaret Cole said super fund members “deserve confidence that their retirement savings are being well-looked after, regardless of what type of fund or product their money is invested in”. “Although there have been benefits generated for members from industry consolidation and reductions in fees in recent years, these heatmaps show there remains considerable room for improvement in member outcomes. “In particular, a sizeable proportion of the choice sector has been exposed for delivering poor outcomes, especially considering these products generally charge higher fees than their MySuper equivalents.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning She said trustees had a legal duty to act in the best financial interests of members and those in charge of underperforming funds should “prompt action to address areas of concern”. “If they are unable or unwilling to do so, they need seriously to reconsider whether their members would be better served with their money elsewhere.”The US Federal Reserve has announced that it will accelerate an end to the central bank’s pandemic-era support of the US economy in a major shift that will also see a series of interest rate rises next year. The measures are a signal that US central bankers no longer view rising inflation as a “transitory” nuisance caused by supply chain problems meeting pent-up consumer demand, but an issue that now requires firm management to avert lasting damage to the US economy. At the end of a two-day meeting in Washington on Wednesday, the Fed chairman Jerome Powell announced it will reduce its monthly $120bn (£90bn) spending on government bonds designed to lower long-term interest rates at twice the rate that he outlined just six weeks ago. Officials also forecast that they will raise short-term rates that have been set at near-zero for close to two years – another departure from indications offered by central bankers just three months ago when the Fed forecast one rate increase in 2022. Central bankers in many of the world’s major economies are attempting a delicate tightrope walk: raise rates enough to tamp down inflation, but not so much as to crush businesses, already struggling to meet rising wages and materials costs, with higher borrowing costs, including for mortgages, credit cards and loans. Efforts to curb inflation, which reached 6.8% in November, the highest in 39 years, come amid signs that consumers are beginning to tap into savings to meet the cost of living. Producer prices increased more than expected in the year to November, registering their largest gains in a decade, while retail sales gains slowed last month to 0.3% from an increase of 1.8% in October. “With prices rising sharply last month, the muted 0.3% m/m rise in retail sales values suggests that consumption was little changed in real terms,” noted Andrew Hunter at Capital Economics. “That won’t stop the Fed from accelerating the pace of its QE taper later today, but it supports our view that economic growth is likely to slow next year.” Economists believe that many consumers, liberated from Delta-variant lockdowns, have been spending enthusiastically before the Christmas season to avoid shortages. But despite the slowdown in spending gains, consumer demand is well above last year’s levels, with retail sales – the largest driver of the US economic activity – rising 18.2% in November from a year earlier. “It’s very possible that people are taking a bit of an advantage or changing lanes because they are afraid of bad news coming from the Fed,” Julius de Kempenaer, a senior technical analyst at StockCharts.com, told Reuters. “But on the other hand, if the market were really afraid of bad news, the futures should have moved a lot more. So, this is not really a market that is speaking its voice, not yet.” With higher interest rates forecast – economists polled by Reuters predict rate rises of 0.25-0.50% in the third quarter of 2022, followed by another in the fourth – economists say that consumers may be spending before belt-tightening as pandemic support cheques end and the cost of credit increases. At the same time, record wage increases of 4.2% to September over a year earlier have not kept pace with official inflation figures. In reality, the rising costs of fuel, housing, transport and food have pushed the costs of living higher and faster than official numbers reveal.The New South Wales environmental regulator has granted the Vales Point power station on the Central Coast another five-year exemption from state air-quality regulations. Environment groups claim the decision will see the power station continue to contribute to respiratory illnesses in children. Under air-quality regulations, power stations are required to limit their emissions of nitrogen oxides (NOx). A NSW upper house committee this year called for those regulations to be made stricter for coal-fired power stations, noting Australia was lagging behind other countries in the limits set on air pollution. Since 2012, Vales Point has been granted exemptions every five years that allow it to exceed the current legal limit. In a decision on Wednesday, the NSW Environment Protection Authority granted its third such exemption to Delta Electricity, the operator of Vales Point. The exemption tightens previous licence conditions but still permits the station to emit up to 850mg of nitrogen oxides per cubic metre 99% of the time. For 1% of the time it can exceed that and emit up to 980mg a cubic metre. Without this variation, the maximum the station would ever be permitted to emit is 800mg a cubic metre. The new limits represent a 23% and 35% reduction, respectively, on what had been granted under previous exemptions. In addition, Vales Point will be required to install a new air monitoring station at Wyee Point, prepare a NOx emission control feasibility study and a separate study on reducing sulphur oxide emissions, and complete a pollution reduction program by July next year. The Nature Conservation Council of NSW said the EPA’s decision would not force the power station to reduce its pollution as the new limits reflected the business-as-usual NOx emissions for that site. “The EPA decision will be a bitter disappointment for the Central Coast community, which had hoped participation in public consultation would result in real change,” the council’s acting chief executive, Jacqui Mumford, said. “Instead, the EPA has locked in another five years of respiratory disease for the Central Coast community.” Mumford said NOx emissions were a known contributor to respiratory illnesses such as asthma, including in children, and the EPA had missed an opportunity to make real change. Ben Ewald, a GP and conjoint senior lecturer in the University of Newcastle’s school of medicine and public health, has done modelling that estimated coal-fired power stations contribute to asthma for 650 children in the Central Coast and Lake Macquarie region. He said the latest exemption granted to Vales Point represented a slight “tightening of the envelope” but the health benefit would be small. He said he would have preferred to see the site’s pollution levels brought into line with the Eraring power station in Lake Macquarie, which emitted lower levels of nitrogen oxides. “The licence has been trimmed slightly but current pollution releases will continue at almost the same rate,” he said. “The EPA has squandered this opportunity to improve the health of the surrounding community, especially [in] those children with asthma due to power station pollution.” Delta Electricity said in a statement it welcomed the decision, which follows a 12-month process that included air modelling and public consultation. The company’s secretary, Steve Gurney, has previously rejected remarks by the Nature Conservation Council and other environmental organisations about air quality as “incorrect and misleading” from “a collection of anti-coal activists with one objective, to shut down coal-fired power stations”. The company’s statement said the upper limit of what was permitted under its licence had been reduced by one-third and was “120 mg/m3 lower than limits in place at newer stations such as Bayswater and Mt Piper”. “Delta appreciates the scientific rigour applied by the EPA in the review, which should allay any community concerns regarding local air quality,” the company said. It said the granting of the licence amendment “reinforces the scientific data that the Central Coast has the best air quality in the greater metropolitan region, with clear evidence that motor vehicles are by far the highest contributor to NOx readings at ground level in the region”. The EPA said in a statement it had listened to community concerns and tightened the NOx limits in the Vales Point licence. “Air quality in NSW is generally good by world standards and our assessment … shows that operating within these tighter limits will maintain good local air quality,” the EPA’s director of regulatory operations, Stephen Beaman, said. Environmental groups have long called for tougher pollution standards and requirements for power stations to install controls, which Environmental Justice Australia said could cut toxic pollutants by more than 85%. “Technology used widely around the world is proven to significantly reduce the risk of these toxic pollutants and should be used widely in Australia,” lawyer Charley Brumby-Rendell said.Beijing has claimed the UK wants to make Hong Kongers “second-class citizens” with its British national (overseas) (BNO) visa scheme, after new figures showed almost 90,000 people have applied from the former British colony to resettle in the UK. “[I]n flagrant violation of its international commitment, the UK tries to turn many Hong Kong residents into ‘second-class citizens’ in the UK and reap benefit from this,” foreign ministry spokesperson Zhao Lijian said in a weekly press conference on Wednesday. Around 88,000 Hong Kongers have applied for the new visa pathway to the UK in the first nine months since its launch, according to a report by the UK foreign office released on Tuesday. The BNO resettlement visa scheme, which began in January, was introduced as part of the UK’s response to Beijing’s imposition of a national security law on Hong Kong last June, which has since been used by local authorities to stamp out political dissent and calls of democracy. Chinese and Hong Kong officials have argued that the law is necessary to restore order and stability, but long queues of travellers leaving for the UK have been seen at Hong Kong airport in months following the law’s imposition. Hong Kongers born in the former British colony before it was returned to Chinese rule in July 1997 are eligible for a BNO passport. The BNO visa scheme expands the rights of BNO holders, granting them and their dependents the right to live in the UK a six-year pathway to citizenship. The UK has predicted that as many as 330,000 Hong Kongers may resettle in the UK within the first five years. In retaliation to the new migration route, Beijing announced in January it will no longer recognise the BNO passport as a valid travel document. Zhao also accused London of attacking and smearing China with its latest report, which raised concerns over diminishing rights and freedoms in Hong Kong. “The UK is obsessed with issuing the so-called semi-annual reports to attack and smear China and interfere in Hong Kong affairs out of [an] ideological bias. China strongly deplores and firmly rejects this,” the spokesperson said. The report addressed major political developments from January to June, including the mass arrest of 55 pro-democracy figures, the forced closure of the pro-democracy Apple Daily newspaper, and Beijing’s overhaul of the city’s electoral processes reducing direct democratic representation. “Just over a year since the introduction of the national security law, the mainland Chinese and Hong Kong authorities have used the law and related institutions against all opposition, free press and civil society in Hong Kong,” UK foreign secretary Liz Truss wrote in the report.It’s very hard to deny the existence of pork barrelling when stories about it have a lot of meat on the bone. Political reporter Katina Curtis and senior economics correspondent Shane Wright, from the Nine newspapers, spent two months compiling, cross-checking and analysing data on government grants. They focused on discretionary grants, overseen by MPs and ministers. They found that the 19,123 grants overwhelmingly favoured Coalition-held electorates. Coalition seats got three times as much – $1.9bn over the past three financial years compared with about $530m for Labor seats. Other money was thrown at independent seats. It’s the latest chapter in an ongoing story about how taxpayer money is seemingly being used for political purposes. Previous chapters include the car park rorts, and the sports rorts. Subplots include former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian conceding “we throw money at seats to keep them”. The federal government’s spin machine went into overdrive. Do their counter-claims deserve traction? ‘A very good local member’ Asked about Peter Dutton’s seat, Dickson, which received more than $43.6m (compared to Lilley, a neighbouring Labor seat, which received less than a million), prime minister Scott Morrison said Dickson “must have a very good local member”. While everyone expects MPs to advocate for their community, the application process does not, in fact, list “having a very good local member” as a reason for doling out money. They tend to focus on the merit of the project, not the merit of the local MP. Lilley MP Anika Wells pointed out that she spent six months putting together an infrastructure budget submission. “And not a single one of those items in an eight-page submission has been delivered,” she told ABC radio. Wright points out that while overall far more money went to Coalition seats, a few Labor seats got amounts similar to Dutton’s, so they must also “all be great local members” by that logic. “The argument of a good local member simply does not fly … unless the PM knows how every one of the members of parliament operate,” he said. “Is the new member for Warringah brilliant?” (Former prime minister Tony Abbott’s seat, Warringah, had a respectable $24m thrown at it – which was not enough to stop independent Zali Steggall winning it). It’s ‘selective’ analysis Morrison said the reporting was a “predictively selective analysis of 11 programs out of 1,700”. “These analyses have looked at very, very small numbers of those programs,” he said. The finance minister, Simon Birmingham, echoed that statement. “I do dispute the figures in that it’s a very selective analysis. It’s 11 grants programs out of some 1,700 grants programs,” he said. It’s true that the 11 programs were selected; they were selected because they are the discretionary grant programs. They are overseen by local MPs or ministers instead of departments. “We chose the 11 programs that are decided on want, not need,” Wright said. He makes the point that many of the grants were for legitimate projects, but were delivered along political lines. Others were more “egregious”, such as chook sheds or turtle ponds. They’re for rural and regional areas Morrison said the programs were predominantly for rural and regional areas, with money going to drought-affected communities. Birmingham also said the grants favoured rural and regional seats, and that “these are communities the Coalition holds the vast majority of electorates in”. But wait, there’s more data. Nine Liberal electorates east of the Yarra in Melbourne received more than $86m, while nine Labor-held seats on the other side got just $14m. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Over in Sydney, Lindsay (a marginal Labor seat that the Liberal Party won in 2019) received $23.1m. Three neighbouring (safe) Labor seats got a little more than $6m between them. Wright said their analysis excluded bushfire grants, which would have distorted the outcome. “We did include drought, but if you remove (the drought communities program) the difference becomes $1.6bn for government seats and $500m for Labor,” he said. They do it too … Birmingham pointed to Labor leader Anthony Albanese, saying he had announced swimming pools for safe Labor seats. He’s right that pork barrelling happens across party lines, but it’s a flimsy argument when the data proves how that has been happening in reality, under the party that is actually in government. Morrison tried to flip the narrative to one about the Coalition keeping election promises. “When we make a commitment, we keep it,” he said. Remember how Berejiklian said “we throw money at seats to keep them”? Wright said: “Budgets are about choices and these are the choices that have been made by a government that is clearly directing grants.”The British public do not share the government’s appetite for perpetual conflict with the EU and more people see the bloc as a key future partner than the US, according to a report on post-Brexit foreign policy. “The Johnson government seems to need the perennial fights of a permanent Brexit,” the report, by the European Council on Foreign Relations (ECFR) thinktank, said, warning that its approach was “eroding the UK’s capacity to cooperate with the EU”. At the same time, it said, “the British public do not have any particular animus towards the EU” and while they do “value British sovereignty and independence, they would support a foreign policy that worked cooperatively with the bloc”. Polling for the report found people were evenly split on who was most to blame for the current dire state of relations between the UK and EU, with 39% blaming Britain and 38% saying they considered the bloc responsible. The divide was predictably partisan, with 70% of Conservative voters blaming the EU and 66% of Labour voters the UK. It was strongest among those with a keen interest in politics, however: most people were less bothered. Regardless of who they saw as responsible, 39% of the public - a majority of those with an opinion - considered the EU a key partner for the UK in future, compared to 22% for the US. The survey also found the lack of enthusiasm for the US extended to following it into any conflict with China, with 54% believing there was already a cold war between the two and 45% preferring the UK to stay neutral in the event of a war. More broadly, the UK government’s vision for “Global Britain” aimed “to restore British greatness as a maritime trading nation”, the report said – but the evidence showed it amounted to little more than “a delusion rooted in a misremembered imperial past”. The British military, “despite its grand traditions, no longer provides the relative advantage for the UK that it once did”, the authors, Nick Witney and Jeremy Shapiro, said. Polling showed the public was “at best indifferent to the restoration of Britain as a global military power”. The ECFR survey found only 6% of respondents favoured a UK foreign policy that prioritised Britain’s military strength, while 40% said they would like foreign policy to focus primarily on strengthening the domestic economy. “The government’s pride in seeing British naval forces steam into the Pacific Ocean does not seem to inspire the public,” the authors said. Rather than looking to the past – and across the world to “a distant Indo-Pacific” – the UK should “rely on its privileged position in international institutions, its world-class diplomatic corps, and a careful effort to nurture its still-considerable soft power”, they argued. They said the UK could “gain the prosperity and respect it craves by … working with a variety of partners”, effectively “triangulating” between EU and US positions. Instead, however, Global Britain “had little role in it for the EU” and even after formal Brexit, Boris Johnson’s government “seems to need perennial fights with the EU to justify its political existence”. The past year has been marked by ongoing battles between the UK and the EU over multiple issues including fishing licences and the Northern Ireland protocol. But the ideology of “permanent Brexit … cannot suspend the laws of distance and strategy”, they argued. Faced with “increasing geopolitical competition, authoritarian advances and geo-economic coercion, the EU remains Britain’s essential partner”. It was “delusional” to believe in “vast untapped commercial opportunities on the far side of the world that can compensate for the loss of the EU single market”, the report said, and “dangerous to turn a blind eye to what Britain could gain in global influence through cooperation with the EU.” A close strategic partnership with the EU would allow the UK to “both protect its sovereignty, and become a force in global affairs”, the report said, and could command political support in the UK “despite the daily drumbeat of EU-bashing by the Johnson government”. Britain still has “extraordinary assets and can forge an effective foreign policy”, the authors said. “To do so it must focus on British strengths, avoid military adventures in distant lands, and find balanced, effective working relationships … with both the EU and the US.”The government is planning to water down the regulatory requirements on key chemicals, in what experts fear could be the first move to a weaker post-Brexit safety regime for potentially toxic substances. Proposals published last week without fanfare on a government website set out some of the intended new rules for the new post-Brexit national chemicals regulator. The proposals would change the way “substances of very high concern” – which include potential toxins and carcinogens, and chemicals that persist for a long time in the environment – are dealt with. Under EU law, these chemicals are formally identified and publicly listed on a “candidate list”, while authorities analyse them and decide whether to ban them or allow their use in certain circumstances, by transferring them to an “authorisation list”. Companies must inform regulators and their supply chains when dealing with products containing these candidate list chemicals, encouraging them to use alternatives. Under the government’s proposals, companies will not be obliged to submit information on “substances of very high concern”, but will be allowed to do so on a voluntary basis. Only chemicals likely to be transferred to the “authorisation list” would be listed on the “candidate list”, meaning a smaller number of notifiable chemicals will be analysed. Zoe Avison, policy analyst at the Green Alliance thinktank, said: “Relying on voluntary data submissions by chemical companies will almost certainly see hazardous substances falling through the cracks. The UK could have made sensible arrangements to reduce costs for industry and safeguard public health. Yet the government has boxed itself into a corner. After the new delay for companies to submit safety data for the UK market, this is a very worrying sign for the future of chemical regulation in the UK.” Experts told the Guardian they were concerned the government’s move would weaken protections against harmful substances, and allow potentially toxic chemicals to slip through the net. Michael Warhurst, executive director of Chem Trust, a charity that campaigns on harmful chemicals, said: “It seems that the government is putting in unnecessary layers of information requirements before taking action, which will lead to regulatory inaction on a range of harmful substances. This will open the door to British consumers and the environment having greater exposure to harmful chemicals than in the EU, and second-rate system for regulating chemicals post-Brexit.” Jamie Page, of the Cancer Prevention and Education Society, added: “We are concerned that protections that British citizens previously enjoyed are now being eroded. The more the UK diverges from the EU Reach [registration, evaluation, authorisation and restriction of chemicals] system and database, the more likely people are to be exposed to potentially hazardous chemicals.” The proposals by the government will not be subject to public consultation and will not require a vote in parliament. Under post-Brexit legal arrangements, ministers can make such alterations without discussion. A spokesperson for the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs said: “We are committed to maintaining an effective regulatory system for the management and control of chemicals, which safeguards human health and the environment and can respond to emerging risks. We have published our interim approach to the candidate list in UK Reach. This approach aims to ensure we have a single, coherent approach to nominating substances for the candidate list.”More than half the states in the US have either abolished the death penalty or have formal suspensions in place, as the country’s use of the brutal punishment continues to wither on the vine. When Virginia became the first southern state to scrap capital punishment in March, it raised to 23 the number of states that have abolished the practice outright. In a further three states, governors have imposed a moratorium on executions. Virginia’s seismic shift away from judicial killings has created a death penalty-free zone on the north-east seaboard of the US that runs from Maine’s border with Canada down to the edge of the Carolinas. A similar zone now runs all the way down the west coast of the US. The growing block of states where capital punishment is no longer welcome is one of the headline findings of the annual review of the Death Penalty Information Center (DPIC). The report contains nuggets that will make an abolitionist’s heart soar, including a record low number of new death sentences in 2021 (18) and the fewest executions carried out since 1988 (11). But there is a powerful sting in the tail. As the fondness for judicial killings generally recedes, those states that are sticking with capital punishment are displaying grotesque aberrations in its application. “The handful of states that continue to push for capital punishment are outliers that often disregard due process, botch executions, and dwell in the shadows of long histories of racism and a biased criminal legal system,” said DPIC’s executive director Robert Dunham. Five states, together with the US government, judicially killed prisoners this year. Seven imposed new death sentences. Three states have the dubious distinction of standing out in this year’s review – Alabama, Oklahoma and Texas. Between them they accounted for half of all death sentences and most of the 11 executions. Oklahoma botched its first execution in six years, that of John Grant, who was observed convulsing and vomiting on the gurney. The Guardian revealed that another death penalty state, Arizona, spent thousands of dollars obtaining hydrogen cyanide for its gas chamber, the same lethal chemical used by the Nazis in Auschwitz. Racism continues to leap out of the statistics, as it has since the early days of US capital punishment with its roots in slavery and racial terror lynchings. Ten of the 18 (56%) new death sentences were meted out to prisoners of colour, while the same percentage of death row inmates who were executed (six out of 11) were African American. Reflecting a centuries-old distortion, more than three out of every four of the victims of this year’s murders ending in new death sentences were white. No non-white victim was involved in any case leading to a white person being condemned to death. Horrors abound in other aspects of the behaviour of the rump of death penalty states. This was a year in which the callous disregard for the mental impairments of those prisoners put to death was on visceral display. As Ngozi Ndulue, DPIC’s deputy director, pointed out, all but one prisoner executed this year had serious impairments, including brain injury or damage, mental illness and intellectual disabilities, or had histories of gruesome childhood neglect and abuse. “We are seeing fewer and fewer executions, but those that do occur demonstrate that the death penalty is not reserved for the worst of the worst, but the most vulnerable of the vulnerable,” she said. Perhaps the most powerful argument of all against the death penalty is that it runs the risk of killing innocent people, and there was plenty of food for thought in that regard in 2021. Two death-row inmates were exonerated during the year, taking the total number of prisoners in the modern era who had been awaiting execution only to be found innocent to a staggering 186. DPIC points out that the figure is equivalent to one exoneration for every eight executions that have been carried out in the past 50 years. Both this year’s exonerees, Eddie Lee Howard and Sherwood Brown, were from Mississippi and were cleared with the help of DNA testing after both had been on death row for 26 years. The annual record for 2021 contains a hangover from an earlier era, in the form of the federal government’s flurry of executions in the dying days of the Trump administration. Three people on federal death row were killed in less than 10 days before Joe Biden’s inauguration, as part of Donald Trump’s rush to carry out 13 executions in six months. Those who died in 2021 at the hands of the Trump administration were Lisa Montgomery, a profoundly mentally ill woman who had suffered a lifetime of abuse tantamount to torture; Corey Johnson, who was severely intellectually disabled; and Dustin Higgs, who indisputably did not kill anybody. Since Biden took office in January there have been no further federal executions, and in June the US attorney general Merrick Garland announced a formal pause to give the Department of Justice time to review its policies. Anti-death penalty campaigners have been hoping the Biden administration would end the federal death penalty and commute sentences of the remaining 45 federal death row inmates to life imprisonment. So far, there has been no sign of that happening.Away from pale reedbeds and leafless woodland beside the River Tamar, the ground below Viverdon Down is more open to gales and torrential downpours. Cattle are moved indoors off sodden pastures, and puddles lie on fields sown with winter corn. Here, an enclosure of land has been rewilded over the last two years, partly to help create new habitat. It will also help slow the runoff towards the boggiest, snipe-favoured corner – a source of a little tributary that joins the tidal river four miles away. New ponds have been created, whose water levels fluctuate depending on springs and rainfall. Thickening bushy hedgebanks grow ever higher, partly buffering the sound of traffic commuting to and from Plymouth, and sheltering creeping wrens that seek out insects among the blackthorn, hazel catkins, ivy, hawthorn and trailing brambles. Young tree “whips” were laboriously watered in the first summer after planting to prevent immature roots from drying out; tree guards against nibbling rabbits are regularly inspected, uprighted after storms and heightened where needed. Nurturing new trees is hard work. Of the 1,000 planted, birch, willow and cherry have grown the most vigorously, seemingly untouched by browsing deer. A couple of brightly-dressed scarecrows draw the eye, and perhaps jolt visiting roe to beware of the tree guardians’ diligent attention. This afternoon, the lowering sun illuminates the crisscrossing contrails and fires up the bracken-shrouded hedges along narrow Down Lane. Rooks swirl overhead before heading for the old nests in a copse by Ashton. Uphill from there, another commotion, as a mob of this year’s lambs skitter down the ramp of a farmer’s lorry into a field of nourishing kale, grass and turnips. Before Christmas, half their number should reach a suitable weight to be sent off to the abattoir. Quality of carcasses will be assessed, noted against ear tags showing genetics, increasing the knowledge as to which rams sired the best meat with a short “finishing time” on home-grown keep. Before the gate is shut and the lorry drives away, an opportunist robin hops on the trampled verge, searching for food before the onset of darkness. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryJapan’s prime minister, Fumio Kishida, has said he will not attend the opening ceremony of the Winter Olympics in Beijing, but it is not clear if the country will join a US-led diplomatic boycott of the Games over human rights abuses. Speaking in parliament on Thursday, Kishida said: “I have no plans at this point to attend” and did not clarify if Japan would send any officials to the event, amid reports that it was unlikely to snub the hosts altogether. Kishida has said only that he will make a decision, possibly by the end of the year, based on Japan’s “national interest”, while media reports said ministers and politicians were likely to skip the Games, with Japan opting instead for the “face-saving” option of sending officials connected to Tokyo 2020, including the president of the organising committee, Seiko Hashimoto. China has accused the US, Britain, Canada and Australia of “political posturing”, and warned them they would “pay a price” after they announced they would not send delegations of officials and politicians to Beijing. Their athletes will compete, however. Countries taking part in the boycott said they were protesting against China’s human rights abuses, including its treatment of Uyghur Muslims in Xinjiang province, the crackdown on democracy and freedoms in Hong Kong and the repression of Tibet. The boycott has placed Japan, a key US ally in the Asia-Pacific, in a difficult position less than two months before the Games are due to open. Japan has deep economic ties with China – its biggest trading partner – and will not want to appear to snub Beijing ahead of next year’s 50th anniversary of the normalisation of diplomatic relations. In addition, Chinese officials supported the decision to go ahead with this summer’s Olympics in Tokyo, despite widespread public opposition due to fears over the coronavirus. The South Korean president, Moon Jae-in, said this week his country would not join the boycott, describing the Games – which run from 4-20 February – as “positive” for Seoul’s relations with Beijing. Wang Wenbin, a spokesman for the Chinese foreign ministry, welcomed Moon’s announcement, but warned Japan that “politicising sport is contrary to the spirit of the Olympic charter”. In a break with other G7 nations, France, which is due to host the 2024 summer Games, has said it will send high-level officials to Beijing.Housebound elderly people are having to wait weeks to get their booster vaccine, despite being a key priority group for top-up jabs, raising fears about them being left at risk. Charities have warned that older people are being “overlooked” in the NHS’s rush to deliver the 1m boosters a day that Boris Johnson has ordered to reduce the threat posed by the Omicron variant. However, NHS staff involved in the booster rollout have privately told the Guardian that the longer time involved in jabbing the housebound, difficulty involved in transporting the Pfizer vaccine and million-a-day target has prompted some GPs and practice nurses to instead focus on vaccinating other patients, because they can get more done more quickly that way. “Unfortunately we are still hearing from some older people who are housebound and who are struggling to get their booster jabs,” said Caroline Abrahams, the charity director at Age UK. “An older person who is housebound and who hasn’t had their booster must be treated as a top priority for the jab, because without it they are undoubtedly at considerable risk of not only contracting the virus but of becoming seriously unwell too.” She cited the case of a 91-year-old housebound woman living alone who had her first two doses from a district nurse but is “long overdue” getting her booster. “Her daughter has spent many hours searching online, trying to get someone to come to her mum’s house and give her the jab. When she finally spoke with her mother’s GP she was told the booster jab wasn’t their responsibility and she should contact the [local NHS] clinical commissioning group.” Her daughter said: “Mum is in tears about trying to get the booster; without it, our family Christmas is at risk.” Dame Margaret Hodge, the Labour MP for Barking and Dagenham, said: “I have had four terrible cases in my constituency where local housebound people have requested boosters from their GPs but have been turned down again and again. Some have been waiting up to a month to get jabbed, leaving them unsafe and at risk as the new variant spreads like wildfire.” One is a woman who had her second dose in March. Her daughter has called her mother’s GP many times over the past month about getting her the booster but failed to secure one. The woman is finally having it on Thursday. Another woman who is shielding because she is medically vulnerable, and whose husband and daughter died of Covid, had also tried unsuccessfully to get her GP to come and deliver one. She finally got hers on Monday. Reports on 6 December said only 170,000 of the 470,000 people in England registered with the NHS as housebound had had their booster by then – just 36%. A vaccine co-ordinator, who asked not to be named, said the time taken to travel to see the housebound and help them get jabbed, plus until this week the 15-minute post-jab observation period, meant some GP practices were prioritising patients in other settings. Prof Martin Marshall, the chair of the Royal College of GPs, said boosting the housebound did present extra challenges but also that family doctors are doing their best to see them quickly. He said: “Vaccinating people who are housebound is more logistically difficult than at vaccine centres, particularly using the vaccines that need to be prepared, stored and transported in specific ways. But GP-led teams will be working hard to do this in the most efficient way possible to ensure as many housebound patients are protected as soon as possible.” Chit Selvarajah, the policy manager at older people’s charity Independent Age, said: “It is really concerning to hear reports that housebound people are struggling to get a booster jab. “No vulnerable older person should be left behind as the booster programme is rolled out, simply because they cannot get to an appointment. It is vital that vaccinations at home continue for those who need it.” An NHS spokesperson said: “Local NHS and GP teams are prioritising the housebound for their boosters and getting to them as quickly, and since Monday many more home visits have been made to ensure people are protected. “If a housebound individual is able to get to a vaccination site for a booked appointment with help from a family member or friend, they should consider this option, while community transport services are also available to support people.” Meanwhile, more than two-thirds of community pharmacies in England that offered to help deliver Covid booster jabs are still waiting for permission or have been refused, ministers have admitted, with some chemists having to wait 11 weeks. The Liberal Democrats’ health spokesperson, Daisy Cooper, uncovered the low approval rate and long delays through a written parliamentary question answered by the vaccines minister, Maggie Throup. The failure to give the green light to more pharmacies to become vaccination sites has raised questions about the NHS’s ability to deliver the 1m boosters a day. Fewer GPs are involved in the programme now than when first and second doses were given. Throup said that by the end of September, 4,733 pharmacies had between them submitted 5,376 expressions of interest to deliver Covid jabs, but only 1,454 had been accepted – a 30.7% approval rate. Some applications were decided by NHS England rather than the Department of Health and Social Care. Cooper said the delays were “shocking” and urged NHS England to speed up its decision-making to help the health service administer as many top-ups shots as possible. An NHS spokesperson said: “There are nearly 1,500 pharmacies delivering boosters, compared to under 1,000 in October, and Monday saw a record number of vaccinations in pharmacies with over 185,000 people getting protected at their local pharmacy.”My invitation to appear on Strictly Come Dancing’s Christmas Special came very late. Being a cynical soul, I assumed someone had dropped out, but I’m warmly assured this wasn’t the case. I am nobody’s idea of a dancer. It’s not that I can’t dance; I can dance with great exuberance, but only if I am alone. If anyone else is in the room, I become overwhelmed with shame and embarrassment and just kind of seize up. I know the advice is to dance like no one is watching, but I can’t dance if anyone is watching. This wasn’t the actual Strictly Come Dancing, one of our biggest TV shows, in which contestants, paired up with pro dancers, are subjected to the judgment of four experts and, even more harrowingly, a public vote. The Christmas Special is a bit of fun, in which half a dozen, erm, celebrities – dread word – do one dance for the purposes of general seasonal entertainment. OK, it’s not as terrifying as the real thing, but it’s still all about dancing. And therefore, not for me. Anyway, for most of the scant two weeks’ preparation time available, I was away on holiday in an out-of-the-way village in south Wales. Can’t dance, won’t dance, away on holiday, no can do. So why did I end up doing it? I’m honestly not quite sure. I don’t recall ever saying yes; perhaps I just stopped saying no. But all of a sudden, a champion dancer from Poland called Jowita was on a train to Swansea. Her mission: to teach me, from scratch, how to do a ballroom dance, you know, like what they do on Strictly. Sheepishly, under cover of darkness, I found the holder of the key to the village hall, who gave me permission to use it for three intensive days of dance tuition. By now I was getting messages from people I hadn’t seen for years along the lines of, “This isn’t true, is it?”, “You can’t be serious!”, “God help you!”, “This has made my Christmas,” and so on. None of this affected my confidence one jot because, when it came to dancing, my confidence could get no lower anyway. My poor partner, Jowita Przystał, was raised in Czeladź, just north of Katowice. Twenty-seven now, she started dancing aged seven and took up ballroom when she was 12. Before her teens were done she was Polish Open Latin champion. Off she went to the US to join a dance company, with whom she worked on cruise ships, aboard which she danced, performing and rehearsing, eight hours a day for four years. Her next move was to try her luck in the UK. She got to compete in the BBC talent show The Greatest Dancer. This she won, earning her a performance slot on Strictly, which in turn led to her being taken on as one of the show’s professional dancers. This was her dream come true. I’m fairly sure that the same dream didn’t feature a windy morning in a village hall on the Welsh coast and 16st of non-dancing, flatfooted, grumpy Brummie. As far as I could see, I had three – and only three – things going for me. First, she was less than half my weight, so at least I’d be able to get her off the ground if required. Second, having never done any ballroom dancing, I had no bad habits to unlearn. Third, and most importantly, she was lovely – a quite brilliant, patient, endlessly encouraging teacher. First off, she made it clear she couldn’t do a lot with me until my appallingly hunched posture was straightened out a bit. “Shoulders back, Adrian, BACK!” she commanded, physically adjusting me. Half dancer, half chiropractor, she brooked no resistance. With my spine already aching in this unfamiliar straight position, the drumming in of the basic waltz step could commence. One two three, two two three, three two three, over and over and over again. Forwards, backwards, sideways and around in circles I’d go. Some bits I’d pick up quickly; others I’d struggle with but then suddenly grasp, at which point we’d return to the bit I’d picked up quickly, only to find that I’d completely forgotten it. On and on we battled as outside the wind whistled. Day turned into night. The odd local wandered by, puzzled at all the stomping and cursing emanating from the village hall. After five hours of this, we called it a day. She assured me I’d done very well and left me to stagger home. I couldn’t have been any more knackered, mentally and physically, if I’d just had my first cage-fighting session. In the morning, to my surprise, I didn’t feel too bad. I bolted down some breakfast and headed back to the village hall, where Jowita was already limbering up. “Right then,” she said. “Let’s try the lift.” Making full use of my weight and height advantage, it went quite well. Full of confidence, we tried it again, but I’m afraid that on this occasion, as I executed the lift, I accidentally broke wind. She was polite enough to pretend not to have noticed. I was polite enough to forego breakfast before all subsequent rehearsals. Over three days we did 15 solid hours in that village hall. The concentration required was painful, but at the same time a great release. If, like me, you’ve got ADHD, you’ll know that anything demanding complete absorption is a blessed relief from all the other noise. I found I was rather good at picking things up quickly; unfortunately, I seemed to be even better at immediately forgetting them. “Don’t worry,” said my diminutive friend. “You’ve got this.” Holiday (if you could call it that) over, it was back to London and my first visit to the Strictly studio, where I was to learn my part in the big opening number of the Christmas show. Bashfully, I lumbered in wondering what fresh hell this would be. It turned out to be the closest thing to heaven I’ve come across in showbusiness. One after another, the pro dancers, from the UK, Russia, Italy, Ukraine, Australia, Slovenia, South Africa, and other places besides, came up to introduce themselves. As a body of men and women they’re talented, fit and good-looking; if they weren’t extravagantly nice with it, they’d make you sick. With one of them, Aljaž Škorjanec from Slovenia, I immediately became bromantically involved. I put him on the phone to my Croatian mum, whose language he speaks. “Ja sam uvijek dobro,” I heard him tell her – I’m always happy. The following day I asked him about this. Was it really true? “When I’m dancing, I’m always happy,” he confirmed. “How can you not be?” My answer to that question at that moment would have been: “When you’ve no idea what you’re doing and you’re worried sick about looking a chump in front of millions of television viewers.” Still, I absolutely took his point. These people had something special going on; it looked like it was great to be them. Slack-jawed in wonder, I watched them all do their brilliant thing. Up close, what really blew me away was the sheer, uninhibited joy they exuded as they danced. I’d always assumed the smiles were just painted on, but it turns out they’re smiling with their whole beings. “This is why I do it,” Jowita said to me. “With every dance, I can be whoever I want to be. Wherever I am, it’s like there’s nobody’s watching. I am free to be myself.” I’ve known footballers fed up with football, politicians sick of politics and many journalists sick to death of everything. But I’ve yet to meet a dancer who didn’t love dancing. Admittedly, my sample size is small, but I think I’m on to something. I was now motivated by a great desire to earn the respect of my new dancing friends and, more importantly, do Jowita justice. I was her first Strictly partner; she deserved a trier. In rehearsal rooms all over London we laboured. The more progress I made, the further away I seemed to be from getting it right. Our dance, to a deceptively quick version of White Christmas, lasted two minutes. This, by my reckoning, involved nailing around 200 precise steps, for each of which my arms, fingers, head, backside, neck and various other bits of me all had to be doing something equally specific. I calculated this added up to about 10 million opportunities to cock things up. “You overthink! Stop overthinking!” demanded Jowita, her patience showing the first signs of wear. The bad bits of ADHD were really kicking in now. As we went through the whole routine, instead of focusing on what I should have been doing at any given moment, I was busy regretting the move I’d just messed up and worrying constantly about a tricky one towards the end. Also, critically, I just couldn’t get my arms – my “frame” – right until I’d sorted my feet out. Once my feet were sorted, my frame started coming together, only for my feet to then go to pot again. As we waltzed together, try as I might, I couldn’t keep my shoulders back and my elbows up in the right position. This wasn’t about posture, as Jowita thought; my shoulders were sagging in sheer disappointment at all the mistakes my feet were making. In desperation she brought in an odd-looking metal bar to hang around my neck to keep my arms up. It was humiliating, but I didn’t care. If Jowita was happy, I was happy. The legendary football manager Brian Clough would occasionally, just occasionally, give a player a thumbs up from the dugout. That player would do whatever it took to elicit another thumbs up from the great man. Jowita had something similar for me. Whenever I nailed a sequence, she’d exclaim “Nice!” with a big, contented smile. Never did I think one word from a small Polish woman, barely older than my daughter and only slightly heavier than my dog, could mean so much. The time came to take our routine into the studio, in front of some actual people. I was sick with nerves, quite sure I’d lose my way completely. But it went rather well; I even got a nice “Nice!” out of Jowita at the end. At this point, my stupid mind went from being sure I’d mess it up, to visualising how badly I’d now feel if I did mess up the real thing when I knew I could actually do it. “Overthinking!” hollered my exasperated partner. “Stop it! You’ve got this. Please, stop thinking, stop worrying, enjoy the moment, be in the moment.” Resolving to obey my dance teacher/chiropractor/life coach and cease all my stinking thinking, I got togged up for the dress rehearsal. I was offered a fake tan not once, but twice, but managed to swerve it. The shirt – who knew! – was actually a bodice, a kind of babygrow that I had to step into. The idea of this, as with the decidedly snug tailcoat, is to stop everything riding up when you raise your arms. After much pinning and fiddling by the wardrobe department, I was ready. Unfortunately, the nerves had kicked in and I was desperate for the toilet, which meant everything had to be unpinned, the bodice stepped out of, and the whole palaver repeated. A rookie error. It was time for our one dress rehearsal. After this, it would be the real thing. All was going swimmingly until we got to the lift and spin, the one bit I’d always got right. I’d crouch to lift her on to my shoulder, grab her knee and start twirling. On this occasion, though, unused to the tightness of my outfit, I didn’t get low enough to pick her up properly. Something twanged in my back and, even worse, I couldn’t find her knee among the complications of her voluminous dress. Frantically, I rummaged around for it in the folds of this frilly frock as we span, but to no avail. I’d still be spinning now if she hadn’t yelled at me to put her down and finish the dance. Facedown on the physio’s table, I tried to put the dress rehearsal behind me. Soon it would be time for the actual televised performance. If you really want to know how well or otherwise I do, you’ll have to watch on Christmas night. After that I may or may not end up living in another country under an assumed name. So can I now call myself a dancer? I’m afraid I can’t, as one moment illustrates. We were all wearily milling around chatting in the studio between run-throughs of a group routine. Suddenly the sound system started blasting out We Found Love by Rihanna. As one, the pro dancers all went berserk, only for the sheer joy of doing so. It was like being in an episode of Glee. I tried to join in but, inhibitions still rock solid, my feet had turned back to clay. No matter, it was a privilege to see what life can be like if you live for the moment and dance, yes, like no one is watching. • The Strictly Come Dancing Christmas Special airs on Christmas Day on BBC One and BBC iPlayerIn June 2020, I attended a Black Lives Matter demonstration in north London, not far from my house. My wife had found out about it from friends who’d found out about it on Facebook. We took the kids. Well over 1,000 people went; beyond my immediate circle, I only recognised a few there. The soundsystem was poor and I couldn’t hear what was being said from the stage. We took a knee like Colin Kaepernick while raising a fist like the Black Panthers and held the pose for eight minutes – the length of time Derek Chauvin kept his knee on George Floyd’s neck. Then we clapped, chatted and made our way back to our locked-down homes. I have no idea who called the demonstration. It just happened and then it was gone. In the weeks before and after, institutions made statements; reviews were announced; social media avatars changed; museums reconsidered their inventory; Labour-led town halls went purple; curricula were revised; statues came down. Overnight, bestseller booklists were filled with anti-racist manuals and explorations of whiteness. This was the virus within the virus: a strain of anti-racist consciousness that spread through the globe with great speed, prompted by a video that had gone viral. Not everybody caught it, but everybody was aware of it, and most were, in some way, affected by it. All of this happened spontaneously. Like oil waiting for a spark, a dormant constituency of like-minded people were ignited. Whether they were people who had thought a great deal about racism but had found no meaningful way to intervene on the issue, or whether they had been converted from ambivalence to passion by the single event of George Floyd’s death is not known. They were roused and found each other, just like we had that day in London. It felt new, though nothing new had happened. The lived experience of racism for non-white people remains pervasive and unrelenting. A YouGov poll of ethnic minorities in Britain taken that same month revealed that a quarter have been racially abused multiple times, while almost half said their career development has been affected by their race. The polling showed significant differences between ethnic groups, as one might expect, but the broad thrust of the findings were similar for all of them. In the US, the sight of Floyd being killed in real time was shocking, but news of it was not. The number of Black people being killed by the police in the US has remained fairly constant over the past five years. When the focus shifted from the US to domestic inequalities in Britain and elsewhere, it became clear that here, too, there were no specific new grievances. We were not protesting against some new manifestation of racism in Britain, but the enduring nature of it. The YouGov poll from June revealed the percentage of non-white people who think racism was present in society 30 years ago is virtually identical to the proportion who think it is present today. No single organisation spearheaded the mass protests that sprang up around Britain. The groups that had been doing anti-racist work over the years sought to catch up with the new mood. But this was not a moment of their making. People came to Black Lives Matter as though gathering under a floating signifier. There was no Black Lives Matter office or official. There were several groups who adopted the name; none counted more than a couple of dozen participants. Each drew on the energy that was generated around them; each went in their own direction. Given that they were small, varied and mostly new, there was no representative entity to make concrete demands. But then, when it came to race, Britain was not short of demands. There had already been the 2017 Lammy Review (on racial disparities in the criminal justice system), the 2017 McGregor-Smith review (on race in the workplace), and the 2019 Timpson Review (on school exclusions). All of these were commissioned by the government; to date, none of the key recommendations have been implemented. Neither the problems that had sparked this conflagration, nor the solutions that might solve them were new, either. Stephen Lawrence would have been 45 when these demonstrations took place. The previous three years had seen the Windrush Scandal and Grenfell. Little had changed, apart from the urgent realisation that so little had changed for so many for so long. The broadly positive response to the demonstrations was an indication that there was sufficient public support to, at least, embark on the kind of changes necessary. But the lack of real backing in parliament, and the absence of institutions that could force politicians to address longstanding racial inequalities, left little prospect of these changes actually happening. To shift that narrative, and avoid being constantly deflected by someone else’s agenda, non-white communities will have to write our own story. * * * Evidence for the impact of British racism was mounting, in mortuaries and hospital beds, even as the demonstrations took place. The pandemic laid bare the structural inequalities with which we had all become familiar, and to which we had then become inured. The first 10 doctors to die from Covid were all non-white. “At face value, it seems hard to see how this can be random,” the head of the British Medical Association, Dr Chaand Nagpaul, said in early April. “This has to be addressed – the government must act now.” The government did not act. The inequalities became more evident. In England, mortality rates among some Black and Asian groups were between 2.5 and 4.3 times higher than among white groups, when all other factors were accounted for. There are good reasons why minorities would find themselves disproportionately affected. Black and Asian people are considerably more likely to live in deprived neighbourhoods, in overcrowded housing, experience higher unemployment, higher poverty and lower incomes, than white people. That means that during the pandemic they have been more likely to have to go to work, use public transport and live in multigenerational homes, and less likely to be able to effectively self-isolate. They have also been more likely to be in the kinds of jobs that demanded contact with the public, such as nursing, working in care homes, taxi driving, security and deliveries. If ever there was an illustration of how the inequalities of race and class work together, this was it. Minorities were not more susceptible because they were Black or brown, but because they were more likely to be poor. Office for National Statistics data shows that those who live in deprived areas in England and Wales were around twice as likely to die after contracting Covid. Most of the people who live in those areas are white, but non-white people are considerably overrepresented. But the reason they are disproportionately poor is, in no small part, because they are Black and brown. The virus does not discriminate on grounds of race. It didn’t need to. Society had done that already. This presented a gruesome, if important, opportunity. For at the very moment when the nation’s consciousness was raised to the issue of racism through Black Lives Matter, we were presented with a clear example of how racism operates through Covid. Notwithstanding the handful of cases where non-white people were spat at, sometimes while being showered with racial epithets, there is no suggestion that anyone tried to deliberately make them ill with Covid. In other words, they were not disproportionately affected because individual people with bad attitudes did bad things to them. Their propensity to succumb to the virus wasn’t primarily the result of people’s uncouth behaviour, bad manners, mean spirits, crude epithets or poor education. For while all of those things are present, it is the systemic nature of racism that gives it its power and endurance. Bequeathed through history, embedded within our institutions and entrenched in our political economy, racism is sustained as much, if not more, by compliance than intent. Take the Windrush scandal. The hostile environment policies announced by the coalition government in 2012 were not intended to ensnare people of Caribbean heritage who had been here for years. But the policies that demanded that landlords, employers and benefit agencies become border guards, checking people’s citizenship and right-to-work credentials, put the burden on some of the most economically vulnerable citizens to prove they were not illegal immigrants. Michael Brathwaite, for example, had worked as a special needs teacher at a primary school in London for 15 years when a new HR department demanded a biometric card or passport to show that he was eligible to work in the UK. When he couldn’t produce one – he was a citizen and didn’t need one – he was summoned to a meeting with HR, his head teacher and his union rep. “I was told that if I didn’t have a biometric card I couldn’t keep my job,” he recalled. “There was no kind of compassion towards who I am as an individual. That was the confusing thing, because I’d done nothing wrong – I was doing a fantastic job.” The London school where Brathwaite taught was listed outstanding by Ofsted: for almost half the children there, English is not their first language. It proudly celebrates Black History Month. I daresay all the people at that meeting in which he was fired had done racism sensitivity training at some point, and had sound, respectful relationships with non-white colleagues and parents elsewhere. Some of them might even have been Black. They needn’t have been personally hostile towards Black people or immigrants. The system was already hostile. All they had to do was comply with it. (I am often invited to give paid talks about race and racism and asked to produce my passport before I can be paid.) This is the system that left non-white people more vulnerable to Covid, and less able to survive it. In marked contrast to the brutality of the murder of George Floyd, Covid illustrated the banality of societal inequalities: the familiar, quotidian, bureaucratic complicity that results in far more deaths, even if they are far less dramatic. * * * Britain was nowhere near reaching this conclusion in the wake of Black Lives Matter. The political education spawned by the protests had been limited. The anti-racist sentiment it had unleashed was broad but shallow. Nonetheless, a critical mass of people was primed for the conversation that had been set in motion. A dynamic had emerged in which a significant number of non-white people felt emboldened to challenge the racism that they witnessed and experienced, while white people’s awareness was heightened and therefore they grew more receptive to the urgency and veracity of these challenges. The evidence for this is partly anecdotal. Virtually everyone I know had some kind of meeting or interaction at their work that they considered in some way substantial. I got the impression that some of these engagements were quite uncomfortable, and productive – some colleagues talking candidly about how they felt while others listened, maybe for the first time, aware that they were implicated in whatever changes were necessary. Meanwhile, my inbox filled with invitations to talk to industry groups, staff networks and trade unions about how they might adapt. Neither my friendship circle nor my inbox are remotely representative. But they are indicative, at the very least, of the changes in the world immediately beyond me. Elsewhere, there was evidence that things in the country were shifting. An Ipsos Mori poll from May 2021 showed that more than half of British people think we need to do more to tackle racism, against just 13% who think we are doing too much. In August, significantly more than half saw taking the knee as very important in tackling racism in football; in March it was barely over a quarter. Another YouGov poll, taken after the Euros final, showed that a third of people who previously did not think racism was a problem in football now do. There has, of course, been considerable resistance to this progress. The eruption of Black Lives Matter had predictably been misrepresented and distorted by the media, while the notion of systemic racism went either unreported, misreported or unexplained. Those for whom these debates, about systemic racism and the legacy of colonialism, were new may have found it disorienting – like walking into a movie halfway through to witness a car chase and struggling to work out who is pursuing whom and why. An Ipsos Mori survey conducted in July 2021, a year or so after the wave of BLM protests, revealed that while more than two-thirds of the country has heard of the terms “systemic racism” and “institutional racism”, still half did not have a good understanding of them. A YouGov poll from shortly before Floyd’s death showed that one in three Britons believe the empire is something to be proud, of and one in five think it’s something to be ashamed of. In 1951, the UK government’s social survey revealed that nearly three-fifths of respondents could not name a single British colony. “The nationalist not only does not disapprove of atrocities committed by his own side,” George Orwell once wrote. “He has a remarkable capacity for not even hearing about them.” But there is far more active hostility, too. Racially motivated hate crimes in England and Wales rose 12% in the first year of the pandemic, continuing a sharp trend upwards over the last five years. Neo-Nazi demonstrations around statues, booing the national team when they take the knee, mobilising to take control of the National Trust governing council to prevent further reckoning with its colonial and slave-sponsored inventory – all these things point to considerable hostility. We should not be too surprised by this. Where there is racism, we must assume there are racists; and when racism is being fought, we must assume the racists will fight back. However, while their attitudes are hardening, it does not appear that their numbers are growing. * * * We don’t know if these shifts in public opinion are sustainable. Racism is itself a hardy virus that adapts to the body politic in which it finds a home, developing new and ever more potent strains. But if they are lasting, then that is a significant achievement. It is possible to change laws and practices without changing people’s minds, but then those legal advances are vulnerable to backlash and repeal. By changing people’s minds, you change the culture and lay the groundwork for significant changes in policy for the future, as well as for a new consensus. Dams may break, as they did over gay marriage. This is not a zero-sum game, in which you either change minds or laws – the two are symbiotic. But what you cannot do is dismiss one as irrelevant and the other as paramount. If the potential of anti-racism became evident in this moment, so did its precarity. There are three main reasons why the lessons that emerged from Covid in the wake of Black Lives Matter might not be heeded. The first is that while, in the population at large, there there is a clear political constituency for this journey, there is little political will in parliament. When the protests occurred, the Labour party, nationally, resorted to its historical default position of condemning racism but failing to embrace anti-racism as its antidote, leaving bigotry deplored but never challenged. It is apparently incapable of framing anti-racism in terms of class solidarity, or of asserting that British history contains atrocities as well as achievements. So when anti-racist protests do emerge, and even when they’re peaceful, Labour leaders keep their distance for fear of alienating white voters. In this regard Keir Starmer is archetypal. England’s football manager, Gareth Southgate, showed more leadership and took more risks on the issue – backing the England players taking the knee and eloquently explaining why – than Starmer ever did. In practice, the Labour position has been to agree that Covid exposed structural racial inequalities, while being ambivalent about the protests that were trying to address them, and failing to come up with a coherent plan for tackling them. The Conservative government took the easier, if more implausible route, of denying any significant racial component to Covid outcomes. When presented with evidence, often from its own reports, that suggested otherwise, it basically said that while it was not sure how to explain the racial discrepancy, it wasn’t structural racism. Factors such as housing and jobs were more significant, government representatives claimed, and there were greater discrepancies, such as age. This merely proved that the government understood neither its own reports nor what structural racism actually meant. Almost all the studies on racial inequalities had already taken age and other factors into account. And the government referred to the fact that minorities were concentrated in the kind of jobs and housing that made them more vulnerable, as though it were mere coincidence. This combination of sloppy reasoning, inadequate attention to detail, toxic messaging and sophistry was emblematic of the government’s interventions on race during this time. The fact that all this came from the most racially diverse cabinet ever seen in the UK simply illustrated the limitations of symbolic representation. If you focus, as many liberals do, on organisations looking different, even as they act the same, you end up not with equal opportunities, but photo opportunities. It’s a form of diversity that Angela Davis once explained to me as: “The difference that brings no difference and the change that brings no change.” The equalities minister, Kemi Badenoch, a British-born woman of Nigerian parentage, is a case in point. She has publicly attacked two young Black female journalists, one for asking her straightforward questions, the other for doing a story she disapproved of. In an interview with the Spectator, she lamented the “boom in sales” of books like Reni Eddo-Lodge’s Why I’m No Longer Talking to White People About Race. “Many of these books – and, in fact, some of the authors and proponents of critical race theory – actually want a segregated society,” she said. They don’t. But this wasn’t just a statement in bad faith. It was bad politics. Just a few months earlier, after the protests erupted, Eddo-Lodge’s book topped the UK book charts – the first time a Black author had done so. Badenoch was not just complaining that the book was written, but that it was popular. This was just one example of how the government in general, and Badenoch in particular, might have been out of touch with the public mood. The Sewell report was another. Chaired by Dr Tony Sewell at the head of a non-white group commissioned to investigate racial and ethnic disparities following the Black Lives Matter protests, it found only “anecdotal evidence of racism”, but claimed it could “no longer see a Britain where the system is deliberately rigged against ethnic minorities”. Poorly researched, badly argued and academically illiterate, it failed on its own terms of producing a credible rightwing intervention into the nation’s race debate. The point here is not that their argument failed to take into account the relevant academic literature and practitioners’ expertise, or to pull together a coherent response to the protests – it wasn’t intended to. Sewell already had a history of downplaying the existence of institutional racism, and assembled the group in his own ideological image. The problem was that, despite significant promotion in the media, the insistence that Britain was a racial success story failed to chime either with non-white people’s lived experience or most white people’s perceptions. Seventy-one per cent of people said that either they had never heard of the Sewell report, or knew little about it. Of those who had heard of it, only a quarter had a favourable opinion of it. First condemned, then derided and ultimately discredited, it did not shift the race debate in Britain, but went largely ignored by all but those who held firmly to those views before it was written, despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary. * * * The question of how we leverage the urgency and clarity of this moment to effect real and lasting change is a crucial one, which brings us back to that day in north London over a year ago. Nobody took our names; there is no way to reconvene that group. Its effect was powerful for those who were there, but fleeting. The absence of structures or identifiable leaders in social movements has its benefits – it enables them to act quickly and allows new, young (often female) leaders to emerge who have previously been marginalised. But it can also mean a lack of democracy, clear direction, consistency or permanence. The US has long-established Black-led institutions – such as the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), the Urban League, historically Black colleges, the African Methodist Episcopal church, and so on – which, for all their problems, can nurture, incubate and sustain these moments. In Britain, no such longstanding organisations exist. When it comes to activism, these deficits are not specific to anti-racism or Black Lives Matter. It reflects the nature of modern, progressive social movements, from occupy Wall Street to #MeToo. Each one mobilised and energised large groups of people, transformed the political conversation and laid out alternative visions for how the world might be understood. That is no small thing. But they created space they cannot hold. After each surge, we are left waiting for the next sight of oil on the ground. We are at the mercy of spontaneous events that arise from structural inequalities and inequities. Institutions offer the possibility of elaborating a coherent strategy on their own terms, rather than being buffeted by any and every incident that occurs. There are moments when Britain appears engaged not so much in a debate about racism as a litany of race-based tantrums: a media figure or politician says something reprehensible, prompting an outcry that in turn prompts an outcry about the outcry. Terms such as “woke” and “culture war”, deprived of any meaning they once may have had, are tossed around like confetti. “The very serious function of racism is distraction,” Toni Morrison argued in 1975. “It keeps you from doing your work. It keeps you explaining, over and over again, your reason for being. Somebody says you have no language and you spend 20 years proving that you do. Somebody says your head isn’t shaped properly so you have scientists working on the fact that it is. Somebody says you have no art, so you dredge that up. Somebody says you have no kingdoms, so you dredge that up. None of this is necessary. There will always be one more thing.” There have been many things recently. The attacks on Meghan, Duchess of Sussex, and on the Euro 2020 penalty takers, racism in the Yorkshire cricket board, the Sewell report. All of them are serious and important, though not all equally so. Each of them might, and usually do, reflect elements of what might be a broader agenda. But in the absence of a defined agenda, we end up being dragged into a “debate” about something Piers Morgan said, or colourism within the royal family. The comprehensive and coherent response needed to combat the inequalities revealed through the Covid pandemic cannot be left to happenstance. We should continue to demand that the government conduct a review into the racial disparities exposed and exacerbated by Covid. But we should hold out no expectations that they will do so, and none that they will do so intelligently, in good faith. Nor should we expect much from Labour. They are not likely to be in power for some time, are more engaged in fighting among themselves than injustice in any case, and appear to be moving away from, not towards, the kind of structural changes we would need. * * * The point is how to channel that pressure, and then apply it. Here we have something of a precedent. Starting in 2018, the Guardian reported cases about British citizens being threatened with deportation, stripped of access to housing, health, employment and benefits for several months before it became known as the Windrush scandal and cost a minister her job. The government was shamed into committing itself to finding out what had gone wrong and setting up a review. Once the pressure was off, its attention waned. But the review, overseen by Wendy Williams, continued. In several cities across the country, there were public meetings. I attended one in a church hall in Bristol, where local people spoke about their experiences. One man had come to Britain from Jamaica with his parents when he was a baby. He applied for a driving licence, but was denied it because he couldn’t prove he was British. “I contacted my MP and they said it sounded like an immigration issue,” he said. “And I thought, how could it be, when I’ve never been out of the country?” Another had come aged 13, also from Jamaica, and had been here for 50 years – he has great-grandchildren here. After undergoing a mental health crisis, he had ended up in prison on remand. The charges were later dropped, but his time in prison meant his application for citizenship was denied. Williams wrote her report with important recommendations. We wait to see if it will be heeded. Given that only 5% of the Windrush victims have been compensated so far, we should not hold our breath. But nor should that prevent us from learning some lessons. Here is my proposal. We should do this again; only without the Home Office. We could hold a series of themed public meetings, independent of political parties, across England, on a range of issues, at which a few experts and practitioners in each field could lay out the challenges and then open the floor for people to bear witness (race in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland has its own dynamics, and will need specific proposals). Go back to Bristol, for example, to do a session on education. Have David Olusoga, who lives there, talk briefly about what changes he’d like to see in the curriculum; a local teacher talk about the challenges she sees in the classroom, and a parent-governor share their experiences: then have the audience talk about what they have seen and what they would like to see. The review would then go to Leicester, Birmingham, Manchester, Leeds, Liverpool, Bradford, Oldham, London, Luton (to name but a few), and in each place health, policing, arts, youth, crime, housing, immigration or employment (among other things) would be discussed. Standing somewhere between a citizens’ assembly and a truth-and-reconciliation event, the evidence could then be collected and a report written reflecting the needs and interests of participants. The aim would be threefold. First to hear, at a local level, what works and what doesn’t when it comes to addressing racial disadvantage, and hopefully develop solutions that people own and can organise around. Second, to listen, be heard, bear witness and testify, shifting the emphasis from an inhuman system to the human consequences of that system. Third, to create the kind of mediated event that might engage a broader public about the challenges, remedies and obstacles to tackling systemic racism. There is no shortage of expertise in the community that might be leveraged to make these high-profile, well attended events. Steve McQueen might document it; Charlene White or Samira Ahmed might moderate it; Eddo-Lodge, Nesrine Malik or Sathnam Sanghera might write it through. Following the Windrush review session in Bristol, I wrote: “Were it not for the fact that the participants need the option of anonymity, the hearings should be televised. For it is in the unmediated bearing of witness of these Britons that the human cost of a malicious immigration policy might be more fully understood. It should be televised because the people who need to see it – those for whom immigrants are faceless, threatening figures without family, ambition or story – were not there.” The perils in this plan for public meetings about Covid and racism are manifold. Nobody might show up; worse still, loud mouths, disruptors and control freaks might show up; it could descend into chaos or banality. If it is effective, then efforts to undermine it will be intense. And, of course, its weakness lies in the very reason why we need it, because in the absence of institutions we have been unable to formulate an agenda. Who will decide where, when, what and whom are questions that all offer opportunities to bicker, blunder and ultimately blow it. No single event, or series of events, will remake a system centuries in the making, so ingrained that many do not even recognise it as a system at all. But such an initiative would be an attempt to convene in person, not just to protest, but to plan and ultimately strategise. To root the discussion and consequent intervention in the needs of communities most affected, rather than at the mercy of whatever happens next. So that we might meet deliberately. Take each other’s names. And build something on our own terms. Gary Younge is a professor of sociology at the University of Manchester • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, listen to our podcasts here and sign up to the long read weekly email here.Starbucks workers at two stores in Massachusetts have filed for union elections to join SEIU affiliate Workers United, citing inspiration from the union organizing campaign in Buffalo, New York. In Buffalo at least one Starbucks branch has successfully won their union election, becoming the first corporate Starbucks location to unionize in the US, a victory that’s being hailed as a significant win for the US labor movement. The workers at stores on Commonwealth Avenue in Boston and Harvard Avenue in Brookline, announced their intent to unionize in a letter to Starbucks CEO Kevin Johnson on 13 December. “We were very inspired by the work that Buffalo was putting toward unionizing, particularly because as employees on the ground, the baristas on the floor understand how the business really flows day to day and builds our community in this connection,” said KyIah Clay, a barista at the Commonwealth Avenue Starbucks location for one year. “It really reminded us that our voice matters quite a bit and it’s very often not listened to, so we were really just feeling empowered to come together, amplify our voices, and tell corporate what we think can make Starbucks even better than it already is.” Workers noted understaffing has been a severe problem in stores throughout the Boston area, an issue cited by workers throughout the Buffalo area ahead of the union drive, as some Starbucks locations throughout the area have closed or reduced hours. In the Buffalo area, workers have faced an aggressive anti-union campaign led by Starbucks corporate. Dozens of executives descended into the Buffalo area in response to the union organizing drive, flooding stores with their presence and holding captive audience meetings with workers to try to persuade them to vote against unionizing. The Massachusetts workers are bracing for a similar campaign against their unionizing efforts from corporate, while pushing the company to adopt the same fair election principles that workers in Buffalo have asked the company to uphold. “We’re preparing our store for this,” said Ash O’Neil, a Starbucks barista for two years who has been at the Commonwealth location for about a year. “Before we went public with this news, we had a meeting with about 18 employees where we went over all of the incidents that happened in Buffalo, prepared them for it, explained what might happen, and acted out scenarios. We want to make sure that they’re all informed and prepared because we’re aware of how hard they’re coming down on stores for unionizing.” Tyler Daguerre, a barista at the Starbucks store on Harvard Avenue in Brookline, noted that their district manager and regional manager have already responded to the union organizing campaign with in-store visits and a planned listening session for 14 December that was cancelled without explanation. “I think that they’re afraid of the unionization effort, and I’m sure that corporate is telling them to do whatever they can to persuade workers right now,” said Daguerre. “We rarely get a visit from corporate management or anything like that, but there’s definitely been an increased presence.” Daguerre also expressed concerns over Starbucks scapegoating store managers over unionizing efforts, as several store managers in the Buffalo area resigned shortly after the union campaign went public and a store manager in Arizona was terminated after she reached out to workers in Buffalo to alert them that Starbucks was sending managers and executives from around the US to Buffalo with the intent to stop the unionization effort. Three more store locations in Buffalo are awaiting their union elections to be scheduled, after three store locations had their votes tallied on 8 December, with one outright winning their election, a second election to be determined based on challenged ballots, and a third election being challenged by the union over concerns that some ballots were missing from the count. In response to the union victory, Starbucks management posted a letter for workers saying they were “saddened” by the results of the election. Workers at the three Buffalo Starbucks locations still awaiting votes have reported retaliation from corporate for union organizing, including disciplinary write-ups and changes to schedules of workers who are involved in the union campaign. A Starbucks store in Mesa, Arizona, has also filed for a union election.The number of Covid cases has risen sharply at some universities as about a million students begin to head home for the Christmas break, prompting fears that the mass migration could fuel the spread of the virus. Students have been urged to take Covid tests before they leave their university to travel to see their families – the vast majority on public transport – and again before they return in the new year, as well as getting their booster vaccinations. But with case numbers increasing rapidly on some campuses, including Omicron infections, there are reports that students have decided to leave early to limit the risk of having to isolate over Christmas away from home. Loughborough University and Imperial College London have moved learning online for most students for the last few days of term after a significant uptick in cases. Elsewhere, universities have urged staff and students to either cancel or scale back planned Christmas celebrations to limit mixing. About 30 universities finished at the end of last week, but for most term will end on Friday and universities are following government guidance to retain face-to-face teaching to the very end, despite the prime minister’s wider call for people to work from home in light of the rapid spread of Omicron. Rowland Kao, a professor of epidemiology at the University of Edinburgh who contributes to the Spi-M modelling subgroup of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), said outbreaks at universities had not been as severe as last year. “However, any travel carries some risk and in particular has the potential for greater exposure during travel and also, importantly, to introduce mixing between age groups that would not be there at other times of the year. “Thus students travelling should be cautious in regards to both physical distancing measures and with the use of lateral flow tests to try to detect presymptomatic infections.” The University of Oxford reported a significant increase in infections, with more than 100 positive Covid-19 cases in the week ending 10 December and a 14% positivity rate, while the University of Sheffield reported a sharp rise to 81 cases among students on 14 December in a seven-day rolling average of 27. Despite the increasing numbers there are no plans for staggered departures in December and for the January return, as were implemented last year to try to reduce the number of students travelling on the same day. The government is instead relying on testing and high levels of vaccination among students. According to the Office for National Statistics, 90% of higher education students have had at least one vaccine dose, and 78% have had two. Everyone aged over 18 is expected to be offered a booster vaccine by the end of December. The University and College Union (UCU), which represents university staff, urged the government to allow universities to move online for the final week of term, rather than risk unnecessary infections and isolation over Christmas. “Sadly, as was the case last year, the government and the vast majority of institutions have ignored warnings from staff and unions and taken unnecessary risks,” said the UCU general secretary, Jo Grady. “With such poor leadership, it is little wonder some students have already voted with their feet and returned home for the year. “The challenge now is delivering a safe return to learning in January. Universities must carry out new risk assessments before the start of the next academic term and ensure appropriate mitigations are in place to keep students and staff safe.” A Department for Education spokesperson called on students to get their booster jab and keep testing regularly. “To minimise the spread of Covid over the holidays we are urging every student heading home to get tested before they leave and to test before they go back in the new term, and we are working closely with the higher education sector to make sure students can continue to benefit from in-person teaching.” Universities UK, which represents 140 universities in England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, added: “Universities are working closely with the health authorities and relevant government departments and will follow the most up-to-date public health advice to help keep the university community safe.”Movies, TV shows and books can all get terrible reviews and small audiences, but the difference when this happens in theatre is that the actors have to go back on stage and remake the work just after critics have declared it disastrous. “It is so crushing for actors to have to go on night after night bearing the weight of failure,” says Richard Eyre, artistic director of the Royal National Theatre from 1987 to 1997. “And that’s one of the reasons actors are such stoics. For directors and writers, there’s a sense of disembowelment you carry round if you’ve had a major failure – but they can just fuck off to Tenerife, and some do. Actors are obliged to soak it up.” Actor Michael Simkins, who wrote the theatrical memoir What’s My Motivation?, says: “If I had to articulate what it feels like to be in the middle of a play you feel is dying on its arse, it’s a cold sense of dread, like battery acid in your stomach. After terrible reviews, a sort of numbness sets in that is still there for the second night. You haven’t yet fully processed it. The first thing you do is tell all your friends who have booked tickets to cancel.” Both men express sympathy and empathy for all involved in Moira Buffini’s play Manor, which received a rare one-star review in the Guardian, and an even scarcer zero rating from the Times. That mauling also brought back memories for Jonathan Moore, a playwright, opera director and librettist who, as a young actor, appeared in Nicholas Wright’s The Gorky Brigade at the Royal Court in 1979. Wright later wrote two of the National Theatre’s most successful new plays – Mrs Klein and Vincent in Brixton – but his early work about Russian politics received brutal reviews. In the Daily Mail, Jack Tinker wrote: “The writer should be sent to the salt mines of Siberia to learn how to write.” Moore remembers “looking up at one of the boxes by the side of the stage, and there was a guy reading a newspaper all through the play”. Simkins once suffered a stark example of the unevenness of an acting career. In the late 1980s, he portrayed a young Italian-American opposite Michael Gambon in Arthur Miller’s A View From The Bridge, directed by Alan Ayckbourn. After playing to 97% capacity at the National, it transferred to the West End for six months. Over the next two years, though, Simkins featured in two legendary disasters. As a bonus for the success of the Miller, NT artistic director Peter Hall invited Ayckbourn to do anything he wanted. He chose John Ford’s 1633 revenge drama, ’Tis Pity She’s a Whore. “The first night party was in the Olivier theatre bar,” recalls Simkins. “As I pushed open the door from backstage, four actor friends who had been in the audience all avoided my gaze as I headed towards them. They looked down into their drinks. Then someone struck up a conversation about a play he’d seen me in six months before.” According to Daniel Rosenthal’s book The National Theatre Story, ’Tis Pity half-filled (or worse) the 1,100-seat Olivier across 68 performances. Strikingly, Ayckbourn’s official website, usually maintained punctiliously, still notes that the opening and closing dates of the show are “to be confirmed”. Simkins seemed assured a happier experience when cast in Michael Frayn’s 1990 play Look Look. Frayn’s previous two shows – Noises Off and Benefactors – had been big London and New York hits, and propitiously this new work returned to the meta-theatrical comedy genre of Noises Off, one of the most successful plays of the 20th century. But where that play had been set backstage, Look Look dramatised an audience, so that ticket-buyers met a mirror image of the stalls on stage. Simkins played the man in seat G15. During rehearsals, he “had the sense it wasn’t working but I looked around and lots of people were laughing. So I thought it must be OK. There were vague murmurings between the actors at lunch, when we went off for our egg and chips. ‘Do you think this is working?’ But it was never fully articulated.” Peter Hall once wrote that no play that seriously fails to engage an audience at its first performance can be saved. “I remember,” says Simkins, “the general sense, in the first couple of previews, that the opening 20 minutes worked wonderfully. Then it sort of died like a battery running down.” Despite the dramatist “rewriting eight to 10 pages every day, on the first night it was absolutely obvious the play didn’t work.” One critic reported that “one leaves the theatre open-mouthed at the sheer awful” spectacle, and another of “having no idea what the usually adept Mr Frayn thought he was up to”. In commercial theatre, failure brings economic stings for actors. Yet such was the commercial confidence in Look Look that Simkins had been “signed up for 52 weeks at a grand a week, by far the most I had ever earned”. But after the reviews, he was looking at unemployment within a fortnight. Drama school includes no training for this: you have to learn on the flop. Jonathan Moore likens the experience of playing out the last weeks of a doomed show to “being in one of those football teams that has been relegated with nine or 10 games of the season still left. You want to keep your standards up as you’re a pro. But you’re only human so you feel crushed. There’s a deep collective disappointment. And there’s something about theatre crowds, that they tend to become a single entity. At a hit, 1,000 people encourage each other to laugh and applaud. In a half-empty theatre, they somehow ramp up each other’s misery.” Theatregoers who show up for an unloved production are unlikely, says Simkins, to be short-changed by the cast. “There is a professional integrity. It’s often when plays are failing that actors kick in and really do their best. Conversely, in a copper-bottomed success, some of the actors stop trying. And it’s driven by fear because it’s always possible that the show where you decide to coast is the one where Ivo Van Hove has come in looking for actors for a 10-year global project.” But in a catastrophe, even the best actors can crack. “In Look Look, John Arthur, who was playing one of the audience members, had to say: ‘I don’t know! £32.50 for this!’ And the line would float out across the stalls to an audience that actually had paid £32.50 – which was then West End top whack – for this. You have never heard such a terrible silence. And late in the run, there were a couple of nights when the silence was so cold that John started laughing.” Whereas Broadway plays can close on the first night after poor reviews, British actors must carry on until the end of the scheduled run in subsidised venues, or through the two-week notice period of closure that West End managements are required to give. This requires support from the theatre team. There is a “duty of care” to those in a hated play, says Eyre, “and it is unforgivable not to support them. At the National, if it was my show, I’d go in to talk to the cast before the second night. And if it was someone else’s show that had destructive, poleaxing reviews, I’d go in to the dressing rooms with the director, and just exhort the actors not to take it personally or to heart.” Before each performance of The Gorky Brigade, Moore remembers, the Royal Court’s then artistic director, Max Stafford-Clark, would appear at the dressing room doors and tell the actors: “Dunkirk spirit, eh, everyone?” There is also a particular atmosphere around a theatre with an unwanted project: “The stage door keeper gives you sympathetic looks. The box office people say: ‘Not that good I’m afraid.’” Simkins and his colleagues on Look Look were regularly visited by Frayn, producer Michael Codron and the director Mike Ockrent. “We never felt abandoned. These were guys who don’t desert their post. I know a lot of producers – and certainly directors – who you never see again if things turn out badly. I’m not going to name them, but actors remember and it cuts very deep.” Although Eyre’s artistic directorship was during one of the National’s strongest decades, he scheduled one of its least successful productions: 1994’s Johnny on a Spot. “There’s no way of disguising that was a catastrophe,” he admits, “and it was my vanity that caused it.” Colleagues had proposed reviving The Front Page, Charles MacArthur’s newspaper comedy written with Ben Hecht. Eyre, though, had vivid memories of Michael Blakemore’s 1972 production of the play and was “not willing to invite comparison with a pretty well definitive production. So I thought we’d do this other Charles MacArthur play, Johnny on a Spot. And we did a reading and everyone thought it was marvellous, so I wasn’t alone in my madness.” One review called it “a one-joke disaster”, adding the observation that the walls “rattle in sympathy” with the silent auditorium. The show played to only 28% capacity in the 1,150-seat Olivier auditorium across 43 dates. Although disasters can provoke humour and even glee (smash flops are known to attract audiences who are drawn to gawp at the carnage like rubber-necking drivers on motorways) it should be remembered that livelihoods and even lives can be at stake. Eyre’s published diaries reveal that, during a run of unsuccessful shows that included the MacArthur, the artistic director was on prescription uppers and having suicidal thoughts. While critics must call what they see, there is a physical and mental toll from public failure. If there were a formula for why shows fail, there would be no need for producers or reviewers. However, a study of the archives reveals some patterns. Huge commercial flops are predominantly musicals, perhaps because this is the dramatic form that walks the thinnest line between great art and ridiculous artifice. Strikingly, around two thirds of the National’s worst box office returns during 46 years at the South Bank are modern verse dramas, including Tony Harrison’s Square Rounds and Peter Oswald’s Fair Ladies at a Game of Poem Cards. Although Harrison has also had major NT successes – The Mysteries and The Trackers of Oxyrhynchus – there is some evidence that verse is off-putting. Harrison’s rhyming-coupleted The Prince’s Play, directed by Eyre in 1996, sold only 31% of its tickets. The remit of the National, though, is to take risks. “I don’t think of The Prince’s Play at all as a failure,” Eyre says. “I was slightly shocked when you listed that. I see it as good work of the sort the National should be doing. With The Prince’s Play, I miscalculated the popularity. It was something like 50 shows in the Olivier. At 25 performances, it might have done 66% business.” Picking the wrong stage is also a common factor across flops. Almost all the National’s big disasters would have been minor disappointments in its smallest auditorium, the Dorfman (previously the Cottesloe). Manor stages small conversations at the front of the huge Lyttelton stage, with a towering set rising behind. Eyre hasn’t seen the play, but is intrigued to hear its geometry. “That’s interesting. You tend to have to find a way of reducing the Lyttleton stage and focusing audience attention on a much smaller part of the acreage. You have to find a way of compressing the space.” Another frequent theatrical post-mortem finding is bad timing. The Gorky Brigade, Moore thinks, “was much better than critics gave it credit for. But, at that time, Thatcher had just been elected and culture felt like a war zone for left-wing ideas, and we were doing a play set in post-revolutionary Russia!” Similarly, two stark National failures – Philip Martin’s Thee and Me, which had half its performances cancelled, and Greenland, which was ridiculed by reviewers – approached the subject of climate change before it became fashionable. In theatre, though, hope can soon follow despair, as Simkins found. “We got our closure notice for Look Look on a Monday. I was meeting a friend that night and Juliet Stevenson came down the stairs with her director from Burn This, which she was rehearsing. She said she was coming to see Look Look. I said, ‘Don’t bother, we’re closing’, and the director said, ‘Get this guy a script. We lost an actor tonight.’ Actors live on optimism – and that time it actually paid off. One moment, I was in the biggest flop in London and two weeks later I was on stage with John Malkovich in the success of the year.” Stage frights: five infamous flops Breakfast at Tiffany’s (1966, Majestic, New York) Broadway’s tradition of long preview periods creates a special small subset of productions that closed without actually opening. After watching the first preview, producer David Merrick cancelled all subsequent performances. “The announcement made Merrick a hero. Never before had a producer admitted at this stage that his show was a disaster,” notes Ken Mandlebaum in his entertaining Not Since Carrie: 40 Years of Broadway Musical Flops. Dutch Uncle (1967, Aldwych Theatre, London) Playwright Simon Gray (1936-2008) was a connoisseur of his theatrical reverses across a series of diaries and memoirs and his “favourite flop” was this seedy bedsitter comedy. After a try-out run in Brighton, where Gray claimed to have witnessed a hotel receptionist warning guests to avoid the show, Dutch Uncle played to “groans of irritability, early and resonant departures, angry complaints at front of house” before closing. The Daily Mail critic argued for resuming the Victorian ritual of audiences booing bad plays. Home Sweet Homer (Palace Theatre, New York, 1976) One of the putrid sub-group of Broadway musicals that opened and closed with the same performance, this musical-comedy version of the classical Greek legend of Odysseus starred Yul Brynner, looking for a show to match his Broadway standard, The King and I. During a pre-New York tour, Brynner was suing the producers to get out of the show while his co-star, Joan Diener, finding that her name had accidentally been left off the theatre marquee, legally insisted the building was dressed in black, leading to fears that President Gerald Ford or Brynner had died. Into the Night (Minskoff, New York, 1983) Featuring at one point a high-kicking chorus line of an archbishop, priests and nuns, this show about the Shroud of Turin, a relic some Christians believe to be the burial shroud of Jesus, raised its $3m capital from churchgoers, but their charity was not shared by critics and it closed after six performances. Bernadette: The People’s Musical (Dominion, London, 1990) Another set of “angels” (as theatre backers are known) among the faithful staked the cash for this musicalisation of claimed appearances of the Virgin Mary at Lourdes in France. Unusually for a stinker, every night of the month it lasted was sold out but audiences had come not to pray but prey on a show universally judged carrion.Britain is caught in a Covid doom loop, the pattern of which is becoming depressingly familiar. A new variant of the virus appears. It spreads rapidly. Restrictions are imposed to slow transmission rates and to take pressure off the NHS, but the economy suffers. Case numbers eventually fall and life gets back to something like normal. For a while, anyway. For a government that constantly trumpets the idea of global Britain, the political focus is scarily narrow. A year-end target has been set for jabbing every adult in England, and every night the BBC dutifully reports how many more people have had their booster. Once everybody has had a third jab, so the Downing Street mantra goes, this country will have maximum protection and the pandemic and economic recovery will be assured. This line of argument is flawed for two reasons. First, the lesson of the last two years is that not everybody will come forward to be jabbed. Unless the government is going to insist on compulsory vaccination – something which would be unworkable and politically impossible – a large minority of the population will remain unprotected against Omicron. Secondly, the idea that Britain can somehow be walled off from the rest of the world is a nonsense. It is proving a struggle to hit the World Health Organization target of vaccinating 40% of the global population by the end of the year and in some parts of Africa programmes have barely started. As the managing director of the International Monetary Fund, Kristalina Georgieva, said this month, the breeding ground for new variants is still out there. It is no coincidence that new variants have tended to be first detected in countries where vaccination rates are low. Set against this reality, the idea that fully jabbing the whole of the UK provides permanent protection is the modern-day equivalent of the Maginot Line, the system of supposedly impregnable defences constructed by the French in the 1920s but which were easily circumvented by the Germans in the spring of 1940. Unless Britain is going to cut itself off from the rest of world, the booster campaign will only work for a limited period. Sooner or later another variant will show up. There is a better and readily available solution: mobilise action at a global level to ensure vaccination rates in the poorer parts of the world match those in the developed west. That will require more money to allow Covax, the vaccine arm of the WHO, to purchase more jabs. It will require countries that have procured more doses than they need to donate their surpluses. It will require changes to intellectual property rules so that countries in the global south can manufacture their own treatments. It will mean higher aid budgets to allow poor countries to improve their health delivery systems. Above all, it requires leadership and vision. This won’t be easy because in times of crisis there is a tendency for countries to become more insular and look after their own people. In this instance, however, there is no real distinction between looking after your own people and looking after people in Tanzania or Nigeria, where less than 5% of people have been double jabbed, let alone had boosters. It is also worth considering what the alternatives are, because none are particularly attractive. One option is to lock down the country at the first sign of a new variant, no matter what the cost to the economy, education, mental health and personal liberty. Another is to accept a higher mortality rate from Covid-19 as a price that has to be paid, with the hope that continued improvements in treatments for those who fall seriously ill mean the number of deaths fall over time. In reality, Britain is stuck somewhere between these two extremes. Faced with the rapid spread of Omicron, large numbers of people have started to take their own precautions. They have cancelled bookings for Christmas parties, they are ordering takeaways rather than eating out, they are buying their Christmas presents online. It hasn’t really mattered that trust in the government is low, because individuals are making their own risk assessments. This is not a good place to be either. It spells trouble for an economy that was barely growing in any case, and which is now operating without the security blanket of the furlough scheme, the wage subsidy scheme that ended in September. The IMF said that Rishi Sunak should draw up contingency plans for a support package in the event that Omicron necessitates widespread enforced closures of businesses, and the chancellor would do well to take this advice. Government policy goes through distinct phases. At first, ministers balk at tougher curbs on activity, saying it is too early to say how serious the health impact of the latest variant will be. The message to the public is that Britain must learn to live with the virus, but sooner or later there is a Downing Street press conference at which Boris Johnson says he is being forced, regrettably, to take sterner measures. The argument this time is that the modest tightening of restrictions already announced, such as mask-wearing in most indoor settings, will be enough because booster jabs will provide sufficient protection for the public. Whether this line will persist once Christmas and the New Year celebrations are over remains to be seen. Given the rate at which Omicron is spreading, it seems unlikely. To an extent, though, it doesn’t matter because the economic damage is already being done. So what should the government be doing? It would certainly make sense for the Treasury to announce a scaled-down version of the furlough targeted at the sectors suffering the worst. The Resolution Foundation thinktank estimates wage subsidies for 1.5 million workers in the hospitality and leisure sectors would cost about £1.4bn a month, a good investment given the much bigger cost of businesses closing for good. There also needs to be a greater focus on getting those who are vaccine-hesitant to come forward for their jabs, with persuasion rather than demonisation the key. Some of those who are unjabbed are flat-out anti-vaxxers, but many are simply wary. Certain groups where vaccine rates are low – young women concerned about their fertility or people from ethnic minorities who are suspicious of the state – have reasons to be concerned. Compulsion and shaming are not the answers. Above all, it is time for concerted multilateral action. The UK is not the only country trapped in its recurring nightmare. Other European countries had imposed much tougher curbs on their populations even before the arrival of the Omicron variant. There is no vaccination-in-one-country approach that will work. We are, to coin a phrase, all in this together. Larry Elliott is the Guardian’s economics editorChris Packham and a campaign to “rewild the royals” have had a “really good” meeting with the crown estate to ask it to consider pledging a slice of its 615,000 acres to wild nature. Packham said the crown estate was “quite clearly aligned” with the rewilding campaign group Wild Card in its determination to act to tackle the biodiversity and climate crises by changing the way land is managed. The crown estate manages a £14.1bn real estate portfolio, which includes Windsor Great Park, urban areas such as Regent Street in central London as well as 264,000 acres of farmland, woods and uplands. An independent commercial business, it hands all its profits to the Treasury, which passes on 25% of profits – with a two-year time lag – to the Queen through the sovereign grant. “It has enormous potential for rewilding and they recognise that,” said Packham. “We weren’t talking about bears and wolves and lynx, and they were extremely receptive.” In the meeting, Wild Card proposed that the crown estate make a pledge to make space for nature on a percentage of its land. The group also suggested a panel of expert scientists to advise it on rewilding, and asked if the crown estate would convene a discussion with other major landowners such as the Church Commissioners, the National Trust and the universities of Oxford and Cambridge to discuss rewilding and nature recovery on their land. Wild Card also asked the crown estate to consider undertaking “opportunity mapping” to calculate the optimum areas of its landholdings to return to nature – areas between two nature reserves, for instance, that could join up natural landscapes. The crown estate has told Wild Card it will respond to the proposals in the new year, when it will meet the campaign group again. The Wild Card campaign has not yet managed to secure a meeting to discuss rewilding with the royal family and the duchies of Cornwall and Lancaster. The royal family including the duchies also directly own an estimated 867,500 acres of land, an area twice the size of Greater London, including most of Dartmoor, swaths of upland Wales, the Isles of Scilly and estates at Balmoral in Aberdeenshire and Sandringham in Norfolk. Packham said he hoped the positive response from the crown estate would encourage the royal family to engage with their proposals. He said: “It would be great to see the crown estate taking a lead on rewilding in a practical way in a working landscape, and it would give confidence to others to do the same.” Early analyses by Dr Steve Carver and Dr Jonathan Carruthers-Jones at the Wildland Research Institute suggest that some of the crown estate lands “have high potential for rewilding and could be of value to multiple species as well as being structurally important for landscape connectivity at the local and national level”. A spokesperson for the crown estate said: “The crown estate recognises the urgent need to tackle the climate and environmental emergency. Alongside our commitment to being a net zero business by 2030, we are actively seeking solutions to restore biodiversity and the natural world, including by providing and protecting habitats and removing carbon from the atmosphere across our portfolio. We continue to review the role that our landholdings can play in addressing these important challenges, and are working closely with many partners and stakeholders to help make a difference.” This article was amended on 16 &amp; 30 December 2021 to add clarification about the structure of the crown estate and to more accurately describe its role.Sending a small sailing boat to explore the interior of a hurricane may seem like a bad idea, but that is exactly what meteorologists from the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration did in October. There was no danger though because the seven-metre vessel was crewless. Saildrones are robot vessels that can stay at sea indefinitely with a combination of wind and solar power. Some, like Saildrone Explorer SD 1045, have been modified to handle 140mph winds and giant waves. The Saildrone has a rigid sail called a wing. The hurricane wing is half the height of a standard wing, like reefing a traditional sail to reduce the risk of damage by decreasing its area. An earlier version tested in the Antarctic in 2019 could sail only downwind, whereas the new wing allows the drone to “run” and sail upwind like a traditional yacht. Greg Foltz, an NOAA researcher, says the Saildrone project should provide useful data on rapid intensification, when hurricane winds gain in strength over the course of a few hours. Intensification can be dangerous to coastal communities because it gives so little warning. SD 1045 is one of a fleet of five new hurricane explorers, and the first to sail through the eye of a hurricane sending back video and other data in real time.In 2009, Squid Game’s creator Hwang Dong-hyuk got himself deep into debt. When both he and his mother found paid employment impossible to come by, he had to turn to loans to survive. Hwang’s homeland is a desperate society, divided between those working themselves to death and those who, having been made redundant, are trapped in debt. But, in channelling the experience of downtrodden South Koreans into one of the finest TV shows of 2021, he made something whose appeal transcended national boundaries. We saw 456 debt-riddled contestants selected by a shadowy corporation to volunteer for a real-life gameshow in which the winner goes home with 4.6bn won (£28m) if they survive a series of brutal games, while the losers go home in body bags. In the first episode, contestants could only move when the face of a sinister mechanised doll is turned away from them. Those caught out were mown down with machine-gun fire. As corpses littered the floor and the living congratulated themselves on surviving, this was a drama that encouraged us to follow the logic of capitalism to its extreme by treating everything, including fellow humans, as commodities, as means to ends. In a world where most of us teeter on the edge of the pit of debt, or are lying in it, Squid Game asked how ruthless we would be given the chance to get out. Would you be a social Darwinist winner, or one of 455 other corpses whose organs are harvested for sale on the black market? Would you, in extremis, resemble the relatable and compassionate loser dad – player 456, Seong Gi-hun – or self-serving venal gangster player 101, Jang Deok-su? But its appeal also lay in something less high-minded. One reason Squid Game overtook Bridgerton to become Netflix’s most-watched series is that it was edge-of-the-seat drama in which we hardly knew who would be terminated in the next game. That ability to create tension, whereby apparently anything could happen and no character is beyond the bullet, takes storytelling skill rarely seen on TV today. One of the pleasures for me, certainly, was how I was wrong-footed several times when I was sure one character would survive but was killed off. Just as well I didn’t bet on the outcome: like Gi-hun when he gets fleeced at the bookies, I’d be a terrible gambler. Squid Game wasn’t the first show to put a bunch of people together and have them kill each other to survive for others’ entertainment. But before making Squid Game, Hwang studied fight-to-the-death precursors such as early 00s Japanese film Battle Royale and 2007 TV anime Gyakkyō Burai Kaiji: Ultimate Survivor – then upped the voyeuristic ante to make his version even more grippingly sadistic. When, halfway through the series, a bunch of masked VIPs (most of them, significantly, westerners) pitch up, they bet on who will live and die. They used people as footstools and feasted on banquets behind glass screens that offered fine views of the carnage below. For me one of Squid Game’s curiosities was that the drama did not play out, as say Suzanne Collins’ Hunger Games did, as a TV show (there is no oleaginous Stanley Tucci interviewing survivors about their love lives before they battle to the death). But that’s to miss the point of Squid Game: it was not a critique of media rapaciousness, but of a society gone wrong. Perhaps Hwang, who is now making series two, didn’t want to bite the Netflix hand that fed him. There have been complaints that the subtitles didn’t give us the full sense of what is being said in Korean. Or that the westerners’ accents were dreadful, and yes some, like basketball star LeBron James, found the ending unsatisfying. Otherwise, though, Hwang delivered what he planned. “The show is motivated by a simple idea,” he told me. “We are fighting for our lives in very unequal circumstances. During the pandemic, the poorer countries can’t get their people vaccinated, so they are contracting viruses on the streets and even dying. It’s not profound.” But it is, Mr Hwang. Squid Game was an allegory of the world in 2021. • This article was amended on 20 December 2021. An earlier version misidentified the “self-serving venal gangster player” in Squid Game as player 067, Kang Sae-byeok. The intended reference was to player 101, Jang Deok-su.Christ’s sacrifice and the erotic death wish of earthly glory: these are the components of this freaky folk horror from writer-director David Lowery, a mysterious and sensationally beautiful film inspired by the 14th-century chivalric poem Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, which was written by an anonymous contemporary of Chaucer. Its creator’s identity remains a puzzle to the present day – though the film playfully hints at the question of authorship. The story could not be more simple or more perplexing. A nobleman at the court of King Arthur is challenged by a stranger to a martial contest on Christmas Day. But the contest utterly negates or deconstructs the whole idea of manly valour, strength, courage and skill in battle. All that is required is submission. In this film adaptation, Dev Patel plays Gawain, who must go on an extraordinary quest across a stunningly rendered landscape. Like a haunted pilgrim in something by Bergman, Gawain is to come across strangers whose own intentions are sinister. Barry Keoghan as a malign scavenger, Erin Kellyman is the spirit of Saint Winifred, whose own decapitation made her a Christian martyr; and a certain lord and lady, played by Joel Edgerton and Alicia Vikander (an eerie doppelganger of the lowborn woman he has left behind), who startle him with what appears to be a taste for medieval swinging. There is a sensational speech from the lady of the castle about the meaning of green: the colour of nature, the colour of remorseless amoral growth, the grass that will grow out of the grave and the moss that will cover the tomb, the endless process that will make a mockery of individual heroes and their paths of glory. And there is a stunning sequence in which Gawain is robbed and bound by the scavenger and his accomplices, left to die, to rot down to his bones but then to be born again, a rebirth that happens within the blink of an eye, or within the victim’s mind, or in metaphysical parallel with his ignominious roadside death. Gawain is being tested. So are we. The visual brilliance of this film combines with shroomy toxicity and inexplicable moral grandeur. What a stunning experience.Wolf Alice’s third album could easily have been a disaster. They made it with Markus Dravs, the go-to producer for going big (Arcade Fire, Coldplay, Florence + the Machine). It’s a move that can fit uncomfortably for anyone not born in Bono’s image, as the low-key London four-piece clearly aren’t. Then the pandemic hit. Stuck in Dravs’ studio in Brussels, they meticulously refined the album, risking sucking the life from it. Somehow they skirted both pitfalls: Blue Weekend is Wolf Alice’s biggest and most immediately satisfying album – cresting shoegaze, woozy classic rock, inventive acoustic songwriting cohered by melodies that aren’t just sticky, but frequently moving. It’s also one that’s seldom as straightforward as it seems, deriving its greatest potency from Ellie Rowsell’s subtly layered songwriting. She has said that Blue Weekend is her least autobiographical album: whatever the inspiration, it tells a convincingly lived-in story of searching in dark places for answers to some indefinable question; of self-sabotage becoming a logical response to having your worst suspicions confirmed. Rowsell’s lyrics have never been stronger, telling of a breakup with friends (brooding opener The Beach), a litany of creeps, misogynists and a cheating lover: “I take you back / Yeah, I know it seems surprising,” she thunders on Lipstick on the Glass with a measure of ecstatic control, as if mirroring her prideful composure. Untethered, her narrator swerves knowingly into nihilism. It’s here that Wolf Alice come into their own as adept musical shapeshifters, using their broad influences to explore the extremes a person might reach for in the throes of alienation: the self-destruction and desolation; the flare-ups of defiance and self-doubt. “Safe from heartbreak if you never fall in love,” Rowsell sings conclusively over a song of the same name, her drawbridge-up stance contrasting sweetly pastoral guitar and innocent in-the-round harmonies. Similarly, at first pass, the woozy Delicious Things comes off as a classic fantasy of a wide-eyed newcomer seduced by life in Los Angeles. But Rowsell is well aware that “the vibes are kinda wrong” and that the man whose bed she’s in is “here for one thing”. Nevertheless, she sings, paradoxically, of feeling “alive, like Marilyn Monroe”, and the dreamy song billows skywards like the ill-fated bombshell’s skirts, a blissed-out wall of guitar steadily charring. Maybe certain annihilation is the fantasy, though some self-preservationist instinct kicks in: “Hey, is mum there?” Rowsell sings in a small voice at the end. “It’s just me / I felt like calling.” There are more headstrong forays into the abyss. The squalling, stadium-ready Smile is a personal rebuke to Rowsell’s critics. Through a jutted jaw, she reclaims attributes that some might perceive as weaknesses – caution, sensitivity, rage – but the song’s crowning moment finds her at the bar amid her fellow “lost souls”, drinking to fake that superhuman feeling. The confidence is conditional; as is the relief on Play the Greatest Hits, a deliriously fun, campy rager about the groundhog day of narcotic nights out, repeated to keep real life at bay. “It isn’t loud enough,” she screams, furiously trying to sate some primal need. Blue Weekend was released with Rowsell, Joff Oddie, Theo Ellis and Joel Amey all on the cusp of 30 – a time when youth’s reckless momentum slows and you’re forced to puzzle over what’s next, or at least to start being more honest with yourself. The album’s turning point, How Can I Make It OK?, plays out like an attempt at consolation, laced with their own doubts at being able to offer it: “How do we sell you the world?” Rowsell sings expansively. But they clearly understood the assignment: the song swells to a euphoric, girl-group-indebted sandstorm of a chorus that’s stirring to the point of confrontation. Similarly tender, but more barbed, is the gorgeous The Last Man on Earth, which wields opiate psychedelia a la Bowie or Floyd to slyly mock a blinkered character awaiting divine intervention instead of sorting their own life out. The music carries you off like a dream, but Rowsell’s lyrics are resolutely grounded. There is a powerful magnetism between the scale of these songs and the detailed empathy and frustrations they contain. But Wolf Alice also trust when to pull back. Penultimate song No Hard Feelings is the inevitable, hard breakup moment, the defenceless conclusion to the earlier heartache. “It’s not hard to remember when it was tough to hear your name,” Rowsell sings gracefully, to just softly thrummed guitar and twinkling ambience: “Crying in the bathtub to Love Is a Losing Game.” This ending is a beginning, she knows, an idea threaded into closer The Beach II, a sweet dirge that marks the reconciliation of that broken friendship: “The tide comes in as it must go out.” These are grand gestures wielded elegantly, and they make Blue Weekend a complete, moving piece of work. In a sense, it’s a record that feels very familiar – a big, confident pop-rock album – but then you remember what an anomaly those are these days, when the form is so diminished as to have been almost abandoned. Few are bemoaning its demise, but there’s an undeniable pleasure in finding one adventurous, ambitious and human enough to remind you why they used to be so essential.One Night in Alton Towers 9pm, Channel 4 “The worst thing about theme parks is other people,” says Alex Brooker, correctly. So imagine what it would be like to have the run of one, at night, with access to free rides and pick’n’mix? It’s big fun for Brooker and his companions, Josh Widdicombe and Roisin Conaty, although at times it is hard not to wonder what’s in it for the viewers. However, by the end – tired, sugar-crashing and, essentially, adult babies – the trio’s hysteria has become both endearing and amusing. Phil Harrison The Doghouse at Christmas 8pm, Channel 4 This doggy matchmaking show is already almost excruciatingly adorable – but the festive version shamelessly ramps up the cuteness to new levels. Michael the lurcher has never really had a long-term home before, so how will he be able to handle two very excited children? PH MasterChef: The Professionals – The Final 9pm, BBC One The most demanding iteration of the cookery contest reaches its climax. Three chefs remain – and only a perfect three-course meal stands between them and glory. Tonight, stressful kitchen moments will be interspersed with a few personal details about the trio, before their food is presented. PH Surgeons: At the Edge of Life 9pm, BBC Two A motorcycle smash leaves a chef in critical condition: can the major trauma team at Addenbrooke’s Hospital in Cambridge stabilise the patient and save an arm? The final episode in the current series also features a race against time to relieve a brain bleed. Graeme Virtue There’s Something About Christmas Movies 8pm, Sky Max And thus the festive argument rages anew. Is Die Hard really a Christmas movie? There’s no disputing others, of course – everything from Miracle on 34th Street to It’s a Wonderful Life – and here, quiz host Alan Carr invites team captains Michael Sheen and Jennifer Saunders to act them out. Ali Catterall I Literally Just Told You 10pm, Channel 4 Not just a gameshow, but also an excuse for host Jimmy Carr to smirkily utter the catchphrase: “I literally just told you.” A team of live quiz writers turn facts mentioned during filming into questions that contestants are expected to recall later on, with £25,000 available to those who succeed. Alexi Duggins Live sport Premier League football: Liverpool v Newcastle 7pm, BT Sport 1. A tricky trip for Eddie Howe’s men. International Test cricket: Australia v England 3.30am, BT Sport 1. The first day from Adelaide Oval.Armed separatists in Cameroon’s anglophone regions have attacked, kidnapped and threatened hundreds of school pupils in nearly five years of violence that has forced more than 230,000 children to flee their homes, a report has found. In a detailed analysis of the conflict that has gripped the English-speaking regions since 2017, dozens of students and teachers speak of brutal attacks by armed groups who have made education a battleground in their fight to form their own state. Ilaria Allegrozzi, author of the Human Rights Watch (HRW) report, said it was essential that separatist leaders called off a school boycott, which was initially intended as a protest over injustices against English-speakers but which is now “destroying an entire generation of Cameroonians” by depriving them of an education. “But most importantly, they should also start reining in their fighters,” she said. “They should instruct their fighters to stop attacking schools. Schools are not places that can be battlegrounds.” The crisis in the anglophone regions began in late 2016, when Cameroonian security forces used excessive force against demonstrations led by teachers and lawyers angry about the perceived marginalisation of the anglophone education and legal systems. Those protests were peaceful, but since 2017, when armed separatist groups seeking independence for the English-speaking Northwest and Southwest Regions declared an education boycott, at least 70 schools have been attacked, the report said. More than 500 students, and at least 100 education professionals, have been attacked, it claimed, with at least 11 pupils and five teachers killed, and scores of others assaulted, harassed, and threatened for failing to comply with the boycott. Separatist fighters have also kidnapped 255 students, according to HRW. One woman, a 19-year-old secondary school pupil, from Buea, Southwest Region, recalled being abducted and brutally maimed by armed separatists in January 2020, on her way back from school. “They were armed with machetes and knives,” she said. “They blindfolded me so I could not see where they were taking me. We had to walk for a few hours. I was not given food. I slept on the ground outside for three days. The amba [separatist fighters] called my father and asked him to pay money for my release. “On the third day, when I was about to be released, they cut my finger with a machete. One of the boys did it. They punished me because they found schoolbooks in my bag. They wanted to cut a finger off my right hand to prevent me from writing again. I begged them [not to], and then they chopped the forefinger of my left hand.” In September, when schools were supposed to reopen for the new academic year, two out of three in Cameroon’s anglophone regions remained closed, leaving more than 700,000 students without education, according to the UN. Those who do risk going to school often do it covertly, the report said. “Many of my students do not wear school uniforms on their way to and from school,” said a chemistry teacher in Buea. “If they wear them, they can be at risk of being spotted by the separatist fighters on the road and attacked. Also, they don’t use school bags. They put their books and notebooks in shopping bags like those we use to go to the market to buy food.” Allegrozzi said that although the report focused on attacks on education by armed separatist groups, human rights abuses have been committed by both sides. “[Cameroonian] security forces also bear responsibility for serious attacks against civilians,” she said. “They have killed innocent people during abusive counterinsurgency operations. They have burnt hundreds of villages and homes across the two regions. So people have been really caught in the middle between a rock and a hard place.” For many – nearly 600,000 people since late 2016, according to the UN – the only option is to flee. Among them are teachers and at least 230,000 children who have had to leave after attacks on education or their communities. After a visit to Cameroon earlier this month, Jan Egeland, secretary general of the Norwegian Refugee Council, called on the international community to break its “deadly silence” on the country’s “education mega-emergency”. “Cameroon is one of the world’s most forgotten crises,” he said. “Until the international community steps up its support and diplomatic engagement, children will continue to bear the brunt of the violence.” The Cameroonian government said it has deployed security forces to some schools to reassure teachers and pupils about safety. It has also mounted a “back to school” campaign over the past two years in an attempt to break the boycott. But in its report HRW is critical of the authorities’ failure to bring the perpetrators of the attacks to justice. It said the armed groups “have enjoyed almost absolute impunity for their attacks on education”. The organisation based its research on 155 telephone calls with people in Cameroon. The separatist leaders, who belong to multiple groups, all disputed the findings of the report. One said it was “extremely biased to the degree that it is difficult to characterise it as anything other than as [sic] deliberate misinformation”. Another accused Cameroon’s security forces of trying to “sully the good image and reputation” of the separatists by committing “atrocious actions including the burning down of schools” in nonmilitary attire. A third said that as HRW had relied on telephone calls for its research it had “missed the dynamics in play” on the ground. It blamed the “appalling situation” on the government of Cameroon, adding: “It is clear from the skewed attitude of HRW that it blindly serves the purposes of those close to the ancient dictator Paul Biya.” Biya, 88, has been president of Cameroon since 1982.Urban Meyer’s tumultuous NFL tenure ended after just 13 games – and two victories – when the Jacksonville Jaguars fired him early Thursday because of an accumulation of missteps. Owner Shad Khan made the move hours after former Jaguars player Josh Lambo told a Florida newspaper Meyer kicked him during practice in August. It was the latest black eye – adding to an already lengthy list of embarrassments – for the three-time national championship-winning college coach who failed miserably to make the transition to the NFL. Meyer joins former Atlanta Falcons coach Bobby Petrino as college coaches whose NFL careers flamed out in stunningly swift fashion. Petrino resigned in December 2007 to take over at Arkansas. He was 3-10 at the time. Meyer went 2-11 in his partial season, and the Jaguars really started to unravel on the offensive side of the ball following the team’s bye week. They averaged a measly 9.1 points in Meyer’s final seven games, which ended with a five-game skid. Offensive coordinator Darrell Bevell will serve as Jacksonville’s interim head coach for the final four games, beginning Sunday against Houston (2-11). “After deliberation over many weeks and a thorough analysis of the entirety of Urban’s tenure with our team, I am bitterly disappointed to arrive at the conclusion that an immediate change is imperative for everyone,” Khan said in a statement. “I informed Urban of the change this evening. As I stated in October, regaining our trust and respect was essential. Regrettably, it did not happen.” Meyer’s biggest issues came off the field, where he tried to handle a professional team like he was on a college campus. He splashed slogans and catchphrases around the facility, instilled gimmicks in practice and repeated his misguided belief that coaches coach for players and players play for coaches. He brought in motivational speakers and kept blaming assistants for the team’s mounting losses instead of the grown men actually on the field. One of Meyer’s most damning decisions came following a Thursday night game at Cincinnati in late September. He chose to stay behind with family instead of flying home with his team and then got caught on video the following night behaving inappropriately with a woman at a bar in Columbus, Ohio. Khan publicly reprimanded Meyer then, saying he needed to regain the owner’s trust and respect. Bailing on his players showed just how out of touch Meyer was with NFL norms. And it was just one of many head-scratching choices for the 57-year-old coach who found success at every college stop: Bowling Green (2001-02), Utah (2003-04), Florida (2005-10) and Ohio State (2012-18). Meyer simply never made the proper adjustments to the pro level. Lambo’s claim seemingly proved too much for Khan, who two days earlier said he didn’t want to make an impulsive decision on the coach’s future. “What’s different about this thing is you have losses and you have drama,” Khan said then. The Jags had way more drama than victories. Lambo provided the latest when he told the Tampa Bay Times that Meyer kicked him while he was stretching at the start of a practice. Lambo, the team’s place-kicker to open the season, said he told Meyer “don’t you ever (expletive) kick me again” and said the coach responded, “I’m the head ball coach, I’ll kick you whenever the (expletive) I want.” Meyer released a statement through the team denying the incident happened the way Lambo described it. “Josh’s characterization of me and this incident is completely inaccurate, and there are eyewitnesses to refute his account,” Meyer said. Lambo said he reported the kick to his agent, who contacted the Jaguars’ legal counsel the following day. “Jaguars legal counsel indeed acknowledged and responded immediately to the query made by Josh Lambo’s agent Friday, August 27, 2021,” the Jaguars said in a statement. “Counsel offered to speak with Josh, or to assist Josh in speaking with coaching or any other football personnel, if he was comfortable with her sharing the information. Any suggestion otherwise is blatantly false.” Lambo was released after he missed his first three field-goal attempts to start the season. Lambo’s allegation came on the heels of an NFL Network report which said Meyer created tension with multiple run-ins with players as well as assistants he allegedly called “losers.” Citing unidentified sources, the report detailed a heated exchange between Meyer and veteran receiver Marvin Jones that stemmed from Meyer criticizing receivers by saying they weren’t winning enough one-on-one matchups or getting enough separation. “I would just say this: There was something that was brought to my attention that I didn’t like too well,” Jones said Wednesday, his first public comments since the report was published Saturday. “I approached him about it and we talked and we handled it like grown men. And that’s all I have to say about that.” Jones denied threatening to leave practice over the argument. “I mean, shoot, when you lose, you’re always going to be the center of attention in a negative way,” Jones said. “That just is what it is. That’s all I have to say.” Other issues for Meyer: • He hired strength coach Chris Doyle in February despite accusations of racist behavior and then had to let him go a day later because of a pending lawsuit. • Jacksonville was fined $200,000 and Meyer docked $100,000 on 1 July, a punishment that stemmed from an early June practice in which the league deemed receivers and defensive backs had too much contact during 11-on-11 drills. • Meyer signed 2007 Heisman Trophy-winning quarterback Tim Tebow to play tight end, an experiment that ended with Tebow looking lost in the preseason opener against Cleveland. • Meyer held a fake QB competition between Trevor Lawrence, a generational prospect, and Gardner Minshew in training camp. Meyer and general manager Trent Baalke traded Minshew to Philadelphia, where he’s a backup to Jalen Hurts. • The NFL Players Association launched an investigation after Meyer said vaccination status factored into the team’s roster decisions. • He repeatedly mishandled running back James Robinson, allowing the team’s most consistent offensive player to get benched twice following fumbles and botched trying to explain why Robinson got pulled and how long he remained on the sideline. All the drama became too much for Lawrence. “I do think that has to change and that’s something that we need to work on for sure,” Lawrence said Wednesday. “You can’t always be in the headlines. You just got to go play football, and that’s where we’re trying to get, and I have no doubt we’ll get there.”Top story: Tory loss would be ‘absolute disaster’ Hello, I’m Warren Murray, and the following is based on actual events. The North Shropshire byelection is being held today and Conservatives MPs say losing the seat of disgraced Owen Paterson would be “an absolute disaster” for Boris Johnson. The odds still favour the Tories’ Neil Shastri-Hurst to replace Paterson. But the scale of a challenge by the Liberal Democrats’ Helen Morgan has some foreseeing her upset victory. A Lib Dem win would be a political earthquake even greater than their Chesham and Amersham victory in June, and would cap a disastrous week for Johnson after Tuesday’s rebellion by 99 Conservative backbenchers over new Covid rules, staged against the backdrop of lockdown-breaking No 10 parties. On Wednesday, Shastri-Hurst declined four times in an interview to say he believed Johnson was “a man of honesty and integrity”. The Lib Dems are pinning their hopes on Labour and Green supporters voting tactically. After a damning new photo of a Conservative Christmas party emerged on Tuesday night, Morgan’s campaign quickly promoted it to voters in North Shropshire on Facebook under the tagline: “Tell them the party’s over.” * * * ‘Very tragic event’ – Four children have been killed and several critically injured in Tasmania when they fell about 10 metres from a bouncy castle that blew into the air. It happened at Hillcrest primary school in Devonport. It is the end of the school year in Australia and the school was holding a “Big Day In” celebration. Debbie Williams, the local police commander, said: “This is a very tragic event and our thoughts are with the families and the wider school community, and also our first responders. There is no doubt that this has been a very confronting and distressing scene.” * * * Get tested, uni students told – The number of Covid cases has risen sharply at some universities as about a million students begin to head home for the Christmas break, prompting fears they could fuel the spread of the virus. Students have been urged to take Covid tests before they leave. Chris Whitty has said people should cut back on socialising in the run-up to Christmas Day. “Don’t mix with people you don’t have to,” said the chief medical adviser, warning that a rise in Covid hospitalisations is “nailed on” after cases hit a record high. Research from Hong Kong suggests the Omicron variant multiplies about 70 times quicker in bronchial tissue of the windpipe than the original and Delta versions, but 10 times slower in lung tissue – which might explain why it seems to spread quickly but cause less severe illness. The researchers say, though, that the results need to be interpreted with caution. Much more Covid news about today – our live blog signposts the way to the stories. * * * No to Brexit forever-war – The public do not share the UK government’s appetite for perpetual post-Brexit conflict with the EU, which is seen as a better partner than the US, according to a report from the European Council on Foreign Relations. The thinktank warns the government’s approach is “eroding the UK’s capacity to cooperate with the EU”. Its polling found people were evenly split on who was most to blame for the current dire state of relations between the UK and EU, with 39% blaming Britain (mostly Labour voters) and 38% blaming the EU (mostly Conservative voters). There was a lack of enthusiasm for following the US into any conflict with China. Only 6% of respondents favoured a UK foreign policy that prioritised military strength, while 40% said they would like foreign policy to focus primarily on strengthening the domestic economy. * * * Arrest over deadly fire – One person has died and two have been confirmed as missing after a fire in Reading, as police warned there were likely to be no more survivors. A 31-year-old man from Reading was arrested on Wednesday morning on suspicion of arson and murder after the blaze at the Rowe Court block of flats in Grovelands Road. Royal Berkshire fire and rescue said firefighters rescued one resident from the building using a ladder. Emergency services remained at the scene last night, with work to begin on Thursday to assess structural damage. Those affected by the fire would be provided temporary accommodation and support, said Jason Brock, the leader of Reading borough council. * * * Deer little thing – A baby Java mouse-deer has been born at Warsaw Zoo in Poland. The new arrival is around 10cm tall and its sex is not yet known. The zoo welcomed its first mouse-deer, Arnold, in 2020, before he was joined by Linda in July this year. Mouse-deer are among the smallest hooved animals on the planet. Today in Focus podcast: Putin’s designs on Ukraine As Russian soldiers continue to amass near the Ukrainian border, shots are already being fired and there are fears that Vladimir Putin is planning an invasion, says Luke Harding. Lunchtime read: Covid, racism and what to do now We were told coronavirus didn’t discriminate, but it didn’t need to – society had already done that for us. But there is a path to a fairer future if we want it, writes Gary Younge. Sport Australia’s best-laid preparations for the second Ashes Test were thrown into disarray before the start of play at Adelaide Oval as their captain, Pat Cummins, was ruled out after being identified as a close contact of a positive Covid-19 case. Just hours before Thursday afternoon’s toss in Adelaide, it emerged that Cummins was dining at a restaurant in the city on Wednesday night when a person at the next table was identified as a positive case. Gabriel Martinelli’s form has been fitful since he returned from injury a year ago but Arsenal’s 2-0 win over West Ham was his best all-round performance under Mikel Arteta and he crowned it in a fashion that felt eerily familiar. The Premier League was straining to keep its competition on the road and its clubs on side on Wednesday night as postponed matches and uncertainty over Covid rules heightened the sense of a returning crisis. Burnley’s match at home against Watford became the third top-flight fixture called off in the past week after a Covid outbreak in the visiting squad. It is Arsenal Women’s “unacceptable” collapse and the team’s somewhat lucky progression to the Champions League quarter-final stage, despite this 4-1 defeat to Hoffenheim, that will dominate post-match discussions, yet it is perhaps the rise of the Bundesliga’s third-placed side – in their first season in Europe – that deserves attention on their exit. Kevin De Bruyne has described how a difficult few months has featured being “kicked in the face, kicked in the ankle” and then contracting Covid, though the midfielder hopes he is finding his best form after two goals in Manchester City’s 7-0 win over Leeds on Tuesday. Perhaps it was only right that, with Christmas just around the corner, the ultimate pantomime villain of darts was front and centre on the PDC world championship’s return to normality as Gerwyn Price came from behind to beat Ritchie Edhouse. Business The US Federal Reserve has accelerated the speed at which it will end its pandemic-era support and pencilled in three rate hikes next year in a major shift of policy that could lead to borrowing costs rising all over the world. The move to tackle rising inflation is a flashing red signal for the Bank of England as it meets today to decide whether or not to follow suit. Asia share markets followed Wall Street upwards overnight although the FTSE10o is expected to open flat. The pound is on $1.325 and €1.174. The papers Our Guardian splash today: “Warning to cut back on socialising as Covid cases surge to record high”. Also on the front, another chapter in the Conservative sleaze debate: “Tory MP pleaded for work from Saudis”. And the sentencing of necrophile David Fuller: “Life in jail for ‘vulture’ who preyed on the dead”. Of that, the Metro says “Mortuary vulture to die in jail”. “Cut back on plans over Christmas” says Chris Whitty in the Times, and Lewis Hamilton is shown receiving his knighthood just as he is on other front pages. “Scale back Christmas plans” says the Telegraph, while it’s a “Wary Christmas” from the Mirror and the Express conveys Whitty’s wishes for “a very sensible Christmas”. The i sums up the key message thusly: “Don’t mix with friends unless you have to”. The Daily Mail takes a more adversarial angle: “It’s Boris versus scientists”, saying the PM “insists he won’t cancel parties or close hospitality” – an unsurprising stance, perhaps, given recent revelations. And the lead in the Financial Times is “Covid cases hit record 78,000 as Omicron cases sweep the country”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendLet’s start with what’s obvious. The Morrison government wants to fight the next election telling voters the economy is roaring back. To focus the national conversation on economic management, the Morrison government would like to deliver another budget next March before facing the voters at next year’s election. But the latest Treasury forecasts tell us the Coalition is also making preparations for calling an election as soon as the end of January. The forecasts, released on Thursday, confirm the government has already squirrelled away $16bn worth of decisions taken but not yet announced. Around half of this is expenditure. More than $5bn is booked to hit the budget in the current financial year. If you look more closely at the tables outlining various spending commitments since the May budget, you’ll see a government very focused on infrastructure in marginal seats in New South Wales. In election seasons, we talk about election budgets. Thursday’s Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook is most decidedly an election Myefo. As well as all the spending, and the clearly stated intention to keep on spending until the economic recovery is a certainty rather than an aspiration, the forecasts unspool a political narrative. The story is one of sunny uplands – growth up, unemployment down, inflation creeping back up, but manageably. The triumphalist opening pitch of Myefo sets the scene: “Having performed more strongly than any major advanced economy throughout the pandemic, the Australian economy is poised for a strong expansion that is forecast to see the unemployment rate fall to 4.25% by the June quarter of 2023.” Poised being the operative word. To borrow an athletics analogy, Australia is crouching at the starter’s block, ready to sprint. The economy is not at the finish line, heading for the medal ceremony. Once we’ve cleared poised, we encounter the assumptions underpinning sunny uplands. You wouldn’t call them heroic, but you would call them optimistic. Treasury assumes all remaining state border restrictions lift by early 2022. (Has anyone met Mark McGowan?) The boffins also assume lockdowns are “no longer required to manage Covid-19 transmission in the community”. Most upbeat of all: “The Omicron variant is not assumed to significantly alter current reopening plans, or require a reimposition of widespread health and activity restrictions.” Well, ideally, yes. Hopefully we are shifting from pandemic to endemic – to living with Covid rather than restricting liberty to avoid dying from Covid. But with experts still in an evidence-gathering phase about the characteristics of the Omicron variant, who can be certain? Not the Treasury in any case, because by the time you hit page 29, you encounter two “alternative stylised scenarios”. Alternative universe one is that a coronavirus variant requires “more significant public health responses to manage outbreaks than is currently expected”. In this (not particularly out there) scenario, the international border would stay closed for another six months and targeted lockdowns would be deployed to suppress the curve of new infections in the first half of 2022. If this came to pass, economic activity would be $20bn lower (which translates to a 1% drop in growth) and unemployment would tick up. For completeness, Treasury adds a sunnier uplands scenario where Australians run into freedom with their wallets wide open. Spending is up, savings down, international tourists and students add to the consumption boom. This results in a $30bn increase in economic activity over 2021-22 and 2022-23. Oh, happy days. Except for a government now very firmly on the electoral clock, this is the working definition of a non-core promise. As treasurer Josh Frydenberg acknowledged on Thursday: “There’s a great deal of uncertainty right now. We’re living in the middle of a pandemic – the biggest economic shock since the Great Depression. The first pandemic in a century”. The treasurer noted he didn’t have a crystal ball. “We’re still in the pandemic, but what I can give you is Treasury’s best analysis.” Obviously the government will try to swim across its own uncertainty rip by warning Australia’s economic recovery is finely balanced, and now is not the time to risk a Labor government. But the Treasury update reinforces the unavoidable problem associated with crafting an election turning on the Coalition’s heroic management of the sunny uplands: the preponderance of quicksand.As we enter another phase of national life so bleakly alarming that watching the news makes my face cave in like the Halloween pumpkin I haven’t got around to binning yet, would you like to hear a trivial problem? Perhaps you have a microscopic violin that needs airing? That’s rhetorical: tune up that tiny fiddle – I am having a bad hair day. It’s more like a bad hair month, actually, ever since I washed my new wig. I have alopecia and one major advantage of the condition is that I have dodged hair styling for 20 years. Once cut, my wig goes on my head every morning and just behaves. Sadly, wigs do not behave for ever: they, too, go bald. This autumn I was reduced to elaborate combovers to hide bald patches and desperately WhatsApping my hairdresser, who, since we first met, has, inconsiderately, become stratospherically successful. He finally squeezed me and my new wig in last month. Mesmerised by his unbroken flow of juicy anecdotes and deft cutting, I concurred enthusiastically when he lifted the fringe speculatively, saying, “Let’s try it a bit longer, Em.” It looked great: there’s a reason he’s so in-demand after all. I left delighted, finally presentable without a woolly hat. Swiftly thereafter, however, things went downhill. The wig has way more hair than I am used to, and requires maintenance I’m unqualified to provide. If I smooth the fringe, I look like Kurtan Mucklowe from This Country; if I let it have its own way, I become Miss Babs from Acorn Antiques. I’ve tried using straighteners, but the sound and smell of my hair sizzling are terrifying. I probably need a hairdryer, but the tiny travel one I use on my chickens on wet days is useless. My hairdresser is now away coiffing someone on a beach in Mustique; I’m in Superdrug, dithering over “clay” versus “serum”. I suppose the wig will settle down eventually, once I have broken its spirit. Until then, I’m probably one of the few people who are delighted safe socialising is moving outside, so can be conducted in a beanie.Ahead, the jellied earth sways. As I approach a natural pool at the edge of a wide, wild expanse in central Estonia, the bog feels untrustworthy, if not quite menacing. This far into the Soomaa national park, the ground is so unsure of itself that even trees have given up. My guide, Aivar Ruukel, tells me that it’s not the same animals – wolves and bears are among the creatures that patrol these lands, hoping to find a meal trapped in the mire. Elsewhere in this wilderness there are elk and raccoon dogs. Recently, wolverines from the north have been spotted, too. “People have been seeing golden jackals,” says Aivar, “and normally they are in Turkey.” The reason for this extraordinary menagerie is, perhaps inevitably, linked to Estonia’s low human population. Despite being slightly larger than the Netherlands, Estonia has about 7.5% of its population, making it one of the most sparsely populated nations in Europe. In Soomaa, it’s easy to believe these stats. The north of the country – Tallinn and the Baltic Sea coast – was a lot busier, but even in Pärnu, a thriving coastal spa town with a yawning beach and colourful wooden houses, things already felt as though they were thinning out. While in summer it booms with domestic tourism, in autumn and winter it’s sleepy. But I was seeking more isolation still, and so I found myself with Aivar. His company, Soomaa, specialises in tours of the national park after which it is named. He offers night safaris and multi-day adventures, but I’ve signed up for a day trip, which starts with a paddle along the Navasti river on the edge of the park in a canoe painstakingly fashioned by Aivar from a local aspen. Graceless ducks splash-land nearby as we paddle upriver, while tiny fish leap from the water, desperately trying to escape murderous pike below. From the high reeds on the riverbank, an inscrutable grass snake looks on. Before venturing into the park, we tuck into lunch at Aivar’s home – a lavish spread of fruits and vegetables grown on the property. While we eat, Aivar describes the problems of hunting, the pressure development is putting on the national park and, more than anything, the glory and goodness of the peat bogs that cover a lot of Soomaa. These, he insists, are primordial, magical places, where flora and fauna have adapted to create something special – and visiting in the colder months adds another dimension to the mystery. Soomaa roughly translates to “mireland” or “land of bogs”, neither of which sound particularly elegant, even if they are technically accurate. It conjures images of the flatulent stepping stones in Labyrinth’s “Bog of Eternal Stench”, and the word bog is still regularly used in my Scottish home town to mean toilet. Perhaps “water meadow” or “aqua glade” is easier on the ears, I suggest. “You’ll see when we get there,” says Aivar confidently. “It’s a very beautiful place, very quiet. A wild place, but also delicate.” There has been a lot of talk of nature healing or “rewilding” over the past couple of years, but in this ecosystem, growth and regrowth happen very slowly. “Peat grows just one millimetre a year,” says Aivar. Cutting or burning peat releases carbon, and the park ensures that the peat contained within it won’t be harvested; mercifully, Estonians tend not to use it as a fuel source these days. Aivar has other concerns about land management, but he’s not about to give me a grim lecture, so we head off to explore. I follow him through some dark woods while he drops a trail of bog-related facts, like Hansel or Gretel. They’re not uninteresting, but it’s quite hard to focus on statistics about which percentage of Estonia is designated as wetlands – it’s 20% – when the undergrowth is so astonishingly fungal. I’ve never seen quite so many mushrooms as on the damp forest floors of Soomaa. Beyond the trees, the sodden plains ahead mostly comprise sphagnum or peat moss, which looks fairly solid but has the consistency of jelly. In the depths of winter this all freezes then dramatically thaws when it is joined by spring rains to create a “fifth season”. As the riverbanks burst, open bogs turn into lakes, and this is the time of year Aivar gets most use out of his canoes. Now, though, to avoid sinking into the squidgy ground, we strap on cumbersome red plastic ‘bog shoes’ (basically snowshoes). “A couple of times people have gone into the bog and got pulled out,” says Aivar. “In 15 years, we’ve lost two shoes. Maybe three. Perhaps one day archaeologists will find them and be very confused.” He adds that these boots were first found to be effective on the land by goose-hunters, cranberry foragers “and maybe guys visiting girlfriends on the other side of the bog”. High acidity and water retention mean that boglands aren’t good hosts for trees. A loose forest of aspen, birch and spruce stops abruptly, looking out across the expanse like protesters at a disciplined rally. While mushrooms dominate darker parts of the woods, towards the edge berries come to the fore: blue-, bil-, cloud-, cow-, cran- and even crow-, but no rasp-. Almost all these berries can be used for jams, says Aivar, eating whichever late-season stragglers he finds on low-lying branches. We head out across the open bogs. As well as being eerily beautiful, the place is also notably silent. Once we get going, however, there’s no ignoring that it’s a great landscape for onomatopoeia: slurp, squidge, slop and, more than anything, squelch. A few established wooden walkways snake across the land, but wearing the shoes and going off-piste is so much more fun, even if I have the approximate gait and grace of a drunkard. After half an hour or so, we stop at a large natural pool. Like many people, Aivar has become a convert to wild swimming over the past year, and he’d like to give it a try here. I meekly suggest that I don’t have any swimming shorts with me, but my guide is already disrobing, telling me he has towels and not to worry. As I begin to strip off, trying to ignore the upsetting whiteness of my thighs, he comments: “They say doing this gives you an extra year of life.” Then, as magnificently naked as the day he was born 54 years ago, he adds “I’m actually 172,” and disappears into the cold, coppery water. For a second, I consider running away, but this wild playground is far from civilisation – and my bog shoes are no use for sprinting. • The trip was arranged by Visit Estonia. Aivar runs various day and multi-day tours in Soomaa national park. Guided bogshoeing trips cost €80 per person for a group of two at soomaa.com. While tours of the national park are available all year, there is no walking on the bogs from 23 April to 24 June each year in order to protect nesting birds. For more information see soomaa.comA rich, complex and fascinating performance from Olivia Colman is what gives this movie its piercing power: she has some old-school star quality and screen presence. Colman is the centre of a stylish feature debut from Maggie Gyllenhaal as writer-director, adapting a novel by Elena Ferrante: the result is an absorbingly shaped psychological drama, built around a single traumatising event from which the action metastasises. It takes place partly in the present and also in the lead character’s remembered past, triggered by a calamity that she witnesses and in which she decides, insidiously, to participate. These scenes aren’t simply flashbacks; they have their own relevance and urgency which run alongside the immediate action. The setting is a Greek island where Leonard Cohen is supposed to have hung out in the 1960s. A British academic arrives on holiday: this is Leda, played by Colman, a Yorkshire-born professor of comparative literature at Harvard, and she has clearly been looking forward to this break for ages, settling almost ecstatically into the vacation apartment into which her bags are carried by the property’s housekeeper Lyle (Ed Harris), an expatriate American who is wizened but virile-looking. Leda is quite happy to do nothing but hang out on the beach, reading Dante and making notes, or journal musings, in a little book. But then her peace and quiet are disrupted by a crassly loud American family, who show up on the beach, treating it as their own private property, including Nina (Dakota Johnson), the mother of a little girl. She is a very young mother, so young you might assume she is the nanny; and there is also the loud and pushy Callie (Dagmara Dominczyk). At first, relations are wince-makingly strained between Leda and these arrogant newcomers, but Leda becomes a hero to them when Nina’s little girl goes missing and Leda finds her, with a sixth sense for where the child might be. Yet now this little girl is herself upset by a mini-catastrophe of her own, which strangely echoes the grownups’ recent nightmare: her beloved doll has mysteriously vanished. And it all echoes inside the mind of Leda and her own troubled past, her relationship with her partner and now grownup daughters. Jessie Buckley is outstanding as young Leda, a performance that cleverly complements Colman’s. What is great about Colman’s performance is that it is always teetering on the brink of some new revelation about Leda: her face is subtly trembling with … what? Tears? Laughter? A scowl of scorn? The initial situation might lead you to expect that Leda is basically the shy, reticent decent person and Nina and Callie and their clan are the boorish villains. But is that true? As for Leda herself, her own sexual life is a worryingly unstable entity. She flirts with handsome young pool attendant Will (Paul Mescal), shamelessly asks him for dinner and then can’t take it the correct way when he tells her she is beautiful. When Lyle attempts to talk to Leda at the bar one evening, she makes strained conversation and finally has to ask him to leave her in peace to enjoy her supper – and then, perhaps ashamed at her rudeness, and perhaps thinking that she might find Lyle attractive after all, she vampishly adjusts her dress, strolls over to where he is hanging out with his friends and attempts a sultry, flirtatious remark which is so ill-judged that I wanted to hide my face in my hands. The Lost Daughter has a slightly tame ending: a Nabokovian flourish of violence and aggression that is cancelled (rather implausibly) by something more emollient. But it all hangs together and Olivia Colman achieves a subtle sort of grandeur at the end. • The Lost Daughter is released on 17 December in cinemas and on 31 December on Netflix.A controversial proposal to drill for oil and gas off the New South Wales coast will not go ahead after the federal government announced it would refuse an application to extend an exploration permit. The petroleum exploration permit, known as Pep11, has been held by several different energy providers in recent years and allows for offshore drilling of gas and oil, and seismic testing in 4,500 sq km of water from off Manly on Sydney’s northern beaches up to Newcastle. Community groups, including Save Our Coast, have been campaigning against efforts to develop the area because of environmental concerns and the impact on whale migration paths. A petition run by Save Our Coast gained 60,000 signatures and was presented to parliament by independent MP Zali Steggall in February. Steggall has been joined in opposition to Pep11 by Greens leader Adam Bandt, Labor MP Emma McBridge, and a group of moderate Liberals including Jason Falinski. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, announced on Thursday he had advised the NSW deputy premier Paul Toole and the National Offshore Petroleum Titles Administrator of the federal government’s intention to refuse the application. “This project will not proceed on our watch,” Morrison said. “Gas is an important part of Australia’s current and future energy mix but this is not the right project for these communities and pristine beaches and waters.” Morrison said his government rejected the application due to the widespread community opposition, a lack of financial support underpinning the program and a lack of good reasons to justify extending the permit. The move directly contradicts the federal resources minister, Keith Pitt, who has previously expressed consistent support for the project despite community opposition. Advent Energy and Bounty Oil &amp; Gas had sought a renewal of the exploration licence and permission to undertake exploratory drilling in the area. Labor welcomed the decision, but said the party would wait to see official confirmation the application had been rejected. “Actions speak louder than words,” opposition leader Anthony Albanese and shadow minister assisting for climate change Pat Conroy said in a joint statement. “Mr Morrison has been saying he doesn’t approve the PEP-11 extension since March, so Labor looks forward to the official confirmation that it has been rejected once and for all.” Belinda Baggs, co-director of Surfers for Climate Action, thanked the federal government for listening to the community. “After years of campaigning against this polluting project, my heart is full to know that the community’s passion for the ocean and care for our climate has overcome the petroleum industry,” Baggs said. The Pep11 may not be going ahead, but the government has set aside $220m to unlock gas developments as part of its Beetaloo strategic basin plan in the Northern Territory, and $15.7m to support developments in the North Bowen and Galilee basins in Queensland. Dr Madeline Taylor, from the Climate Council and Macquarie University’s School of Law, said the decision was a “huge win” for those who had been fighting the project 20 years. “The fact it hasn’t been developed in that period shows this project was never viable commercially in the first instance anyway,” Taylor said. “It’s a huge win for the community but there’s a lot more work to be done to ensure other new greenfield gas projects do not go ahead.” The International Energy Agency suggested in May that limiting global heating to 1.5C, a goal set out in the Paris agreement, meant exploration and exploitation of new fossil fuel basins had to stop this year.Garment workers making clothes for international brands in Karnataka, a major clothing production hub in India, say their children are going hungry as factories refuse to pay the legal minimum wage in what is claimed to be the biggest wage theft to ever hit the fashion industry. More than 400,000 garment workers in Karnataka have not been paid the state’s legal minimum wage since April 2020, according to an international labour rights organisation that monitors working conditions in factories. The Worker Rights Consortium (WRC) estimates the total amount of unpaid wages so far to be more than £41m. One worker said she only earned about half of what she needed to cover basic living costs, such as food and rent. “If we had got the wage increase last year, we could have at least eaten vegetables a few times a month. Throughout this year I have only fed my family rice and chutney sauce,” she said. “I tried to talk to the factory management about it,” she added, “but they said, ‘this is what we pay to work here. If you don’t like it, you can leave.’” Scott Nova, executive director of the WRC, said: “In terms of number of workers affected and total money stolen, this is the most egregious act of wage theft we’ve ever seen. The children of garment workers are going hungry so brands can make a buck.” Karnataka is one of India’s garment-industry heartlands, with thousands of factories and hundreds of thousands of workers producing clothing for international brands including Puma, Nike, Zara, Tesco, C&amp;A, Gap, Marks &amp; Spencer and H&amp;M. Nova said the “indifference and inaction” of all the brands sourcing clothing from the region about the situation facing its mostly poor, female workforce was “shameful and cruel”. He said that despite persistent demands from the WRC for the past two years, western brands had either refused to intervene or had not acted to ensure that workers making their clothes were paid in line with Indian law. “It has been almost two years since apparel suppliers have been refusing to pay the legal minimum wage and brands have been letting this continue when they know they are the only ones with the power to stop this widespread wage theft,” he said. “Payment of minimum wage is pretty much the lowest bar on a brand’s responsibility towards its workforce. If they won’t even insist on this being paid then they are letting a human rights violation on a huge scale continue with impunity.” The annual cost of living increase to the minimum wage, the “variable dearness allowance” (VDA), was increased to 417 Indian rupees (£4.10) a month in April 2020. The WRC said that as this supplement for low-paid workers, which amounts to 16p a day, had gone unpaid for 20 months, each employee had been underpaid by R8,351 (£83). Garment suppliers argue that the Ministry of Labour &amp; Employment issued a proclamation suspending the minimum wage increase shortly after it was implemented in April 2020 and that a legal complaint relating to the requirement to pay the increase was still progressing through the courts in Karnataka. However, in September last year, the Karnataka high court ruled that the labour ministry’s proclamation was illegal and that the minimum wage, including all arrears, must be paid to workers regardless of any other court proceedings. According to the WRC, apparel suppliers make up the only industrial sector across Karnataka refusing to comply with this court order. Workers in Karnataka, whom the Guardian are not naming to protect their livelihoods, said that not receiving their pay rise, in the face of steeply rising living costs, had had a devastating effect on their own lives and those of their families, especially their children. Another woman, who works at a factory making clothing for UK high street brands, said that she had been forced to leave her home and was now living with a relative because she could no longer pay the rent. “The salary increases we received every year didn’t cover our living costs but did help with things like food for the family and medicine. Working in the garment factories is very painful. “The brands who buy from my factory demand quality and for the clothes to be shipped in time but aren’t bothered with what happens to me,” she said. Puma, Nike, Gap, Tesco, C&amp;A, Marks &amp; Spencer and H&amp;M, which are among the brands sourcing clothing from Karnataka, all said that they were committed to paying the legal minimum wage and expected their suppliers to comply with the high court order. H&amp;M said: “We have made it clear to our suppliers in Karnataka that they must pay the workers legally mandated minimum wages, including all arrears. If they fail to do so, it will ultimately lead to serious business consequences.” Gap said in a statement: “[We] expect our suppliers to comply with the VDA allowance and arrears. We have established a timeline by which we expect full compliance.” C&amp;A said in a statement that it had demanded its suppliers comply with the court order and it was “confident” that they would do so. The Dutch-owned multinational said it was expecting written confirmation from its suppliers. Marks &amp; Spencer said it was working with the Ethical Trading Initiative to “demand” that its suppliers paid the legal minimum wage. “We have engaged our suppliers in the state directly, making clear our expectation that these conditions be met with immediate effect,” an M&amp;S spokesperson said. Puma said that its influence on its suppliers was “limited” in Karnataka but added: “We are working with our peers, who source bigger volumes in Karnataka, to make sure that wages are paid correctly.” Nike said in a statement: “Nike expects all suppliers to comply with local legal requirements and the Nike code of conduct.” A spokesperson for Tesco said: “We are working with the Ethical Trading Initiative and other brands to ensure this issue is resolved and workers are paid in full.” A spokesperson for Inditex, which owns Zara, said: “Inditex has a stringent code of conduct, which requires all factories in our supply chain to pay legal wages as a minimum. We are engaging suppliers in the region to urge them to make the VDA payment.” The statement added: “Wages should always be enough to meet at least the basic needs of workers and their families.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:On the night of Thursday 3 September 1998, a middle-aged community college professor with a history of heart attacks passed out at the wheel of his car on a busy US highway. The car drifted across the lanes and into the rush of oncoming traffic. The collision was so powerful it thrust the engine of the professor’s car into the front seats. Miraculously, he survived, and no one else was seriously injured. He recovered from a broken ankle and wrist and left hospital. A month later, he was back there with a pain in his leg – a clot that might or might not have been triggered by the accident. Next, his body swelled up to twice its size with fluid, so he looked like a balloon you could prick with a needle and burst. His wife and young children watched as his miraculous survival turned to a sudden worsening of his underlying heart disease. By April 1999 he was dead. Just over two decades later his son, Michael Grothaus, sat at his computer watching a video of his father, healthy and wearing a yellow T-shirt, playing with a smartphone that was invented many years after his death. He was enjoying himself, recording the sun-dappled park around him. Then he turned towards the screen and smiled benignly at his son from behind his unmistakeable bushy eyebrows. Grothaus had bought his father back to life as a “deepfake”. It only costs a couple of hundred dollars. There are whole communities of anonymous deepfakers you can easily reach out to in the danker strata of the internet. Usually they specialise in creating made-to-order-porn: say you want a video of yourself making love to Scarlett Johansson, or to the girl next door. All you need to do is provide a video snippet and they do the rest. To create the video of his father in the park, Grothaus sent over 60 seconds of VHS footage from the mid 1990s. “Brad” then broke it down into 1,800 images of his father’s face and ran those images through a program called DeepFaceLab, which grafted them on to a video of another man. The digital resurrection of his father gave rise to contradictory feelings in Grothaus. He watched the video repeatedly – relishing the reunion. Then he deleted it – horrified at the rupture it had made in reality, and the consequences it implies for our sense of truth and trust. This split reaction runs through Grothaus’s book on deepfakes. On the one hand they hold out the prospect of overcoming death, envisioning utopia, fulfilling sexual desire. On the other they bring the fear of utter chaos. Even a short fake video of, say, the CEO of a major company resigning, could send markets into panic for just long enough to enable the people who created it to make a killing. Deepfakes of candidates saying something untoward in the final moments of a close election could change the fate of geopolitics. But while such scenarios are dizzying in their destructive potential, they are, for the most part, still theoretical. The actual financial scam Grothaus describes involves fraudsters who used a voice recording of a CEO to call his accountant and get him to wire them $243,00. Embarrassing – but also only possible because of a pretty gullible interlocutor. The political case study he describes is of an amateur edit of a video that made it look as if Hollywood star Dwayne Johnson was humiliating Hillary Clinton in the run-up to the 2016 election. The video went viral in Magaland, but not because its authenticity was particularly persuasive. It just fitted with people’s existing biases. That’s the thing about “disinformation”: it’s not really geared towards changing people’s minds. It’s about feeding them what they want to consume anyway. The quality of the deception is not necessarily the crucial factor. Will deepfakes change this? Will their mere existence destroy any vestiges of trust in a shared reality? Potentially. But one thing we do know is that the discourse that has grown up around this issue, rather than being something radically new, is part of a much older dynamic. Back in a previous life I used to make TV documentaries. I always wondered why anyone agreed to take part in them. Most were ordinary people uninterested in fame. Slowly it dawned on me there was something about the process of filming that seduced them. The camera seemed to promise that their experiences had meaning, and ultimately offered a kind of immortality. That said, whenever our contributors saw the films they featured in, they hated them. The way we edited them into our storylines made them feel less powerful, more vulnerable. Instead of immortality we brought the opposite: a total loss of self-control. Our relationship with visual representations of ourselves always runs along this axis of narcissism and dread: at once promising a defeat of death, but by arousing that desire only to disappoint it, crushingly reinforcing its inevitability. Our fascination with deepfakes strikes me as the latest iteration of this emotional rollercoaster, and it’s one Grothaus captures very well. • Trust No One: Inside the World of Deepfakes is published by Hodder &amp; Stoughton (£18.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Coalition pet projects in marginal seats, including the inland rail from Toowoomba to Gladstone, which environmentalists warn would unlock a “carbon bomb”, have been showered with a $2.3bn cash splash in the mid-year budget update. The update, released on Thursday, gives the green light to the controversial inland rail extension in the seat of Flynn, which Queensland Labor is targeting, and provides $10m for the project business case. The $2.3bn infrastructure package delivers an injection of $908m to projects in New South Wales, including hundreds of millions in Nationals seats and the ultra-marginal Labor seat of Macquarie. Projects in states with the seats most likely to determine the 2022 election received the next highest levels of funding: Queensland ($616.5m), Western Australia ($362m) and Tasmania ($247.8m). Victoria – with about a quarter of Australia’s population – received a paltry $21.3m, less than 1% of the new money for infrastructure in the mid-year update. Barnaby Joyce, the deputy prime minister and infrastructure minister, boasted in October while negotiating Nationals’ support for net zero emissions by 2050 that the inland rail project to take coal from Toowoomba to Gladstone could be “booked in”. The Lock the Gate alliance said it was concerned the government was preparing to fund the “disgraceful” project, which is set to unlock nine new coalmines and an estimated 150m tonnes of carbon emissions a year. The mid-year economic and fiscal update confirms the project has received in-principle agreement but adds that it is “subject to the outcomes of the business case demonstrating the project is economically beneficial”. The business case will identify the preferred route and “commercial development and private sector funding opportunities”, which may reduce the level of government funding, which “has not been quantified at this time”. The infrastructure package delivers $907m in New South Wales, including: $298.4m to the Coffs Harbour Bypass project in the Nationals seat of Cowper $200m to the Hawkesbury River third crossing, in the ultra-marginal Labor seat of Macquarie $96m for the New England highway Tenterfield heavy vehicle bypass in Joyce’s seat of New England; and a further $90m for the Tenterfield to Newcastle corridor $80m for the M1 Pacific highway to be extended to Raymond Terrace, in the Labor-held, Coalition-target seat of Paterson in the Hunter Queensland projects to be funded include: $316.1m for the Coomera to Nerang connector $243.1m for projects along the Bruce highway corridor $29.3m for the Bowen Basin service link Walkerston bypass Western Australian projects will get: $300m to support the Metronet, $32m for the Newman to Katherine corridor upgrade, $25m for the Canning Bridge bus interchange, and $50m for a road duplication at Wanneroo Road. Tasmania will get $167.8m for the New Bridgewater bridge and $80m for the freight capacity upgrade program. The mid-year update also confirms a $100m cash injection for the fifth round of the Building Better Regions fund, and $250m for the sixth round, taking the regional grants program up to a total of $1.4bn over its life. The update contained $16bn of mystery spending, including decisions taken but not yet announced. Labor has taken aim at discretionary programs, promising a future national integrity commission will examine grants decisions after numerous analyses showed they disproportionately flowed to Coalition-held seats. Labor has promised real-time reporting of ministerial decisions that reject departmental advice on grants but stopped short of removing discretion for where grants are allocated and infrastructure investments are made. On Thursday the shadow treasurer, Jim Chalmers, told reporters in Brisbane the mid-year update “doubles down on the rorts and waste in the budget”. “Remarkably, it pours billions of extra dollars into secret slush funds for the election,” he said. “It shows that the government has learned absolute nothing from the furore over politically motivated rorts and corruption, which has chased this government for much of its time in office.”Joanie (not her real name), a clinical psychologist who lives in London, has three work laptops. This is not uncommon when you’re spread across different NHS services. Sometimes, she feels like the 1980s synth supremo Paul Hardcastle, who used to dart between keyboards when performing on Top of the Pops. Except that he wasn’t always rudely interrupted by random notifications. “When I log on to one laptop,” she says, “this automatic thing comes on called Netpresenter player. It’s a ticker tape, like one of those bus-stop ads that keeps moving.” She quits it, because she needs to concentrate on writing up notes before her next meeting. But it keeps coming back with annoying notifications. “I’ve been in the middle of a session and it’s started playing music and a video – usually things like, ‘Don’t forget to wash your hands properly’, or, ‘Hey, we’re all meeting for a webinar in half an hour about staff wellbeing.’” Joanie says her wellbeing would improve if it was easier to get her work done. With increasing chunks of life handled online – from banking to entertainment to health – we have spiralled into notifications hell. On a bad day, life can feel like one long stressy game of Space Invaders. You open a device to check the weather, only to be greeted with a barrage of invasive alerts – some interesting (you got paid!) and some irritating (a pointless post on your neighbourhood WhatsApp group, a software update …) and before you know it, you’ve forgotten all about the weather. Scrolling down YouTube’s endless list of video explainers for opting out of notifications provides a window into this distracting reality: “Turn off annoying Outlook alerts,” “How to disable notifications in Google Chrome browser,” “How to TURN OFF ALL notifications on ANY iPhone.” PlayStation, Microsoft Teams, Facebook, Garmin smartwatch, the list goes on and on, because this is a constantly evolving situation and we can’t keep up. Joanie is a serial notifications disabler, but could do with watching the Teams and Outlook ones. The computer she uses most has recently started running Microsoft Teams to connect workers who either hotdesk or, since Covid, work from home. As she opens it, I hear a sophisticated chime that reminds me of airports, with their frequent announcements about gate closures for flights that aren’t yours. She says that’s the “activity” bell, heralding announcements that may or may not be relevant. Then there’s the general chat function, which notifies her about more meetings than anyone could possibly attend. “But even when I decline the invite, sometimes I still get all these pings of messages from the meeting saying: ‘I can’t see the slides.’ So then you have to actively mute yourself each time.” Email notifications needlessly pop up on Microsoft Outlook, and with young children, her personal phone is never far away, with its steady flow of reminders from school, and other pings and alerts she either needs or hasn’t managed to eliminate. On her third laptop, there’s only a shared drive for files, and an email account. “I feel when I’m on that laptop, I can get my job done so much more easily, because you’re choosing what you do.” Sophie Leroy, associate professor at University of Washington Bothell School of Business, is an expert in work interruptions, although many of her findings also apply to personal life. She puts notifications into two categories: “Notifications like work emails, where you are expected to provide an answer immediately, because of corporate norms, versus things that may not require a switch of your attention, like the Wall Street Journal, or your favourite store, and then you have to decide whether to switch or not.” Both are challenging. Being notified of a text from a friend, which you don’t need to read straight away, can be surprisingly draining. “You’re like: ‘OK, what does my friend want?’ There’s uncertainty, and we don’t deal with uncertainty very well.” Ignoring it, says Leroy, is “cognitively difficult”. Self-control is required, and when it’s needed several times an hour, your brain will become exhausted. If your current task feels taxing, you’ll soon take a break to scratch some of your notifications itches. But even if you’re really keen to continue working, says Leroy, “when we use the resource of self-control, it depletes over time, and it’s going to be harder to ignore those notifications.” Checking a notification quickly, so that it can be batted away and we can return to our work, might therefore seem the best option, but the mental cost is significant. “As the brain transitions between context,” says Leroy, “our train of thought has been broken. And when we go back to what we’re doing, the brain has a hard time remembering exactly where we were. Getting that momentum back, reaching the same level of concentration – that takes time. Even after a few seconds’ attention switch, coming back can be very costly.” This may not be the end of the world in many jobs – but what if you work in something like healthcare? “If a nurse is interrupted during the administration of a drug to a patient,” says Leroy, “even if it’s a few seconds, there is a risk that they might either administer the wrong dose, or forget whether they had done it or not.” People understand this example, she says, yet don’t think it applies to them, but her research says otherwise. Leroy gives people tricky tasks to focus on – such as reviewing CVs to find the most appropriate candidate for a given job description. People who are interrupted, she says, “are 17% less likely to choose the optimal candidate because of the cognitive costs associated with having to switch attention”. In notifications hell, productivity declines, as does the quality of your work. All this means we are more likely to reach clocking off time without having finished our tasks, which then start eating up personal time – “recovery time”, says Leroy. “And that has a direct impact on wellbeing and mental health, because then there’s no time to disconnect.” Even after we have clocked off, the notifications keep coming and we still check them, “because we have normalised it, not realising that if you’re having a good time with your kid, or with a friend, and you suddenly see a notification, you’re switching between different worlds and never being fully in the moment, or fully enjoying it. And that’s really critical for wellbeing.” One study has shown that anxiety and depression are higher among people who pay more attention to their devices than to their friends when socialising. Another finds that life satisfaction is lower. *** And yet for those of younger generations, this state of constant interruption can define their early teens. Beth Walker is a psychology teacher in Yorkshire with four stepchildren, the youngest of whom are 13-year-old twin girls. “I worry about the amount of notifications they get in such a short space of time,” says Walker. “They have notifications from Snapchat, WhatsApp and text messages.” She fears that the sheer weight of notifications puts pressure on them. “They feel the need to respond immediately. They can’t think: ‘I can just leave that until I’ve got a minute.’” And Walker suspects that they perceive social consequences if they don’t. “I think they believe their friends expect them to respond straight away, otherwise maybe they’re not as good friends as they should be.” Anna Cox, professor of human-computer interaction at University College London, offers some reassurance. “We don’t have any good evidence that young people are more harmed, if you like, than anybody else.” But she concedes that one of the worst things about all our tech is that it’s designed to grab our attention, and comes with notifications switched on. “I feel a lot of sympathy for young people, who get their first mobile when they’re 10 or 11 often, and no one sits down to teach them how to turn the notifications off. And so they do get bombarded by these things. I think we need to be doing a much better job of educating people of all ages.” Lane says the twins’ older siblings (20 and 17) now treat their notifications with less urgency. “With the right guidance, as they get older, they are able to moderate. They still get as many notifications, but if they’re in the middle of doing something they will leave the phone for two hours, or whatever.” Cox laments that many phone newbies are unaware of how to use night or do-not-disturb modes. “There were lots of reports of children being woken up through the night by someone texting them. When you see that it can impact people’s sleep, it’s not surprising that they’re stressed out. They’re exhausted.” Lane says the twins are still of an age at which they’ll hand over their phones before they go to bed, but it can be harder to force older teens to do so. Those who have switched to remote working, meanwhile, might have waved goodbye to the distractions of open-plan offices, but, as with Joanie’s least favourite laptop, software is filling that nice, peaceful gap. “Previously, they might have had a phone on their desk, and email,” says Cox, “but now they’ve also got Teams and Slack and Zoom and they feel as if there are all these different things that they might be getting messages from.” Cox says there’s no evidence that notifications hell is affecting our concentration skills in a permanent way. We can still pay attention when we really need to. Surgeons and truck drivers can still focus safely on their tasks for hours on end. “But there is maybe a change in how we view the world,” she says. “What we really like is novelty. Before we had access to all of this technology, it was quite hard to find new things, right? It was exciting if you got a new book, or the next episode of EastEnders was on.” Now, of course, especially if we’ve not turned notifications off, there’s a constant flow of new content vying for our attention. Like obedient puppies, tech has conditioned humans to react to notifications. Most of these digital nags are boring things, but because we occasionally get a high-reward one – a message from a new love, or an update on an exciting delivery, “we get this Pavlovian response,” says Cox, “where we end up thinking: ‘Oh, maybe this is an exciting one,’ and we want to respond to it straight away.” By now, most of us are familiar with the notion of the dopamine hits that make phone-checking addictive. Dopamine is our motivational neurochemical – our wanting and seeking mechanism – and novelty is one of its key triggers. But the wanting part of our brains is mightier than the pleasure part, negatively weighting our desire to pleasure ratio. Which is why often, reading a notification feels like being a small child, unwrapping the biggest but most disappointing Christmas present. Although notifications are bad for our productivity, brain power and mental health, the thought of going without them can be distressing to some, as a team of Spanish and US researchers discovered in 2017 when they asked participants to do so for 24 hours. While the 30 who took up the challenge felt less distracted and more productive, they also felt, says the study, “no longer able to be as responsive as expected, which made some participants anxious. And they felt less connected with [their] social group.” Despite these gripes, after taking part, about two-thirds of them planned to change the way they managed notifications, and two years later, half had adhered to those plans. *** ‘The struggle is real,” says Cox, but there are things we can do to minimise notifications hell. Tech companies, such as Microsoft, say they are trying to make such messages less annoying. “Our research has taught us that notifications and interruptions can be valuable and disruptive,” says Mary Czerwinski, a research manager at Microsoft’s Human Understanding and Empathy group, before flagging up new features the company has introduced. Focus Assist, she says, “attempts to block social media and other app notifications so that users can work distraction-free for long periods of time.” And you can set a Focus Session timer within the Clock app. But notifications will always come from somewhere. Your GP’s surgery, your kids’ school, your own weekly reminder that it’s bin day. Even simple things can help, suggests Cox, “like putting your phone in a drawer, while you get on with the boring work task. She also suggests compartmentalising and, where possible, having separate devices for work and personal life, or even having different user accounts on the one device. Some Android phones, she says, allow there to be two users. One could be work you, the other off-duty you. Turning off notifications for apps, and, she says, “those badges that tell you how many messages you haven’t read yet, will reduce the distractions”. With Facebook, she says, not only will you need to turn off notifications, but also emails. “You probably only want to know if someone else has logged into your Facebook account.” But equally, if you haven’t the brainpower for fiddly notifications admin right now, she says, “we shouldn’t be too scared and worried about it. It’s not cocaine.” Leroy only uses email and texts, and chooses when she checks them. But she has developed a simple strategy for interruptions to reduce the mental burden of context switching, called the “ready-to-resume plan”. Before checking the notification, she says, “take a couple of seconds to write down where you were, and more importantly, what you were going to do next, or where you were struggling. And then you’re disengaged, and you address whatever is coming.” This helps your brain get closure on what you were doing. “So you’re more fully focused on the interrupting request. And then when you resume, you have a trace of where you were and are able to resume much faster.” Similarly, if the notification requires action but isn’t urgent, don’t just let it hang. Make a note of it. “The brain does not do well with anything that is pending when there is no plan on how to deal with it,” says Leroy. “Writing down to go back and address Jerry’s email will help your brain relax about the fact that you have Jerry’s email pending.” “We have to be mindful about protecting our attention,” she says. “We take it for granted. Understand that we have those cognitive limitations, and be humble about it.” Every time Leroy loads a new app, she disables notifications. “That’s my default,” she says. As Cox adds, “These notifications do train us to respond. And they’re very effective. That’s why all the companies use them. And that’s why we need to fight, quietly, by switching them off.”In January of 2019, Chase Lochmiller and Cully Cavness, recently reunited prep school pals from Denver, drove out to the snow-covered plains of Wyoming to bring a piece of tech culture to the American heartland. Trembling in -20F (-29C) temperatures, they wired up a prototype of their brainchild: a machine that harnesses the “waste gas” from oil rigs to power mining for cryptocurrency. Cryptocurrencies such as bitcoin, the most-popular decentralized digital currency, have a notoriously large carbon footprint (bitcoin mining alone consumes about half as much electricity in a year as all of the UK). So to leverage a cheap source of energy to run their bitcoin mining operations, Lochmiller and Cavness found themselves partnering with oil companies to repurpose a byproduct, primarily methane, that’s typically vented or burnt off in flares. “We flipped the switch and saw all the bitcoin mining servers light up green, and you could see the flare physically shrink a little bit,” said Lochmiller, a self-described “city kid” who had never before set foot in an oilfield. “It was kind of a Frankenstein moment, like ‘Oh my god, it’s alive!’” Their creation is part of a niche wave of tech startups that are now eyeing the oil and gas industry to help power the cryptocurrency boom. Lochmiller and Cavness, who started a bitcoin mining company called Crusoe Energy, see their fix as a marriage between two problems capable of “solving” one another: the wasting of gas flaring that contributes to the climate crisis, and the need for cheaper energy as crypto increases in popularity. Climate experts, however, warn it’s a “false solution” so long as oil and gas production is allowed to continue. The world’s leading authority on climate science concludes that only a dramatic reduction in greenhouse gas emissions will help avert a climate calamity; merely finding alternate uses for “waste gas” doesn’t confront the dire need to curb fossil fuel consumption. If anything, researchers warn, oil companies may feel incentivized to drill even more. “At the end of the day, they’re still burning natural gas,” said Arvind Ravikumar, a methane researcher at the University of Texas at Austin, who deemed flare mitigation and companies proposing similar technologies a “scam”. Lochmiller and Cavness, however, say their work helps the industry produce oil in as clean a way as possible, buying time, or “extending the runway” for the energy transition. Their company has attracted high-profile investors, including Bain and Winklevoss Capital, raking in $125m for their second round of fundraising in April. They plan to roll out 100 bitcoin mining data centers by early 2022, up from the 65 units already in place. Crusoe has trademarked its solution as “digital flare mitigation”. They install fleets of data centers that hum in shipping container-like structures next to remote oil rigs. Oil producers are then paid for the waste gas they otherwise wouldn’t use because it’s cheaper to burn than to pay to transport to market. In return, Crusoe can use the byproduct to power energy-intensive computing operations on-site. The data centers burn through enormous amounts of energy because there’s no centralized “bank” that holds cryptocurrency. Instead, new coins are created by solving complex equations that require heavy computing power to authenticate. The currency is then tracked on a decentralized ledger, known as the blockchain, which is also resource-intensive to maintain. The new technology comes amid a “great mining migration” that’s currently underway in the United States after China banned crypto mining in September. And with renewed global focus on cutting the highly-potent greenhouse gas, methane, which is the primary “waste gas” in flaring, the model is particularly in vogue. Oil-friendly regulators, elected officials, industry groups and financial services giants have been taking note. Commissioner Jim Wright of the Texas Railroad Commission, the state agency charged with regulating oil and gas, told the Guardian that modular mitigation setups like Crusoe’s are “most appealing”. Texas senator Ted Cruz is also a fan. Meanwhile, North Dakota lawmakers on both sides of the aisle passed a law this year making oil producers eligible for a tax credit if they employ onsite flare mitigation. Crusoe, which is based in Williston, North Dakota – the heart of the Bakken shale – worked closely with legislators to pass the bill. According to Paasha Mahdavi, a political science professor at the University of California, Santa Barbara, who co-authored a 2020 paper on methane mitigation measures, new technologies that stop flaring at the source do seem like they would reduce emissions. But in practice, he said, projects designed to capture otherwise flared or vented gas have resulted in an overall increase in gas production. After all, they create a new source of demand. “It’s like if you had a leaky gasoline pipeline and, instead of fixing the problem, you plugged in a Humvee next to the leak and left the engine on in perpetuity with the A/C on full blast,” Mahdavi said. *** Cavness, the chief executive of Crusoe Energy who goes by “Electron Cowboy” on Twitter, grew up envisioning himself jumping on the family bandwagon. He would get an internship with Shell, and follow in the footsteps of his father and grandfather to carve out a career in the oil and gas industry. But then Cavness landed at Middlebury College, a prestigious liberal arts school in Vermont with a reputation as the alma mater of global climate campaign, 350.org founders, and home of the university fossil fuel divestment movement. “Climate was the whole conversation,” Cavness said, noting that he felt pressure to downplay his oil and gas roots. After going down the climate rabbit hole at Middlebury, and spending a year after graduation studying the “morality of energy”, Cavness’ job was troubling his conscience. He’d been losing sleep thinking about the unfathomable amount of gas the industry was wasting. According to the International Energy Agency (IEA) in 2020, 142bn cubic metres of gas was flared – the energy equivalent of providing electricity to 49m homes. When Cavness reunited with Lochmiller in 2018 during an 18-hour hiking trip in the Rocky Mountains, they hatched a plan: Lochmiller, an MIT graduate based in San Francisco, had recently left a position as a partner at a cryptocurrency investment firm, while Cavness was with a separate firm that invested in oil and gas. Together, they would combine their worlds of bitcoin and big oil. Unsurprisingly, the bitcoin flaring option is enormously appealing to the industry. Crusoe’s data centers are set up without cost to producers, who earn money on gas they otherwise wouldn’t. “It’s essentially a free offering to the oil company,” Cavness explained earlier this year at Hart Energy’s Developing Unconventional Gas virtual conference for the Bakken and Rockies regions. Cavness and Lochmiller say they’re on the cusp of the latest climate research. But critics warn their company sits squarely within the techno-optimistic ecosystem of Silicon Valley, where the hunt for innovative solutions may blind even the most climate-literate entrepreneurs. Climate experts warn Crusoe’s outlook, and it’s proposed “fix”, reflects a selective understanding of the science. Even the most conservative forecasts say oil and gas exploration must stop immediately to prevent the worst impacts of the climate crisis, including unnecessary loss of human lives. But despite Crusoe’s climate-focused branding, Lochmiller confirmed the company supports ongoing exploration and drilling. As Cavness sees it, even after his now-infant daughter grows old or reaches the end of her life, fossil fuels will still be around. If the oil industry will be “required to sustain life on the planet” anyway, Cavness asks, why not drill in the cleanest way possible? *** While the Crusoe chiefs say their digital flare migration technology is buying time for new clean energy sources, some fear their strategy is more like placing a Band-Aid over a gaping wound. Nine out of ten climate experts who responded to requests for comment, including top methane researchers, political scientists, and climate analysts, said that oil and gas exploration and new drilling – even if equipped with methane mitigation technologies – is not in line with a future in which warming is curbed in accordance with global climate pledges. Of this group, the one dissenting voice, an academic and co-founder of a greenhouse gas monitoring company, said continued exploration and drilling can “probably” happen in a clean way. Climate experts are more split over the degree to which cryptocurrency operations should be allowed to consume renewable energy. Three out of ten climate experts the Guardian spoke with were intrigued by one element of Crusoe’s model. Similar to waste gas operations, the company has a set of data centers slated to run on wind farms designed to tap energy available when gigawatts generated exceed those demanded. Crusoe’s ability to pay for that energy, according to the company, will enable renewable developers to underwrite new fleets. But not all are optimistic. Heather Price, an atmospheric chemist and professor at North Seattle College, worries that flare mitigation technology is little more than a greenwashing tactic meant to spin fossil fuels in a positive light. “I have no faith that this use of flares for crypto would be a temporary situation,” she said. “The fossil fuel industry and crypto companies should not get a ‘cookie’ for this move.” This story is published as part of Covering Climate Now, a global collaboration of news outlets strengthening coverage of the climate storyIt’s the antihero antidote to the BBC’s saccharine Sports Personality of the Year awards, a selection of our favourite cheats, heels, villains and sore losers from 2021. Vlastimil Voracek “I use mouthwash myself several times a day during the coronavirus pandemic, and I recommend it to my patients,” said Voracek, an orthopaedic doctor who often works with Czech tennis players on the WTA Tour. “Commonly available mouthwashes can significantly affect coronavirus transmission.” As can vaccines. Unfortunately, according to the Czech press, Voracek didn’t believe in using them. He tested positive for Covid soon after he arrived in Tokyo. Which made him patient zero in an outbreak that swept through the Czech Olympic team travelling on the plane with him. Six athletes and one coach were forced to drop out of the Games and hole up in quarantine. “We cried, then we swore, then we cried again,” said beach volleyball player Marketa Slukova, who had spent four years training for that moment. Shakib Al Hasan After two decades as a professional, you would think Shakib would have learned how to handle a rough umpiring decision by now, but no. In June, Shakib was playing a T20 game in the Dhaka Premier League when Imran Parvez rejected his lbw appeal. Shakib immediately hoofed over the stumps, and started shouting in the face of the umpire, who took a measured step backwards. Shakib wasn’t finished. When the umpires took the players off for a rain break, he gave it the full Howard Beale “I’m mad as hell” treatment, ripped up all three stumps and smashed them down into the ground. “I apologise to the teams, management, tournament officials and organising committee for this human error,” he said afterwards. “Hopefully, I won’t be repeating this again in the future.” No guarantees in that “hopefully”. Kim Raisner However frustrating the lottery system they use to draw the mounts may be, however infuriating it must be for a coach to see their athlete’s dreams of winning an Olympic medal foiled by a truculent nag, Raisner punched a horse on live TV. She was disqualified and ordered to attend a “coach education seminar”, which includes a “humane treatment of animals” module. Modern pentathlon is now considering swapping the horse riding for a bicycle race. Benoît Paire There was a point, midway through this year, when Paire’s record in the last few months of play on the ATP Tour read: P36 W4 L32. The richly gifted Frenchman had sunk into an existential funk. The rankings were frozen, which meant he could keep losing without suffering the consequences. “I arrive, I take some money and I go to the next tournament,” he told L’Equipe. And he might have gotten away without anyone noticing if he’d just done it quietly. But no. Paire said February’s Australian Open was “shit”, “really crap”, “shameful” and grotesque. At the Argentina Open he tanked and spat on court and at Wimbledon, where he was fined for a “lack of effort” and heckled for “wasting everybody’s time”, he said: “I do not care about the people, I play for me and that’s it.” The French tennis association banned him from their Olympic team. Morhad Amdouni Seventeen miles into one of the most gruelling marathons in Olympic history, Amdouni swept every single bottle off the front row of the water table before nabbing the last one for himself. “The bottles are soaked in water, which makes them slippery,” Amdouni said in his defence. “However, it is clear that I am trying to get one from the beginning of the row but they slip as soon as we touch them.” It wasn’t. Rassie Erasmus Your take on Erasmus turns on whether you’re a Springbok supporter or not. Either he was on a crusade to expose prejudice against his team or he was trying to pile pressure on the referees during the Lions series. The one thing everyone can agree on, though, is that the man has a genuine talent for mischief. After his opposite number, Warren Gatland, had complained it was unfair for a South African to be working as the Television Match Official, Erasmus responded by compiling an hour-long video monologue detailing every last little decision against his team by the referee, Nic Berry, in the opening Test. It was uploaded on Vimeo by someone called ‘JJ’ who may or may not have been related to what might or might not be a sockpuppet account Erasmus had previously retweeted to share similar clips. If that wasn’t enough, Erasmus swapped his spot in the stands so he could carry water and tactical messages on to the pitch (“Willie, Willie, get him, he’s shit”). When World Rugby banned him for two months, Erasmus cheerily tweeted a video of him drinking a pint: “I get the feeling the next two months will not be as bad as feared.” Shaun Murphy There is a time and a place for making a serious point about whether or not amateurs should be allowed to enter professional snooker tournaments. It’s probably not when one of them has just knocked you out of the UK Championship in the opening round. “I am going to sound like a grumpy old man but that young man shouldn’t be in the tournament. It is not right, it is not fair,” said former champion Shaun Murphy after his 6-5 defeat to the 19-year-old Chinese player Si Jiahui. “I feel extremely hard done by that I have lost to someone who shouldn’t even be in the building. I don’t know why we as a sport allow amateurs to compete in professional tournaments.”Last week I suffered from film-induced whiplash. One minute I was watching Pablo Larraín’s Spencer, in which Diana, Princess of Wales’s last Christmas with the British royal family is like being trapped in a haunted mansion full of malevolent waxworks. The next, I was revelling in the adorable idiocy of The Princess Switch, in which a Chicago patisserie owner called Stacy swaps places with a lookalike duchess at Christmas, and falls in love with the Crown Prince of Belgravia. We’re not talking about the posh London district of the same name, but a fictional, Ruritania-style kingdom somewhere in the region of Romania, whose treasury must now be coining it from the number of Christmas romcoms being shot in and around its fancy castles. If the House of Windsor’s standing has been devalued by a lawsuit involving the Duke of York and the acrimonious familial rupture with Harry and his American wife, Netflix is busy restoring public confidence in monarchical systems, albeit imaginary ones. The Princess Switch trilogy shows that an American baker from a mixed-race background (Vanessa Hudgens playing three roles) can be warmly embraced by Mitteleuropean royalty. Likewise, age-old traditions are nudged into the 21st century in the 2017 film A Christmas Prince. Here, a feisty American blogger called Amber (Rose McIver) meets, marries and has a baby with the titular prince, heir to the throne of Aldovia, the country next to Belgravia in the Netflix Christmasverse. Both trilogies feature diverse casting in which neither race nor sexual proclivity is ever remarked upon. Indeed, in this year’s Single All the Way, the romcom formula is tweaked so the central couple are gay, but this causes not even a hint of disapproval in the New Hampshire host family, which sets about same-sex matchmaking with gusto. Truly these are all-inclusive fairytales for our times. Christmas settings add shiny new baubles to familiar romcom cliches: not just precocious kids, airport dashes and mutual antagonism melting into romance, but also Christmas trees, Christmas markets, Christmas carols and snowball fights, to a degree where seasonal obsessiveness begins to feel almost as oppressive as Christmasland in Joe Hill’s horror novel NOS-4A2, where unhappiness is against the law. American women are forever finding themselves by travelling to some never-never European past where they are romanced by the local royalty – or aristocracy in the case of this year’s A Castle for Christmas, directed by Mary Lambert, probably still best known for 1989’s scary Pet Sematary. But no scares here: Brooke Shields plays an American novelist called Sophie Brown who seeks refuge from a minor scandal by burying herself in remotest Scotland, where she tries to buy a castle from an impoverished Duke (Cary Elwes). Cue Christmas jumpers, a full range of diverse supporting characters, and snowballs galore. While the desire to marry above my station stopped at the age of eight, when I realised I couldn’t get hitched to Prince Charles because having two Princess Annes would confuse the nation, I still wallow in the delusion that I might one day write a bestselling novel that will enable me to buy, if not a castle, then at least a one-bedroom flat. So Sophie’s story speaks to me more than most. But while Christmas romcom heroines have flourishing careers, they also persist in nonfeminist dreams of true romance with a prince or (in 2019’s A Knight Before Christmas) a knight in shining armour. What’s the attraction? My guess is the allure of wealth, power and attention, although, as Spencer rams home, the real-life requirements of a royal family are the polar opposite of the romcom message of being true to yourself. As Spencer’s Prince Charles points out, Diana must adopt a fake public persona if she is to survive. But we can dream. Perhaps the whole point of Christmas romcoms is they enable us to bask, however fleetingly, in the delusion that we can have it all. Love Hard, the smartest of this year’s crop, deals in unvarnished truths: online dating profiles are invariably fake; Die Hard is a better Christmas film than Love, Actually; the lyrics of Baby, It’s Cold Outside are worryingly sexually aggressive. But it still persists in the fib that you can’t celebrate Christmas without a soulmate. As Joni Mitchell once sang: “A woman must have everything.” Anne Billson is a writer and film criticWith that, we’ll end our live coverage for today. Here’s a recap of today’s major news developments: Four children have died and four have been left critically injured after they fell about 10 metres from a jumping castle that was blown into the air in north-west Tasmania. The Morrison government has set aside an election war chest from $15.9bn in mystery spending in a mid-year budget update that warns of significant economic risks ahead. Coalition pet projects in marginal seats, including the inland rail from Toowoomba to Gladstone, which environmentalists warn would unlock a “carbon bomb”, have been showered with a $2.3bn cash splash. At least 97 people have caught Covid-19 at a Taylor Swift-themed dance party in Sydney, as NSW cases escalate to record levels. A controversial proposal to drill for oil and gas off the New South Wales coast will not go ahead after the federal government announced it would refuse an application to extend an exploration permit. Australia’s best-laid preparations for the second Ashes Test were thrown into disarray before the start of play at Adelaide Oval as their captain, Pat Cummins, was ruled out after being identified as a close contact of a positive Covid-19 case. Have a great evening. We’ll be back tomorrow to do it all over again. A controversial proposal to drill for oil and gas off the New South Wales coast will not go ahead after the federal government announced it would refuse an application to extend an exploration permit. The petroleum exploration permit, known as Pep11, has been held by several different energy providers in recent years and allows for offshore drilling of gas and oil, and seismic testing in 4,500 sq km of water from off Manly on Sydney’s northern beaches up to Newcastle. Community groups, including Save Our Coast, have been campaigning against efforts to develop the area because of environmental concerns and the impact on whale migration paths. Read more: Two men face life in prison for three execution murders of gang rivals, including mafioso Pasquale Barbaro and another that occurred a metre from the target’s fiancee. Business student Abuzar Sultani and housemate Siar Munshizada’s three murder convictions can be revealed after the New South Wales court of criminal appeal on Thursday lifted suppression orders covering the case. The men, aged 32 and 33, were active and high-ranking members of a Rebels bikie gang chapter when they committed a string of murders across Sydney in 2016. Rebels enforcer Michael “Ruthless” Davey, described by his father, William, last week as the victim of a “cowardly aggressive and sickening” murder, was shot dead in the driveway of his home in Kingswood on 30 March 2016. Read more: A Sydney theatre has become a venue of concern for the potential spread of the Omicron variant of Covid-19. NSW Health have issued an alert to anyone who attended the “On Repeat: Taylor Swift Red Party” at Metro Theatre (624 George Street, Sydney) from 9pm onwards on Friday 10 December. There are at least 97 confirmed cases of Covid-19 associated with the event, and NSW Health said it is likely some of these cases have the Omicron variant of concern. Anyone who attended is considered a close contact and must immediately get tested and isolate for 7 days. The NSW Health statement also said: NSW Health is asking all household contacts of close contacts to get tested and self-isolate until a negative result is received by everyone in the household. NSW Health is urgently contacting 600 people who attended Metro Theatre at this time and checked in via the QR code and is directing them and members of their households to immediately get tested and follow public health advice. NSW Health is appealing for anyone who attended but did not check in using the QR code to urgently get tested and isolate, and for the community to ensure other potential attendees are aware of this advice.” It’s very hard to deny the existence of pork barrelling when stories about it have a lot of meat on the bone. Political reporter Katina Curtis and senior economics correspondent Shane Wright, from the Nine newspapers, spent two months compiling, cross-checking and analysing data on government grants. They focused on discretionary grants, overseen by MPs and ministers. They found that the 19,123 grants overwhelmingly favoured Coalition-held electorates. Coalition seats got three times as much – $1.9bn over the past three financial years compared with about $530m for Labor seats. Other money was thrown at independent seats. It’s the latest chapter in an ongoing story about how taxpayer money is seemingly being used for political purposes. Previous chapters include the car park rorts, and the sports rorts. Subplots include former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian conceding “we throw money at seats to keep them”. The federal government’s spin machine went into overdrive. Do their counter-claims deserve traction? Read more: The government has set aside an election war chest from $15.9bn in mystery spending in a mid-year budget update that warns of significant economic risks ahead. But despite the treasurer hailing an “incredible” set of job numbers, which shows Australia’s unemployment rate will fall comfortably below 5% next year, the government is holding off the task of budget repair until “economic recovery is secure”. “These gains are not yet locked in,” Josh Frydenberg said on Thursday as he announced the mid-year economic and fiscal outlook (Myefo). “The pandemic is still with us and we must continue to learn to live with the virus as demonstrated by the recent emergence of the Omicron variant.” The economic update – potentially the last before the election – shows a combined $15.9bn in expenditure for decisions “taken but not yet announced” and other mystery spending that is not for publication. Treasury officials suggested the spending was split about 50-50 between these two categories. Read more: More than 60% of super fund investment options where members can choose how to invest their money fail to deliver good returns, statistics released by the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (Apra) show. Poorly performing funds in the “choice” sector also tend to have higher fees that eat into their returns, the data reveals. It is the first time Apra has examined the performance of choice funds, which allow members to choose from a menu of investment options. The funds contained in the data manage $394bn of retirement savings, which is about 40% of the choice market. Read more: The auditor general has called on the Department of Defence to improve its probity measures, in an otherwise positive report on the handling of a patrol boat project. The Australian National Audit Office published a report (pdf) today about its audit of the $357m procurement of six evolved Cape-class patrol boats. The report - tabled in parliament - said: “The decision to acquire six new evolved Cape-class patrol boats rather than undertake the life-of-type extension of Navy’s existing Armidale class patrol boats as planned, was made following receipt of an unsolicited proposal from Austal Limited to Defence in September 2019 outlining a leasing arrangement. At the time of receipt, Defence had not planned for or approached the market for this specific capability.” The audit found Defence’s procurement of the boats “has been largely effective”, and its decision making and procurement activities were “largely effective”. But the report made one recommendation: for Defence to “develop and implement specific requirements for the management of probity when engaging with industry on unsolicited proposals”. Defence agreed to this recommendation. The report said Defence “did not assess potential probity risks on receipt of the unsolicited proposal from Austal in September 2019 or introduce additional arrangements to manage procurement probity risk until it commenced exclusive negotiations with Austal in February 2020” - five months after receipt of the proposal. The ANAO report said: “It would have been prudent for Defence to consider its probity arrangements for its personnel earlier than it did. Defence records indicate that prior to receipt of the unsolicited proposal, Austal personnel provided Defence personnel with information and modelling relating to the idea of acquiring additional Cape-class boats as an alternative to the Armidale class [extension], to support Navy’s transition to the Arafura class offshore patrol vessels (OPVs). While the ANAO did not identify direct evidence of joint development of the unsolicited proposal before it was formally received, and Defence advised that joint development did not occur, in such circumstances care needs to be taken to avoid the perception of joint development of a proposal which may result in procurement action, so as to avoid any perception that potential suppliers enjoy an unfair advantage. Non-discrimination is a key principle of the CPRs [Commonwealth Procurement Rules].” Tasmania’s premier Peter Gutwein has said it is “simply inconceivable” that the jumping castle tragedy occurred during what was meant to be an end of year celebratory period. Gutwein said: It’s difficult for me to find words in such tragic circumstances. Four children have passed away. I’m certain that I speak for all Tasmanians in extending my deepest sympathies to the family, friends and loved ones of everyone affected by today’s tragedy. For the five children who remain in hospital, our thoughts and prayers are with them and their families and their friends during this very difficult time. On a day when schoolchildren were celebrating at the end of term so close to Christmas, it’s simply inconceivable that this shocking tragedy has occurred. We stand ready to provide whatever support we can to the families directed impacted, the student, staff and the broader community, and also to our emergency services and our first responders who I know have also been affected very deeply. I know that this is a strong and caring community that will stand together and support one another. I know they’ll do that with love and kindness to get them through this. I know this is utterly devastating and heartbreaking for all involved. And as I’ve said I know I speak on behalf of all Tasmanians when I say that our thoughts and prayers are with those five children that are still in hospital. And our sympathies are with those families and friends and loved ones of the four children who have unfortunately passed away.I’ll hand over now. Gutwein, speaking from Devonport, urged Tasmanians who felt affected by the event to contact mental health support services. The support services Gutwein mentioned were: Lifeline on 1311 14, The Kids Helpline on 1800551800, The Mental Health helpline on 1800332388, and Beyond Blue on 1300 22 4636 Tasmanian police have announced there are now four children who have died at the Hillcrest primary school in Devonport. Darren Hine, Tasmania’s police commissioner, said the four children who have died were in grade 6. Five other children are still in hospital, four of who are in a critical condition. Police and emergency services were called to the scene around 10:00am this morning after a wind gust had reportedly caused the jumping castle and inflatable balls to lift into the air. Police and emergency services quickly began administering first aid at the scene. Of the four children, two were boys and two were girls. On a day when these children were meant to be celebrating their last day of primary school, instead were all mourning their loss. Our hearts are breaking for the families and the loved ones, schoolmates, teachers of these young people who were taken too soon. Our thoughts are also with those emergency services personnel who attended to try and save these people’s lives. We’re going to be doing everything we possibly can to support the school community and the community at large. Counselling will be provided to the school and wider community, and to the “many” who witnessed the event. Hine added: The loss of children affect us all and our thoughts and prayers are certainly with the loved ones and the school community. An investigation is under way. The coroner has visited the scene already. We’ll be supplying a report to the coroner in conjunction with WorkSafe Tasmania. The Lunar Electric music festival that was to be held in Newcastle this Saturday has been cancelled under a public health order, as Omicron cases in New South Wales surge. A NSW Health statement released on Thursday afternoon said that the department “considered that the ongoing spread of Covid-19 in the Newcastle area, where the majority of a record number of cases are the Omicron variant of concern, presents too great a risk for the festival to take place this weekend”. The statement said: NSW Health has advised the organisers of the festival this afternoon of the cancellation. NSW Health continues to be concerned about the ongoing spread of Covid-19 in the Newcastle area, where several venues and events have now seen extensive transmission. NSW Health again asks everyone across the community to continue to be particularly careful and practise Covid-safe behaviours. The emergence of the Omicron variant is a timely reminder of the importance of booster shots in maintaining a high level of protection against the Covid-19 virus. We urge people to get their booster dose as soon as they are eligible, to best protect yourself, your loved ones and the community from the ongoing transmission of Covid-19. South Australia has reported another 24 Covid-19 cases with authorities confirming six cases of the Omicron variant have been detected since its arrival last week, reports AAP. Thursday’s tally follows the 25 new infections on Wednesday which was the state’s highest daily number for more than 18 months. SA has 108 active infections, with 67 being managed at home and 39 in hotel quarantine. A staffer working for energy minister Angus Taylor has tested positive to Covid-19. A spokesman from Taylor’s office has just sent out this statement: A fully vaccinated staff member on Minister for Industry, Energy and Emissions Reduction Angus Taylor’s team has tested positive to Covid. The staff member is upbeat about spending Christmas Day in isolation. Minister Taylor and members of his Canberra ministerial office have undertaken Covid tests. Minister Taylor has returned a negative result. Parliament House has been notified and ACT Health guidelines are being adhered to.” New South Wales police have fined a man $10,000 for allegedly breaching a self-isolation direction in the Newcastle area. According to a police statement, the 20-year-old had been directed to self-isolate at a Newcastle property from Wednesday 8 December, as he was a close contact of a positive Covid-19 case. NSW Police said “it’s understood the man subsequently attended a licensed premises on Wharf Road later that evening, and also attended a private residence in Adamstown on Saturday (11 December 2021)“. He has since returned a positive test to Covid-19 and is currently self-isolating. The NSW Police statement follows pleas from health authorities this week for people who attended the Argyle House nightclub on Wharf Road on the evening of Wednesday 8 December to get tested and isolate. Hundreds of patrons at the nightclub on that evening have since tested positive to Covid-19. Of the roughly 650 people who attended an event that night, more than 200 have tested positive, making the event one of the highest transmission events in the world. On Thursday afternoon, police said: Following inquiries, the man was issued with two Penalty Infringement Notices (PINs) totalling $10,000 for the offence of Fail to Comply with Notice Direction s 7/8/9 – Covid-19. Inquiries are continuing.” At 4:30pm AEDT, Tasmania’s premier Peter Gutwein will hold a press conference in Devonport to provide an update on the jumping castle tragedy at Hillcrest primary school. He’ll be joined by Tasmania’s police commissioner Darren Hine and other government representatives. We’ll bring that to you live here. The Australian Federal Police has been given a bit of a slap on the wrist by the Australian Privacy Commissioner for trialling Clearview AI’s facial recognition technology without properly considering the privacy implications. Clearview AI works by sucking up images of people’s faces from social media and other sites across the internet, building a database for its law enforcement customers to search through. Last month the privacy commissioner, Angelene Falk, found Clearview AI had breached the privacy of Australians by collecting images of them online, and ordered the company to delete all images of people in Australia within 90 days and not collect any more. In the determination, Falk mentioned police agencies in Australia including the AFP had signed up for trials. Previous reporting on the AFP’s use revealed at least one officer tested the software using photos of herself and another member of staff, while the Australian Centre to Counter Child Exploitation conducted searches for five “persons of interest”. On Thursday, the information commissioner found the AFP should have conducted a privacy impact assessment, and ordered the agency to appoint an independent assessor to review AFP privacy practises and make changes, and for officers to complete an updated privacy training program. Falk said: I recognise that facial recognition and other high privacy impact technologies may provide public benefit where they are accompanied by appropriate safeguards. But there were a number of red flags about this third-party offering that should have prompted a careful privacy assessment. By uploading information about persons of interest and victims, the ACCCE were handling personal information in a way that could have serious consequences for individuals whose information was collected. Clearview AI is appealing the decision made against it in November. The Therapeutic Goods Administration has announced a final decision not to reschedule psilocybin and MDMA from schedule 9 prohibited substances to schedule 8 controlled medicines. Therapeutic uses for MDMA and psilocybin – the active ingredient in magic mushrooms – are currently being explored in clinical trials both in Australia and overseas. The announcement confirms an interim decision made by the TGA in February. The decision does not affect current access to the drugs for use in clinical trial settings, and confirmed there was “potential benefit of MDMA in treatment of PTSD”. It concluded: Pending the outcome of current clinical research, the scheduling of MDMA could be reconsidered in future applications.” Responding to the announcement, Dr Martin Williams, executive director of Psychedelic Research in Science &amp; Medicine, said in a statement: Our firm support for the eventual rescheduling of psilocybin and MDMA, alongside inclusion on the Australian Register of Therapeutic Goods, is based on the emerging evidence from local and international research demonstrating that these drugs may be used as safe and effective adjuncts to psychotherapy in the treatment of refractory mental illness.” New Zealand has detected its first case of the Omicron Covid-19 variant in a Christchurch managed isolation facility. On Thursday afternoon, the director general of health Dr Ashley Bloomfield said: This is a person who is in managed isolation in Christchurch. The person arrived in New Zealand on a flight from Germany via Dubai that landed in Auckland...the people on that flight were transferred to Christchurch on a chartered domestic flight trip with all our usual protocols.” Bloomfield said: We fully expected we will find a case of Omicron and in fact, we are treating every border related case as if it were Omicron until proven otherwise. We have good protocols in place that are designed to stop the virus getting across the border.” Everyone who travelled on the same international and charter flights as the case are being treated as close contacts, as are those staying on the same floor of the MIQ facility. Bloomfield said health authorities are considering advice over reducing the interval period between second and third doses of the Pfizer vaccine, to help combat Omicron’s spread and effect. Jim Chalmers, the opposition treasury spokesman, has taken aim at $16bn in mystery spending the Morrison government has included in its mid-year economic and fiscal outlook (Myefo). In his response to Myefo, Chalmers said the update shows the government “completely ignores the issues in the economy around stagnant wages and skills shortages and job insecurity and it does absolutely nothing to crack down on rorts and mismanagement”. Specifically, Chalmers denounced the $16bn in Myefo for decisions taken but not yet announced, and alleged this budget item meant the government is doubling down on “rorts”. Chalmers said: It remarkably pours billions of dollars into slush funds. This is a mid-year budget update which has got lots of complacency, lots of self-congratulation, but nothing in terms of a plan for wages or job insecurity or skills shortages or the other issues and challenges in our economy. Billions of dollars of your money, stashed away to be spent on the prime minister’s political interests and not on the national economic interests. Scott Morrison and Josh Frydenberg have learned absolutely nothing from the furore over politically motivated rorts. What they don’t understand is this. You can’t rort your way to recovery.” The Australian Council of Trade Unions has accused Scott Morrison of “delivering working Australians a pay cut for Christmas” following mid-year economic and fiscal outlook (Myefo) figures showing inflation will outpace wage growth. In a statement, the ACTU said that the figures released in Myefo today “proves yet again that Mr Morrison has no plan to address the cancer of insecure work plaguing this country”. Myefo figures predict wages to grow from 2.25% in 2021-22 to 3.25% in 2024-25. Inflation is projected to reach and stay at the mid-point of the reserve bank’s target range (2.5%) in 2022-23, as noted by my colleague Paul Karp in his Myefo analysis. ACTU acting secretary Liam O’Brien said: After years of stagnant wages growth under this Government, Mr Morrison still has no plan to deliver working Australians a long overdue and desperately needed bump to their pay packets. The Government’s own Myefo confirms that real wages will go backwards this financial year. The Prime Minister’s only real plan for wages is to continue ramping up temporary migration, which will rob locals of opportunities, suppress wages growth and exacerbate the abuse and exploitation of vulnerable migrant workers. The Prime Minister has no plan to address the rampant casualisation of Australian jobs. His only response is to continue to peddle his con-job ‘casual conversion laws’, which have been exposed as a cruel hoax on working people.” Commander Debbie Williams of Tasmania Police has spoken about the tragedy that occurred at Hillcrest primary school in Devonport. Two children have died and several have been left critically injured after they fell about 10 metres from a jumping castle that was blown into the air this morning at the school’s ‘Big Day In’ celebration to mark the end of the school year. Williams said: Tragically I can confirm that there are two deceased children after an incident today at Hillcrest Primary School. A number of the children have been taken to hospital and some are in a critical condition. This is a very tragic event and our thoughts are with the families and the wider school community, and also our first responders. There is no doubt that this has been a very confronting and distressing scene. Counselling is being made available to the families affected by this in the school community along with the first responders.” You can read more here: Scott Morrison has also made some comments about the soaring number of Covid cases in New South Wales and other states. He points out he is wearing a mask at the press conference (when he’s not speaking) because he’s a casual contact. The prime minister also stresses that ICU representations should be the more appropriate metric for concern as opposed to case numbers each day. Morrison ends by urging Australians to get their booster shot. Scott Morrison has announced the government will reject the Petroleum Exploration Permit (Pep) 11, which would see offshore gas exploration off the coastlines between Sydney and Newcastle. The Morrison government had come under pressure from its own MPs whose electorates sit on the 4,500 sq km of coast which stood to be opened up to offshore drilling of gas and oil and seismic testing. In announcing the government’s shift, the prime minister mentions Dave Sharma and Trent Zimmerman, whose eastern and north Sydney electorates would have been affected by the Pep 11 permit. Jason Falinski, another Liberal MP opposed to Pep 11 and whose electorate stood to be affected by it, is also at this press conference today with the PM. Labor, the Greens and independents such as Zali Steggall whose electorate of Warringah stood to be affected were also opposed to Pep 11. Morrison said: I have a keen sense of how it is to live in places like this and how important the ocean environment is. I’m such a passionate advocate of getting plastics out of our waterways and the export waste ban we put into place after we were elected to ensure we can take greater care of these amazing environments we love so much. But it’s important we do that in a balanced way and we can ensure that people who rely on the resources industry can continue to do so, with confidence. So this is balance and this is a sensible decision. Because at the end of the day, I want to protect this, but I also want to protect people’s jobs.” You can read more about Pep 11 here, however I should note there have been quite a few developments since this was written, including the New South Wales government writing to resources minister Keith Pitt to express its opposition to it and urge it not be granted. Scott Morrison has called the tragic incident in Devonport “unthinkably heartbreaking”. The prime minister, speaking from Terrigal on the New South Wales central coast, said he had been speaking with Tasmanian premier Peter Gutwein throughout the morning. He said that Gutwein is now travelling to Devonport. Morrison said. The events that occurred today in Devonport in Tasmania are just shattering. Young children on a fun day out, together with their families and it turns to such horrific tragedy, at this time of year, it just breaks your heart. To the parents and families and friends, all who were there, to the other young children there and witnessing these events, I just pray you’ll have great family around you and great friends and you can come through this horrific tragedy. So [this is] just a terrible tragedy. Unthinkable, horrific accident, a freak accident, that will leave families completely devastated.” There are reports a second child has also died as a result of the tragic jumping castle incident in north-west Tasmania today. Earlier today, police in Tasmania announced one child had died and several others were in a critical condition after a wind event caused a jumping castle at Hillcrest primary school in Devonport to lift into the air. Several children fell from a height of about 10m, around 10am this morning. We are still waiting for more details from a media conference, however the ABC are reporting a second child has now died. We’ll bring you more information when we can. Lots of economic data around today, whether it’s the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook from the Morrison government and the mid-year review from the NSW government. (NSW is about a third of the national economy.) There are, though, a bunch of ABS stats of interest too, if you happen to like figures and can’t wait for the cricket (with all the tedious stats involved with that). Anyway, Australia’s jobless rate plunged in November even as people in the ex-locked down states flooded back in. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg had already flagged unemployment rate could drop below 5% in the MYEFO preview. Well, it’s dropped 0.6 percentage points to 4.6%, the lowest level since August’s 4.5%, or near its lowest level in more than a decade. Market economists had been expecting a 5% reading for November, with some such as Westpac predicting it would come in at 5.3%. Instead of 200,000 jobs being added, the economy added almost twice that, or 366,100. Importantly, the jobless rate fell even as the participation rate jumped about 1.4 percentage points to 66.1%. Hours worked also increased by 77m. Such a rise, though, will have economists adjusting their expectations of just when the Reserve Bank will lift official interest rates, while employees will be wondering if they should press harder for more pay. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg and finance minister Simon Birmingham have been asked a few questions about $16bn in spending for decisions taken but not announced and for measures not for publication. As my colleague Paul Karp noted earlier in this blog, the budget papers reveal that there is about $16bn of mystery spending over the next four years, which is more than ten times the size of mystery spending last year. One reporter asked if this money is for a spend-a-thon to win the next election. Frydenberg said they are provisions for uncertainty, and adds: They are measures that we expect to eventuate, but at this point, we can’t allocate and confirm to specific programs. What goes into a contingency reserve can be a number of specific initiatives, including those that are commercial in confidence and therefore can’t be revealed. Issues that may relate to the purchase of vaccines, or other necessary health supports. It can be national security related.” Guardian Australia’s Katharine Murphy then asks if some of the not for publication costs are related to the cost of cancelling the Naval Group contract (incurred when Australia announced it would purchase different submarines as part of the Aukus agreement). Frydenberg said the prime minister had said the cancellation costs were in the order of $2.4bn at the time, but adds: The details around finalising the exit of that contract and ... are being finalised through negotiations. Provisions are made for all of the elements in the defence budget in terms of making sure that funds are available to meet any and all of the likely consequences of that.” Treasurer Josh Frydenberg has praised Australians for turning out to get vaccinated and those who have “sacrificed so much” over the last two years for contributing to an improved budget deficit outlook. In delivering the mid-year fiscal and economic outlook (Myefo) on Thursday, which predicts a deficit of $99.2bn in 2021-22 that has improved by $7.4bn since the budget, Frydenberg said “Australians have good reason to be optimistic about their future”. He also trumpeted the latest unemployment rate which has fallen to 4.6%, and noted the rate is predicted to fall to 4.25%. Frydenberg said: Our plan is working. In the face of the largest economic shock since the great depression, working together, we have been doing what has been needed to be done. Australians should be incredibly proud of what they have achieved. This result belongs to all Australians who have sacrificed so much over the last two years. It shows that the Morrison government’s economic plan is working. It further confirms the Australian economy is rebounding strongly.” Some more on MYEFO: What could go wrong In a word: virus. If a new variant of concern emerges requiring more significant health responses, the international border could be closed for another six months, public health orders and precautionary behaviour could drive down spending. The treasury projects this could mean 1% is shaved off gross domestic product in 2021-22, and unemployment about 1% higher. The rebound would instead come in the second half of 2022. The papers also note that revenue assumptions and nominal GDP are also sensitive to changes in the iron ore price, with a US$10 fall shaving $3.9bn off GDP this year and $0.9bn off tax receipts next financial year. If the government has to pay higher interest rates on bonds, then debt could blow out by a further 5.4% of GDP by 2032. $16bn of Mystery Spending The budget papers reveal that there is about $16bn of mystery spending over the next four years, consisting of decisions taken but not announced or measures for which the cost is not-for-publication. That’s more than ten times the size of mystery spending last year. The papers make it impossible to calculate the size of the war chest for announcements to be made before the election, by mixing in a bunch of commercially sensitive spending items like vaccine purchases. But a treasury official in the lockup suggested it was about half and half...so, an $8bn war chest for the election. There will also be $940m more revenue collected due to decisions taken but not announced or not for publication measures. Debt and Deficit For a government previously concerned with the debt and deficit disaster, there is still red as far as the eye can see. The deficit is tipped to be $99.2bn in 2021-22, an improvement of $7.4bn since the budget despite the Delta lockdowns. The deficit will still be $57.5bn in 2024-25 (or 2.3% of GDP), and only shrinks to 1.8% of GDP in 2031-32. Net debt is projected to be 30.6% of GDP at June 2022, rising to a peak of 37.4% in 2025, then down to 35.5% in 2032. The papers say that despite the economic recovery the government is sticking with the first plank of its budget plan – strong and sustained recovery – so don’t expect austerity measures to try and cut the debt and deficit. Forecasts The budget papers project the size of the Australian economy will grow in real terms by 3.75% in 2021-22 and 3.5% in 2022-23, before easing back to 2.25% and 2.5% in the two final years of the forward projections. The unemployment rate is tipped to fall to 4.25% in that time. The treasury thinks Australians will be ambitious with their pay demands and bosses generous in a bid to keep workers, because wages are supposed to take off from 2.25% in 2021-22 to 3.25% in 2024-25. Inflation is projected to reach and stay at the mid-point of the reserve bank’s target range (2.5%) in 2022-23. Assumptions The treasury has assumed that with over 80% of Australians aged 16 and above vaccinated currently, rates will climb to more than 90%. So far so good. But the rest of the assumptions are … a little rosy. The treasury assumed lockdowns are no longer required, with “most domestic activity restrictions” lifted by the start of 2022 and only basic density restrictions in place. There may be “temporary strengthening of activity restrictions” to contain localised outbreaks – but these short, sharp lockdown-like restrictions are assumed to have no material impact on the outlook. Remaining state border restrictions are assumed to be lifted by early 2022 and the Omicron variant “is not assumed to significantly alter current reopening plans or require a reimposition of widespread health and activity restrictions”. Migrants will start returning from 2022, with international students ready to go for the first semester of 2022. It’s been a horrible morning for news, so here’s hoping that’s the last of it. We are due to hear from treasurer Josh Frydenberg shortly on the mid-year budget update. Prime minister Scott Morrison was also due to speak an hour or so ago but that’s been delayed - presumably to come. Elias Visontay will be there to expertly and vivaciously take you through it all. Qantas has forecast a loss of more than $1.1bn from a lockdown-plagued half year but says it has made inroads in reducing debt, AAP reports. The carrier on Thursday blamed months of coronavirus lockdowns and travel restrictions from the Delta outbreak for the estimated first-half loss in underlying earnings. The earnings are due in February. Qantas leaders were happier to talk about improving travel demand, and a $802m Sydney land sale, which have helped reduce massive pandemic debt. The executives expect net debt will be $5.65bn by the end of December. Chief executive Alan Joyce said customers were booking domestic and overseas travel, despite concerns about the latest virus variant. The news of the Omicron variant had a clear impact on people’s confidence to book international trips in particular, but we haven’t seen large numbers of cancellations. Many customers have strong intentions to travel if their border and quarantine settings are right, and in the past few days we have seen intakes improve. Joyce said the focus next year was making sure the business was cash-flow positive. We just need to generate cash. For us, 2022 is not about making money. It’s about generating positive cash flows and repairing the balance sheet by building revenue. We’re near the debt target we set for ourselves. The airline has slashed thousands of jobs since the pandemic began as bookings spiralled due to virus rules. The carrier also revealed it has chosen Airbus planes for its domestic narrow-body fleet after a tender. Forty planes from the Airbus A320neo and A220 families will be ordered by the end of the financial year. The value of the deal was not revealed. Joyce said the planes were quieter and produced fewer carbon emissions. ASX shares in the company were down 1.75% to $4.78 at 11.35am. In more news coming out of Victoria, major collision investigation unit detectives are looking into the circumstances surrounding the death of a Drouin man who fell from the back of a utility tray overnight. The 21-year-old man was in a ute driving along Silbys Road in Darnum at about 10.15pm when the incident occurred. He was airlifted to hospital with life-threatening injuries, but sadly died a short time later: At this early stage it appears four males and a female, all believed aged in their late teens to early 20s, were involved in the incident. Detectives are investigating one youth may have been travelling on the bonnet of the ute, two in the tray and another two inside the cabin. Police have spoken with the other people involved and a crime scene has been established. A 20-year-old Darnum woman was interviewed by police and has been released without charge pending further investigation. Detectives will remain at the scene. Six people are being treated by paramedics after a car crashed into a Northcote shop in Melbourne’s north earlier this morning. Police are currently on the scene. Emergency services were called to the Northcote Plaza shopping precinct just before 11am, after a car drove into the Suzanne Grae clothing store. Victoria Police: Ambulance paramedics are treating six pedestrians which were struck by the vehicle. Their injuries appear to be non life-threatening. The driver of the vehicle, who also sustained non life-threatening injuries, is currently assisting police at the scene with their enquiries. Police have partially evacuated some occupants of the Separation Street precinct to allow for structural assessment. The incident isn’t being treated as deliberate. Absolutely awful news coming out of Tasmania. One child has died due to the jumping castle incident at Hillcrest Primary School. There will be a media conference at 1pm. A statement from police: Emergency services remain on the scene at Hillcrest primary School in Devonport after a wind event because a jumping castle to lifted into the air. Several children fell from a height of about 10m, around 10am this morning and are currently receiving treatment. Sadly one child has died, and a number of others are critical. Our thoughts are with the families and loved ones of those involved. No further details about the fatality can be released at the stage for privacy reasons. Several helicopters are responding to the incident to transport patients, please avoid the area to allow emergency services to respond. 7Cricket has provided official confirmation Cummins will not play in today’s Ashes test. Smith will captain, and Neser will make his debut. What a whirlwind! Read the full story here: Images are emerging of an incident at a jumping castle in Tasmania. Police have asked people to avoid the area. As noted earlier in our blog, NSW treasurer Matt Kean has a few challenges, given the Covid disruptions blowing out the budget deficit. A couple of other things came out of this morning’s gathering. One is that the budget projections, including a return to surplus (fingers crossed, and more) by 2024-25, do not imply a change to the treatment of stamp duty. That’s understandable since the budget can only work on current policies. Kean’s predecessor Dominic Perrottet, who is now premier, had called for a switch from stamp duty to a land tax as part of a major fiscal reform. Let’s just say that as premier, some of that reforming zeal has dissipated, and it no longer looms as a priority. Watch this space, though, for a major policy soon that will be aimed at increasing participation in the workplace, particularly for women. Kean, meanwhile, has retained his enthusiasm for the environment and climate action. He told a breakfast hosted by the Business Council of Australia: Make no mistake, the biggest thing that will determine our nation’s prosperity and our future is our ability to grab the enormous opportunities that are coming as a result of these huge global megatrends. “The carbon risk that is posed to the communities like the Hunter and the Illawarra is significant, and that’s coming whether right-wing shock jocks like it or not,” Kean said, using words we don’t hear very often from either major party in federal politics: We need to make sure that we are managing that risk but also setting ourselves up to grab these huge opportunities ... the gold rush will look like a blip if we can get on board the green energy transition. Kean is also the state’s energy and environment minister, and it will be interesting to see how much of those portfolios he retains after the coming cabinet reshuffle. The Australian’s Peter Lalor is reporting Patrick Cummins will be out, Steve Smith will be made captain and Michael Neser of the Adelaide Strikers will take his place in today’s Ashes test following reports Cummins was listed as a close contact of a confirmed Covid case. Premier Steven Marshall earlier said SA Health was “working with” Cricket Australia. I only just heard the news about Pat Cummins while I was in the launch this morning ... He’s our captain, a great player, but of course SA Health are going to have to work through those issues with Cricket Australia. We haven’t got too much hours now until the first ball is delivered. A senior Victorian police officer who misused his position to involve himself in historical sexual offence investigations into associates of his church acted “wholly inappropriately”, the state’s anti-corruption commission has found. The Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption Commission found that former Victoria Police Superintendent Paul Rosenblum drafted a letter, intended to be signed by an alleged victim of a sexual offence, requesting police take no further action with its investigation, and accessed and disclosed police information to people associated with or involved in the investigation without authorisation. A special report into Rosenblum was tabled by Ibac in parliament on Thursday. The Ibac commissioner, Robert Redlich QC, said that while Rosenblum was driven by a genuine desire to support his church associates through a difficult period, his actions were wholly inappropriate and represented a clear conflict of interest. Redlich said: His actions also risked undermining community confidence in the independence and integrity of Victoria Police. His seniority further exacerbated the seriousness of his conduct. In April 2019, Rosenblum resigned from the force while under investigation. He was charged by Ibac in October 2019. In March 2021, he pleaded guilty to unauthorised access of police information and was sentenced to a three-month adjourned undertaking with no conviction recorded. He was also ordered to make a $10,000 contribution to Beyond Blue and a $10,000 contribution to the Blue Ribbon Foundation. Two hours and 23 minutes (AEST) until the Ashes. No word yet on Pat Cummins but SA Water is absolutely raring to go: NSW treasurer Matt Kean has defended his state’s mid-year budget projection despite a cloud hanging the state’s accounts because of a wrangle over the treatment of $40b of rail assets, as explained here. After a breakfast speech, the new treasurer (who has had just over two months in the role) was asked if the figures in the review could be trusted since the auditor general Margaret Crawford is so far refusing to sign off on the state’s 2020-21 finances. Kean’s mid-year review, for instance, has lifted the expected deficit this fiscal year to $19.5b, up from the budget’s forecast last June of an $8.6b shortfall. Thank the Delta Covid strain and the lockdowns for most of that blowout. Anyway, the NSW government is still projecting a surplus by 2024-25. Why the rail assets matter is the changed treatment of payments into equity injections after RailCorp was turned into the Transport Asset Holding Entity (TAHE). Kean, though, said he had “full confidence” in both sides of the standoff – ie his treasury department and the audit office. “We’re working through some very complex accounting issues and as a former auditor myself, I know that this is exactly the type of process that we go through to ensure that the people of New South Wales can have confidence in the state’s finances,” he said, adding: “I’m confident that these issues will be resolved very shortly.” Kean was expected to be keeping an eye on the state’s upper house inquiry into TAHE, which was expected to start at 10.30am with a renewed grilling by committee members of treasury secretary Mike Pratt. A power surge, though, has held up proceedings, as has partial streaming that has only been working for those within the NSW parliament. Officials are trying to fix the feed and may postpone the start until noon, and anyone watching will have to do it from parliament itself. Queensland chief health officer John Gerrard expects Covid cases to continue to rise across the state. Details on the cases will become “increasingly complex” and as time goes by “details will change on how we present the data”. Another four potential cases are currently under investigation. Gerrard: 12 of the cases mentioned by the minister were linked to interstate travel, all fully vaccinated. One case was detected in the community, locally acquired and at this stage we have not identified a link for that particular patient. Two cases are known contacts of another case or cluster, one on the Gold Coast and one in the Darling Downs region. One was vaccinated and one was partially vaccinated. We’ve got one patient who was potentially infected for three days but there’s contact tracing proceeding. Three cases are linked to overseas travel and detected in quarantine, one in home quarantine and two in hotel quarantine. One had travelled from Doha and two had travelled from Africa. It has been confirmed that the Townsville traveller who was on two confirmed flights that were listed as exposure sites had the Omicron variant of the virus. Yvette D’Ath: I can advise that we have results back on genomic sequences and we have identified three Omicron cases here in Queensland. One is the Townsville gentleman, who had been on those two flights that we had listed as exposure sites. Thankfully, this person has had limited exposure beyond known flights and the airport. The other one is a female from Rochdale South, who we have previously reported had been in Newcastle. She was infectious in the community in Queensland on 12 and 13 December. And the third one is an international aircrew who has not been out in the community. More on the cases detected in Queensland. Of the 22 new cases, 18 have been infectious in the community, two have been detected in home quarantine and two have been detected in hotel quarantine and arrived from overseas. One of the positive cases visited an aged care facility and has since tested positive. The aged care facility is in Holland Park and staff and residents are being tested. Health minister Yvette D’Ath: Those detected in the community are located in Brisbane south, Brisbane north, Darling Downs, Gold Coast, Sunshine Coast, Townsville, West Moreton and Wide Bay regions. Most of those people have been infectious in the community between one and seven days. The source of the virus for the majority of those people is primarily interstate travel but some, of course, are overseas as well. We have 67 active cases now. Tasmanian premier Peter Gutwein is up now, discussing the incident at Hillcrest primary school: I’ve been made aware of an incident at Hillcrest primary school this morning, which involved a jumping castle and which unfortunately got away in high winds. People have been, as I understand it seriously injured and we currently have all the relevant emergency services on site. I understand there are serious injuries involved. As further information comes to hand, we will obviously provide it. But as this involves a primary school, Hillcrest primary school, my thoughts are obviously with the people involved, but obviously the parents of the children that have been injured, and with the emergency services, but as we receive further information on what I understand is a very serious matter, we’ll provide that as the day progresses. Quite a sizeable number of New South Wales cases today are in the Hunter New England catchment. Some 267 are in Newcastle, and 213 are from Lake Macquarie. There have been seven new locally acquired cases reported in Queensland, and 12 cases acquired interstate. There have been three new cases acquired overseas. The light rail will return in a limited capacity to the inner west of Sydney from February, with a full service to come from mid year. The foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, says she warmly welcomes Joe Biden’s nomination of Caroline Kennedy to be the ambassador to Australia. Responding to the US president’s announcement overnight – which is still subject to US senate confirmation, and which was widely speculated months in advance – Payne issued a statement: Ms Kennedy has a distinguished career in law, the arts, education and philanthropy. If confirmed by the United States Senate, she would bring deep political networks in Washington and a keen understanding of our Indo-Pacific region, including from her time as US Ambassador to Japan. She would be the second woman to serve in the role. Ms Kennedy’s nomination comes as we mark and celebrate the 70th year of the ANZUS Treaty. Our Alliance has never been more central to the interests of both countries. As US Secretary of State Antony Blinken and I discussed last week in Liverpool, we look forward to having a Senate-confirmed Ambassador in place in Canberra in light of the scope and scale of the shared challenges we face. Payne said she acknowledged and thanked chargé d’affaires Mike Goldman for his ongoing engagement. He has been serving as the most senior diplomat at the US embassy while the ambassador post is unfilled. James Merlino out touting Victoria’s high achievers while simultaneously reassuring the youth that everything is ultimately meaningless – (except for Pat Cummins’ Covid status). Police and emergency services are responding to an incident at Hillcrest primary school in Tasmania “involving a jumping castle and wind” that has caused serious injuries. A rescue helicopter is on its way to the scene. The department of health has described it as a “major incident”. It is being reported several children have fallen from a height of about 10 metres after the jumping castle lifted into the air. If Pat Cummins is a close contact of a confirmed Covid case, “must stay in quarantine until the date provided” by SA Health, according to its website. The match is less than four hours away. This is an an absolute disaster for fans of Test cricket. The Sydney Morning Herald is reporting that Pat Cummins has been identified as a close contact of a positive case, just hours before the first day of the Adelaide Test is due to go ahead. Albanese: I’ll say this to the prime minister - there might be a divide on this street depending upon what side you’re on over whether you have access to support from the Federal Government for discretionary grants. But I pay the same rate of tax on that side of the street as you do on this side of the street. And that’s why this is corrupt. That’s why this has to be called out. That’s why this has to be stopped. Earlier this morning, Albanese was touting Labor’s plan to establish an independent National Anti-Corruption Commission: Anthony Albanese turns to federal government grants funding: I want to welcome you to Hammond Park in Ashfield. We’re in the electorate of Reid. Just across the road there is the electorate of Grayndler. They are very similar communities. You can’t tell the community based upon what side of the road you’re on, but for this government that looks at the electoral map, they’re very different in terms of the approach. On this side of the road, you have some $14.8m of community infrastructure funding from this government through the grants. On the other side of the road in my electorate of Grayndler, you have $700,000. So if you live on this side of the road, you are more than 20 times more likely to get government support than if you live just across the road in the same suburb ... This is a bankrupt government. It’s a government that has lost its moral compass ... imagine how bad they would be if they got a fourth term ... it is just extraordinary the action that has been taken. And every day, we get a reminder of why we need a national anti-corruption commission. More from Anthony Albanese’s doorstop in Ashfield, which began with his welcoming of Caroline Kennedy as Joe Biden’s nominee to be US ambassador: Caroline Kennedy is, of course, from a famous family, as JFK and Jackie’s daughter. But she also has served as a diplomat to Japan in the region and is a powerful figure in the Democratic party of which, of course, the Australian Labor party has particularly good relations. So I welcome this nomination ... We’ve always had good relations with the United States. They’re our most important ally. But in addition to that, we have a lot of work to do in the future. A lot of work on climate change where President Biden’s vision is similar to the vision that I have and that an incoming Labor government would look forward to working on climate change as an important national security issue in the Indo-Pacific region. Good news for our fine NZ friends: The US embassy Canberra is up and about: Meanwhile, Anthony Albanese is out and about at Hammond Park in Sydney’s Ashfield this morning, hitting out at federal government grants funding. Albanese’s seat of Grayndler received $718,000 in grants over three years. While neighbouring Liberal-held Reid, a highly marginal seat, received almost $14.8m in discretionary grants, including money to a Presbyterian school to create a breeding pond for native turtles. Over in the world of weather, a number of flood warnings have again been issued for the Lachlan River. The competition regulator says it won’t oppose a $40bn merger of BHP’s oil and gas assets with pure play fossil fuel company Woodside. Australian Competition and Consumer Commission chair Rod Sims said the regulator had looked closely at the deal because it combines two of the four biggest suppliers of natural gas to the domestic market. The review focused on gas supply in WA, where the two companies compete. Sims: We found that post-acquisition, Woodside would continue to face competition from a range of suppliers of domestic gas, including major producers Chevron and Santos, and from several other smaller suppliers including Shell and ExxonMobil. Woodside’s share of domestic gas after the acquisition will be approximately 20%. In Western Australia, gas exporters are required to reserve the equivalent of 15% of their export production for the domestic market, ensuring that domestic gas will continue to be available from Woodside and BHP Petroleum’s export assets, and from a range of other competitors. The deal will clear out most of BHP’s carbon-intensive assets – after the merger, it will be left with the Mount Arthur thermal coalmine in NSW, which it is trying to sell, and some coking coal assets in Queensland. There’s been another exposure site in Newcastle: Over in Brisbane, health minister Yvette D’Ath and chief health officer Dr John Gerrard will hold a press conference at 10am AEST. Victoria police have just released their latest Crime Statistics Agency data. There was a 10% decrease of overall offences in the 12 months to September 2021 compared with the previous year. Burglaries decreased to their lowest levels in 10 years – in large part due to residents spending more time at home. Robberies were also at a record 10-year low, dropping by 26.6%, and theft decreased by 14.5%. In drug-related offending there was a 16% decrease for drug dealing and trafficking, and drug use and possession reduced by 18.4%. Opportunities to obtain drugs via festivals, clubs and so forth in part explained the drop, but the detection of offences related to cultivating and manufacturing drugs increased by 15.4%. In more sombre news, family violence order breaches rose by 7.8%, and stalking, harassment and threatening behaviour was also up, by 10.6%. More than half of all assaults were family violence-related. Meanwhile, there are some sizeable waiting times for Covid tests in the ACT. Holt, Kambah and Nicholls are reporting the shortest waiting times, if you’re in need of getting tested. More on Joe Biden’s nomination of Caroline Kennedy, from Daniel Hurst. It had been widely speculated that Biden was considering nominating Kennedy but the move was only confirmed on Wednesday evening US time. As with all such moves, the nomination is subject to confirmation by the US senate, so she will not be in place right away. Announcing the nomination, the White House cited Kennedy’s experience as ambassador to Japan from 2013 to 2017. The appointment comes at a time when Australia and the US have been deepening their military ties amid increasing concern about what they see as China’s more assertive conduct. Foreign affairs minister Marise Payne discussed tensions across the Taiwan Strait during a meeting with US secretary of state Antony Blinken in the UK on Saturday. Meeting on the the sidelines of a G7 foreign and development ministers’ meeting in Liverpool, Payne and Blinken also “agreed on the importance of having a senate-confirmed ambassador in place in Canberra as soon as possible in light of the scope and scale of shared challenges we face”. Without an ambassador in place in Canberra, senior diplomat Mike Goldman has been serving as the US embassy’s chargé d’affaires. The ambassador under the Trump administration, Arthur Culvahouse, left Canberra in January in line with convention. New South Wales has reported a record 1,742 new Covid cases. Numbers were expected to rise overnight but have jumped significantly in the past two weeks. There have been no deaths. Victoria has reported 1,622 new Covid cases and, sadly, nine more deaths. Clinical epidemiologist Nancy Baxter was on ABC Breakfast earlier warning that the Omicron variant would spread incredibly quickly without restrictions. She said 25,000 cases could arrive in New South Wales “sooner” than the end of January that health minister Brad Hazzard predicted: We don’t need to look outside of Australia. We can look in Australia and see what is happening in New South Wales. About a week ago they had 200 or so cases and yesterday they had 1,300 or 1,400 cases and today I hear it is going to be higher. We don’t need to look outside Australia to see how quickly it has grown. I am not a modeller, I just want to say that but if it is doubling every two to three days and we are already over 2,000 today in New South Wales, I have no idea where this could go, given that we are relaxing things. When you look at Europe and Canada, they are increasing their restrictions, not decreasing them now that they are seeing Omicron coming. There is nowhere else in the world that has decided to say we have this new variant coming that seems to spread much faster, so let’s relax restrictions. Here is the full White House statement on Kennedy: Caroline Kennedy served as U.S. ambassador to Japan from 2013-2017. She played a critical role in the commemoration of the 70th anniversary of the end of World War II culminating in the historic visits of president Obama to Hiroshima and prime minister Abe to Pearl Harbor. She advanced the realignment of U.S. Forces in Okinawa, promoted women’s empowerment in Japan, and increased student exchange between the U.S and Japan. In 2017, she founded the International Poetry Exchange Project to virtually connect students in Japan, Korea, the Philippines, and the Bronx through the power of the spoken word. In November 2021, she was awarded the Grand Cordon of the Rising Sun, the highest honor for which foreigners are eligible, for her efforts to strengthen the US-Japan alliance. Prior to her time in Japan, Kennedy was at the forefront of education reform efforts in New York City, creating public private partnerships to promote arts education, school libraries, and performing arts spaces. She served as the CEO of the Office of Strategic Partnerships at the NYC Department of Education from 2002-2004, vice chair of the Fund for Public Schools from 2002-2010, and served on the Board of New Visions for Public Schools. An attorney and author, Kennedy has published 11 New York Times best-selling books on law, civics, and poetry and serves as the Honorary President of the John F. Kennedy Library Foundation. She is a director of the Carnegie Corporation and a member of the Board of Advisors of the International Rescue Committee. The White House has announced that Joe Biden has picked Caroline Kennedy to be ambassador to Australia. Kennedy is the only surviving child of John F Kennedy and Jacqueline Onassis. She previously served as ambassador to Japan during the Obama administration. More on treasurer Josh Frydenberg’s mid-year budget, to be released today. AAP reports that Frydenberg claims 1m jobs will be created over the next four years as a result of the Morrison government’s economic strategy. Economists expect the mid-year budget will see an improved budget position against the backdrop of a rapidly recovering economy. Deloitte Access Economics expects deficits will have improved by $103bn over the four-year budget estimates. This would see the 2021-22 budget deficit reduced to $91.1bn from $106.6bn forecast in the May budget, and to $61.8bn in 2022-23 rather than $99.3bn. This could be Frydenberg’s last major economic showpiece should prime minister Scott Morrison head to the polls in March rather than May, and before the 2022-23 budget planned for 29 March. Frydenberg: Saving jobs and creating jobs is a top economic priority. It’s a pathway to a stronger economy, an improved budget bottom line while being fundamental to a healthy and prosperous society. Labor frontbencher Tanya Plibersek pushed back against the estimated jobs figure, saying there was no use in creating 1m jobs if there are no skilled workers to fill the positions, imploring the treasurer to invest further in tertiary education. Former Labor leader Bill Shorten added that any wage increase announcement must be taken with a large grain of salt. He told Nine: Mr Frydenberg is telling some Christmas fairytales about wages. For the last eight years wages have basically been in the toilet, they haven’t increased at all. Whenever the government says they are going to go up, they don’t go as far up as the government promises. Frydenberg is touting a new wave of economic activity off the back of tax cuts and business investment incentives as the baton is passed to the private sector to create more jobs and secure the recovery: Business and consumer confidence is up, job ads are at the highest level in 13 years. Very strong investment coming from businesses big and small – a sign that people have confidence in our economic recovery. Forecasts in the mid-year economic and fiscal outlook are expected to see the unemployment rate cut to 4.5% by the June quarter of next year compared with the estimate of 5% in the May budget. By the June quarter 2023 it is estimated to be 4.25% rather than the 4.75% predicted seven months ago. If achieved, this would represent the first time since before the 2008-09 global financial crisis that Australia has sustained an unemployment rate of below 5%, and only the second time since the early 1970s. The Canberra Raiders have been struck by Covid: Josh Frydenberg is doing the rounds this morning: It’s well worth reading this story from reporter Christopher Knaus this morning. Almost 3,000 children have been hit with fines of up to $5,000 for minor Covid breaches in New South Wales. Back in Victoria, the Peel Hotel owner Tom McFeely has been on Today after his venue was visited by a positive Omicron case: What people often forget is when you have staff isolating, there’s not that many staff out there. The hospitality industry right now is pretty shortstaffed. When you’re instructed your staff have to isolate, that effectively means you have to close. Federal finance minister Simon Birmingham is appearing on RN Breakfast ahead of today’s midyear budget update, which will show unemployment will be below 5% by mid next year: In Victoria, some 65,000 VCE and VCAL students are receiving their Atar results this morning after completing year 12 amid statewide lockdowns and a global pandemic – no small feat. Some 50,723 students are receiving their VCE – a 98% completion rate, while 14,066 are receiving their VCAL. Some 13,935 students have received at least one study score of 40 or more out of 50. Speaking of borders, Labor MP Bill Shorten appeared on the Today show this morning urging state leaders to be cautious about closing off to states with rising Covid cases in light of the Omicron variant’s spread: I really expect and hope that the borders won’t close and that plans will go ahead. What we need to recognise is Omicron is different to Delta ... we need to accelerate the booster shots right now ... we’ve got to adjust our plans but not wreck Christmas. There’s more evidence of the cost of the Covid pandemic to government finances this morning, with NSW treasurer Matt Kean unveiling his state’s mid-year review at a Sydney breakfast hosted by the Business Council of Australia. The key number is the more than doubling of the projected budget deficit for this the 2021-22 year to $19.5bn, compared with $8.6bn forecast when the budget was laid down in June. That was the same budget then treasurer and now premier Dominic Perrottet declared at the start of his budget speech: “NSW is back.” At that time, Delta was clustering in Sydney and within days the state was locked down. Kean says NSW is “continuing to bounce back from one of the biggest economic shocks the state has faced in generations, with the government’s targeted support measures and strong vaccination rates helping our economy successfully recover”. Despite that much bigger projected deficit, Kean is still forecasting the budget will return to surplus by 2024-25, “with the impact of the Delta outbreak largely contained to the current financial year”. Let’s see how the Omicron variant plays out, with health minister Brad Hazzard predicting yesterday the state could be reporting 25,000 new cases a day by the end of next month. And it remains to be seen whether that return to surplus includes a contribution from the Transport Asset Holdings Entity. This is the financial vehicle at the centre of a standoff between Kean’s Treasury department and the Audit Office. Which side of the ledger will Kean side with is worth keeping an eye on. Good morning everyone. It’s nine days until 25 December and all I want for Christmas is an end to the pandemic. But Covid is continuing to dominate the news. It’s Caitlin Cassidy here and we’re watching Victoria this morning, where some restrictions are to ease today as, concurrently, case numbers are expected to rise. Unvaccinated people will now be allowed into retail stores – where masks will remain compulsory – and deep cleaning requirements will be lifted for gyms, workplaces, theatres and cinemas. New South Wales is also bracing for today’s Covid numbers after recording a high 1,360 new cases on the first day of eased restrictions. Health minister Brad Hazzard yesterday warned case numbers could reach 25,000 by the end of January. Further south, Tasmania has declared all of Sydney, Melbourne, Newcastle and Geelong as high-risk Covid areas after increases in case numbers, including the Omicron variant of concern. It comes just a day after the state reopened its borders to fully vaccinated travellers. People coming from designated high-risk areas must return a negative test in the 72 hours before arriving and present proof at the border. And another royal has tested positive to Covid. Denmark’s Princess Mary is isolating in a wing of the Amalienborg Palace in Copenhagen. It has not been detected among other members of the family. It’s shaping up to be a busy day, so let’s dive in.Preliminary modelling showing Covid cases in New South Wales could hit 25,000 a day by the end of January made headlines on Tuesday after the health minister, Brad Hazzard, cited the figure on the same day as more restrictions were rolled back. While the University of NSW modelling did not take into account increasing booster shots or the potential reintroduction of restrictions if cases grow, Omicron has thrown previous predictions about the efficacy of vaccination and predicted case numbers into disarray. It is becoming clearer that the variant is more infectious and more vaccine-evasive, so how worried should we be? What impact is Omicron having on previous modelling and advice? Early data from South Africa and laboratory data from the Kirby Institute in Australia has found being double-dose vaccinated against Covid-19 does not offer as much protection against symptomatic infection from the Omicron strain as it does for Delta. The South African research analysed 211,000 positive test results from adults aged 18 and up, 41% of whom had received two doses of the Pfizer vaccine, and found protection from Omicron infection was 33%. The Kirby data placed efficacy similarly, at 37%, regardless of whether the vaccine used was AstraZeneca or Pfizer. Encouragingly, the South African data found those who had received two doses of the Pfizer vaccine had 70% protection against severe disease and hospital admission. While this is lower than the 93% protection offered against Delta, 70% is still regarded as very good protection. But it means previous predictions for when a third booster dose of the vaccine might be needed will probably no longer hold. While it had seemed hopeful a booster shot might offer protection for at least one year against the Delta strain, Kirby Institute researchers say it is appearing likely that more frequent ongoing boosters will be needed against Omicron. This is early data and won’t be the final predictions for how Omicron will behave. South Africa also has a unique context, with low vaccination rates but a high number of people who have been previously infected with Covid, leading to higher rates of natural immunity than Australia which may also lead to differences in spread. But the data is an early indicator that will prove useful to groups like the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (Atagi), which advises the government. Guardian Australia contacted the Doherty Institute, which provides modelling to the federal government, to ask whether new modelling for Australia had been completed, but did not receive a response. If Omicron causes milder disease than Delta, won’t hospital rates fall? Not if Omicron is highly infectious and spreads to the most vulnerable too quickly, epidemiologist and public health medicine specialist with the University of Melbourne, Prof Tony Blakely said. “The best-case scenario is that Omicron comes through in a controlled manner, and infects mostly the people who are unvaccinated, but they get a mild illness,” Blakely said. “Some of them will die, though not as many as from Delta, and that will mean our immunity is boosted so that in Australia we’ve all either been vaccinated and boosted, or infected with Covid-19, or both. “Those things together will hopefully get us to a position where we’re very resilient and it’s much easier to live with whatever coronavirus throws at us next. But how to do this in a controlled manner is the big question mark.” A fast peak in cases would lead to hospitals being overwhelmed, he said, because there will always be those who become severely ill or die. It also appears that some treatment options now being heavily relied upon to reduce deaths in vulnerable patients, such as antibody therapies, might not be as effective at disarming the Omicron variant. Should other measures be taken? It would be important to roll out booster shots quickly, Blakely said, and implement measures such as mask-wearing in the meantime to slow and stop the spread among those most susceptible to severe disease such as elderly people, the immunocompromised and the unvaccinated. “We don’t need to wait on more data and modelling to know this is what we need to do,” he said. Director-general of the World Health Organization Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said the world could not rely on vaccines alone, and that other public health measures such as mask-wearing, proper ventilation, hand hygiene and social distancing should not be dismissed yet as countries like Australia reopen. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning He said he was concerned people might dismiss the risk posed by Omicron because it seemed to cause milder disease in most people. “Omicron is spreading at a rate we have not seen with any previous variant,” he said. “Surely we have learned by now that we underestimate this virus at our peril.”In 2017, a white supremacist drove his car headlong into a peaceful group opposing a Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville, Virginia, killing a young woman, Heather Heyer, and injuring dozens of others. There was widespread horror and outrage as footage of broken bodies bouncing off the car was broadcast around the world. But what if the tragedy did not shame local white nationalists, but embolden them? Such is the premise of Jocelyn Nicole Johnson’s riveting debut novel, which is set in the near future with the deadly assault in Charlottesville still in living memory. As the novel begins, the nation is already unravelling: ecological and societal disasters loom. There are electricity blackouts and biblical floods, and bigoted “true patriots” with delusional notions of “restoring our legacy” are bent on violence. “The men kept coming,” says the protagonist, an African American student, Da’Naisha, “wielding bright new rage.” My Monticello is weighted from the start with her sense of foreboding. Soon enough, angry white zealots clutching “metal canisters” and swinging “torches topped in flames” descend on her mostly Black neighbourhood, setting homes ablaze. Da’Naisha and her neighbours commandeer a city bus; dodging bullets and shattered glass, they escape the conflagration, taking the road towards the Piedmont mountains. She leads a motley crew of 16 involuntary exiles – including Knox, her attentive white boyfriend, and Ma Violet, her sickly grandmother – who eventually find refuge at Monticello, the former plantation of founding father Thomas Jefferson, now a museum. Fuelled by adrenaline, Da’Naisha seems to have driven them there by chance, but she has a special relationship with Monticello; she’s a descendent of Sally Hemings, the enslaved woman who bore a number of Jefferson’s children. One of her neighbours teases her about the connection: “So y’all are like hood royalty or something”? Da’Naisha notes the irony that the plantation, previously overseen by a man who considered slavery a “moral depravity” yet owned 600 enslaved people, is their one hope of salvation. On each page, My Monticello amplifies William Faulkner’s famous reflection: “The past is not dead. It’s not even past.” At Monticello, these Virginian descendants of enslaved people relish the chance to occupy the pristine plantation house; but they’re both bemused and affronted by the sanitised rendering of its brutal history. Short, precise sentences match the urgency of the story, and this economy seems also to inform the dialogue. Brief exchanges are incomplete; the dialogue at times more closely resembles a series of monologues, as each escapee is consumed with worry about the likely outcome of their situation. There are layers of threat to be endured, from the risk of their hideout being discovered to the temptation to return to Charlottesville to check on their burned-out homes. The fugitives are caught up in waves of heat, physical and emotional. Devin, a childhood sweetheart of Da’Naisha, is filled with anger, not just for the white supremacists but also towards Knox, his replacement in Da’Naisha’s affections. Notwithstanding the fervour of the tale, the narrator’s tone is cool and unruffled, even as she’s riven with the secret of her pregnancy. She yearns to reveal the truth, only to “swallow my confession whole”. Her reticence is the result of a determination not to distract from the group’s priority: survival. Da’Naisha, older than her years, shines with the kind of wisdom evident in her reflections on African Americans’ inherited trauma – “I was born knowing.” Throughout the novel, there are echoes of the historical resistance of African Americans outnumbered and outgunned by foes, yet fighting back. As Da’Naisha’s band of walking wounded brothers and sisters prepare for one last stand, you fear the worst. My Monticello is a bleak story but reading it elicits the same kind of sensation that comes from listening to a poignant blues song: there is pleasure in its creation without denying the pain of the subject. • My Monticello is published by Harvill Secker (£12.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.1) After playing superbly to finish runner-up in the UK Open, Luca Brecel continued his rich vein of form by thrashing John Higgins in the final of the Scottish Open. He features in this roundup of the best shots of the competition, but what will stick in the memory is this brilliant no-look black when clearing up for the final time. 2) In a similar vein, there’s never a bad time to enjoy Adrian Lewis’ no-look 180, and here’s an equally good one from Gerwyn Price. 3) “Violence” and “table tennis” aren’t words one often sees in the same sentence, but here’s some table tennis violence – in a kids’ match, along with various other table-tennis tantrums. 4) Thirty-five years ago this week, Dennis Bergkamp made his Ajax debut aged just 17. Also in the team were Danny Blind, Frank Rijkaard, Aron Winter, John Bosman and others, and they beat Roda 2-0. Here are the highlights of the game, here’s a beautiful Bergkamp goal from 1989 against Den Bosch, here’s one against Vitesse from the former Arsenal man, here’s another against Vitesse from 1993, here he is sending the Feyenoord keeper for some fries and mayonnaise, also in 1993, here’s one at PSV in 1993 and here’s a Bergkamp at Ajax compilation. 5) The Ashes are now in full swing, so here’s Allan Border on Australia’s 1993 tour, offering Craig McDermott some friendly advice, here’s his first press conference as Australia captain, and here he is taking a blinding catch to dismiss New Zealand’s John Reid. And while we’re on a cricketing tip, here’s Shaun Pollock ripping one through Rahul Dravid’s famously flimsy defences and here’s a compilation of Abdul Qadir googlies. 6) And to finish, let’s enjoy some Roy Keane on John Delaney. Our favourites from below the line last week 1) Ronnie O’Sullivan in fine 147 form. 2) Larry Bird v Bill Laimbeer. 3) Don’t mess with Sam Kerr. 4) South Korea celebrity five-a-side. 5) The Ashes at its best. 6) Johnny Most, the host with the … errrr … most. Spotters’ badges: denothemeno, germit, whobroughtoranges, Tony06, budhudnut. Next week, it’s our review of 2021, alternative or not. Please send in your favourite clips of the past 12 months. Here are some to start you off … Guardian YouTube football channel Do subscribe, if you fancy. Guardian YouTube sport channel Likewise.Police are considering appealing against the sentence given to the former model Katie Price after she avoided a jail term for drink-driving following a crash near her home. Price, 43, was handed a 16-week suspended sentence at Crawley magistrates court on Wednesday after she admitted drink-driving while disqualified and without insurance. District judge Amanda Kelly told Price she was unable to send her to prison because she had complied with requirements of the court, including attending a rehabilitation centre, adding: “The public may be appalled to hear that I can’t send you to jail today.” Supt James Collis, the head of roads policing for Sussex police and Surrey police, said officers were looking into whether an appeal could be launched over the sentence. He said the sentencing, “as the judge explained, could have and should have been much worse and, in our view, Price is extremely lucky not to be spending Christmas behind bars”. “Given the circumstances and her history of motoring offences, it’s clear she did not consider the risk of her actions to the wider public or the implications for her own family,” he added. “We are now exploring whether we can appeal this sentence.” The sentence was criticised on the front page of the Sun newspaper on Thursday under the headline “What Price justice?” Jonathan Karani, prosecuting, told the court that Price was involved in the collision on the B2135 near Partridge Green, West Sussex, on 28 September. Police arrived shortly afterwards and she admitted she should not have been driving, the court heard. Price admitted the offences in a hearing at the same court on 29 September. At that hearing, her sentencing was adjourned on the condition that she have treatment at the Priory Centre, not commit any further offences, and be banned from driving in the interim. Price was given a 16-week jail sentence suspended for 12 months, a two-year driving ban, 100 hours’ unpaid work, 20 sessions of rehabilitation work with probation, and was ordered to pay £213. Kelly told the court that Price already owed £7,358 in relation to previous offences. She told the defendant: “You appear to think that you are above the law. “You have one of the worst driving records I have seen. You have been banned from driving on five occasions. “The public may be appalled to hear that I can’t send you to jail today. But the law says that when a person has complied with the terms of their release then you have a legitimate expectation not to be sent to prison today, even though you deserve to spend Christmas behind bars.”Splashing tales from British watersports have won both categories of the 2021 Football School/Guardian Young Sportswriter of the Year award. James Sarfas, age nine and from Reading, Berkshire, won the category for children aged from seven to nine for an article about the gold-medal exploits of Tom Daley and Matty Lee at the 2020 Tokyo Olympics, while Isla Trude Callard, age 12 and from York, was judged best in the age 10-12 category for an emotive celebration of the Paralympic swimmer Ellie Simmonds. The judges for the award, now in its third year, included the former England rugby player Catherine Spencer, the cyclist Tao Geoghegan Hart, the golfer Ian Poulter, the former England striker Rachel Yankey, the former Germany defender Per Mertesacker, the Olympic and world 400m gold medallist Christine Ohuruogu, the Arsenal defender Lotte Wubben-Moy, and the England cricketer Jack Leach. The latter was the subject of a winning entry last year. The competition asked entrants to write a story of up to 600 words about a sports event or an athlete. The prize for each of the winners includes having their article published by the paper and having a writing workshop at their school with a Guardian sportswriter. The judges were full of praise for the contestants: “I can’t actually believe these pieces were written by [people in] those age groups. It’s incredible,” said Poulter. Catherine Spencer said of Safras’s story: “I could picture the scene and felt like I was there. It was a great balance between evoking emotion and delivering the facts.” Of Callard’s piece she added: “The article captures what sport is about to me; it inspired me and reminded me why I love sport.” The final shortlist included stories on cricket, mountain-climbing, tennis and lacrosse. Samuel Mitting, who wrote about the Tour de France, was the runner-up in the age seven to nine category while Alex Raeburn, who wrote about Tom Daley, took the same spot for the age 10-12 award. Marcus Christenson, the Guardian’s football special projects editor, said: “Young people have an extraordinary capacity to tell it how it is – and do it in a very infectious way. The pieces from our two winners are perfect examples of that, but they weren’t the only ones to shine. The overall quality of the young writers was heartening to see.” Alex Bellos and Ben Lyttleton, authors of the Football School book series, added: “The quality of writing in this year’s competition was outstanding. We were bowled over by the passion of each writer. The future of sportswriting looks very exciting!” The Football School/Guardian Young Sportswriter of the Year award will be held again next year. Football School is a book series for readers aged 7-13. The latest in the series is Terrific Teams: 50 True Stories of Football’s Greatest Sides. For more information on the competition visit www.footballschool.coRadwan Ghazi Moumneh has had a hand in some of the most astonishing experimental music this side of the millennium, both behind the scenes as recording engineer at Montreal studio Hotel2Tango and on stage fronting his own project, Jerusalem in My Heart. The Lebanese artist merges folk instrumentation and field recordings with abyssal drones and tectonic electro-acoustics, forming a foundation upon which his grave, guttural vocals are sung in Arabic. On Qalaq, he inverts the orchestral premise of his prior LP, choosing instead to collaborate with avant garde peers in a remote, individuated and turn-based capacity – one that invites each guest artist to interpret the record’s titular theme of deep worry and anxiety for Lebanon. The result is an album that’s as defiant and visceral as it is vulnerable. It doesn’t open so much as it explodes, with Moumneh’s distorted laments tersely rattled by the shellshock blastbeats of drummer Greg Fox. This destructive, damaged beginning haunts the rest of the album like a spectre: Moumneh’s agitated buzuq shredding spars with intercepted transmissions, relentless electronics and the might of the Turkish davul drum; He shares a phantasmic tape-loop duet with Lucrecia Dalt; Abenaki artist-activist Alanis Obomsawin even sings a lullaby for his children – but the threat of the next explosion courses through each moment, each thought on Moumneh’s mind. This was a record planned long before the pandemic, long before the corruption-induced blast in Beirut last year, its timeliness underlined by the inevitability of horror during escalating crisis. Qalaq stands as an essential expression of this pain, bearing witness to a manufactured apocalypse unleashed upon place and people.A long-serving coach in Gabon is facing claims he raped, groomed and exploited young players, the Guardian can reveal. Alleged victims claim that Patrick Assoumou Eyi – known as “Capello” – abused boys in his previous role as the head coach of Gabon’s under-17 team and in his current role as the technical director for La Ligue de l’Estuaire, the country’s highest league. One former player who was coached by Eyi said that the coach would lure alleged victims to his home, which he called the “Garden of Eden”. Some victims have alleged that Eyi also provided boys for other figures in football to abuse. Eyi left his role with the country’s youth sides in 2017 but continues to work with young players at La Ligue de l’Estuaire. He has not responded directly to the Guardian’s questions about the claims. One former official at Fegafoot, Gabon’s football federation, claimed he tried to raise concerns regarding allegations of sexual abuse in relation to Eyi in a board meeting in 2019 and was dismissed from his post as a result. Fegafoot denies that claim. Alleged victims say they have not contacted the police in Gabon because they do not have confidence in the justice system. A complaint over the allegations of sexual abuse has been registered with Fifa by the international players union, Fifpro, which said it was deeply concerned about the allegations. “Our preliminary inquiries yielded consistent evidence from credible witnesses who all tell of an ongoing and long-embedded practice of forcing young players into sexual relationships as a pre-condition for footballing opportunities. “If these allegations are indeed true, it is yet further evidence that football is being consistently exploited, across leagues and continents, as a forum for abusers to access, groom, extort and assault players. More must be done to prevent this horrific abuse and we call on football’s governing bodies to act as a matter of urgency.” Several alleged victims have spoken to the Guardian. One alleged victim who played for Gabon’s under-17 side between 2015 and 2017 claimed he was abused several times by the coach during his career with the national team. “He forced me to have sexual relations with him,” said the player. “That was the condition to stay in the national team. At the time, I left my village in order to help my family. I was living in the capital [Libreville] and becoming a professional footballer was the only way to get out of misery. So I did what I had to do to help them.” He added: “Capello raped so many boys. He sometimes went to the countryside to find new ones. He took advantage of poverty and also gave some boys to other officials. In our national team, the majority had to give sex. That’s the reality of Gabonese football for decades but no one can shut down the system. Predators are too numerous … we suffered hell.” Two more alleged victims claimed Eyi abused them when they were under the age of 18 and attending an academy called Académie Club de Libreville in Akanda, a suburb of Libreville, between 2017 and 2019. “Sometimes, he took some kids to his house, ‘Le Jardin d’Eden’,” one said. “He was very nice to me but every time I saw him he told me I was beautiful. One day, he told me that some of the players gave masturbation … he left his office with a smile. It was like he was sending me a message.” He added: “I had some sexual experiences with Capello, I was obligated to. I quit football, you know. I tried my best for my family and now I live out of the country. I can’t go back.” The other player added: “Capello bought kids from remote provinces or villages with a poor background in the majority. He brainwashed them and made them believe they had to give sexual favours to him. One other coach told us one day: ‘If you want to play with the under-17 national team, you know what you have to do.’” During his playing days, Eyi was a winger who turned to coaching at an early age and developed a reputation for spotting talented young players. He has coached at several clubs as well as Gabon’s national youth teams, and took his nickname as a tribute to Fabio Capello, the Italian who managed England between 2007 and 2012. Eyi has yet to respond directly to questions from the Guardian. However, after repeated attempts to contact him he posted a series of messages on WhatsApp Status that appeared to make reference to the allegations, including one that read: “Those who use lies as a weapon don’t know the reverse on the spiritual side.” A statement from Fegafoot said it had “never registered any complaints relating to any act of this nature”. “To our knowledge, [Eyi] does not have a team and is not appointed to lead any national team. The players you have met should consider also contacting us in order to diligently investigate, because we confirm that such facts must be denounced in court and to the competent judicial bodies.” Fegafoot’s media officer, Pablo Moussodji Ngoma, made reference to the Guardian’s inquiries in a Facebook post, criticising the allegations for a “weakness of evidence”. “The testimonies of the actor victims, with their names, can dissuade the perpetrators of these abominable acts but we must also allow the judicial bodies and even the courts to punish them,” he wrote. “The rest will be taken as one more communication operation for those who are committed to tarnishing Gabon’s image internationally.” Gabonese football has been beset with issues in recent months, with the former Rennes winger Stéphane N’Guéma and four other former internationals having been arrested last month for protesting over the continued cancellation of the domestic leagues. N’Guéma has since stepped down from his post as the secretary general of the players’ union, whose members say they have not been paid for nearly two years.Thanks to her sweetly seething, Paramore-quoting chart-topper Good 4 U, Olivia Rodrigo hogged the majority of the limelight when it came to this year’s zoomer-led pop-punk revival. It certainly felt like Willow Smith deserved more of a look-in. The 21-year-old’s fourth album swapped the dreamy psychedelic soul of her recent output for a pummelling, hook-riddled, near-perfect collision of pop-punk, emo, alternative rock and metal nu and old. Lately I Feel Everything (LIFE) comes just over a decade since Smith made headlines with her debut single, Whip My Hair, an impressively cool (especially for a 10-year-old) R&amp;B-pop number. For all its quality, its existence was also predicated on her celebrity offspring status – Willow is the daughter of Will and Jada Pinkett Smith – but it would be extremely difficult to make that argument about her latest record. From the grainy closer Breakout – a collaboration with indie band Cherry Glazerr that combines nu-metal vocals with a stadium-rock-into-cantering-punk backdrop via a Kanye interpolation – to the bratty lo-fi interlude F**k You, which has Smith wailing atonally Slits-style over a reggae-adjacent rhythm, this is far from bet-hedging, focus-grouped fare. The lyrics can be a little trite – the euphoric Grow is therapy-speak bingo, Transparent Soul is about fame-hungry hangers-on – but the music is resolutely of the now. That’s partly down to its knowing, very Gen-Z worship of turn-of-the-millennium sounds and figures (Travis Barker, who has become something of a mentor to a new wave of pop-punkers of late, features on three tracks; Avril Lavigne sings on Grow) and partly Willow’s vocal melodies – especially on Gaslight and Xtra – whose subtlety and wending, elliptical nature fuses punk heritage with contemporary R&amp;B. It’s the latter that makes it impossible to dismiss LIFE as zeitgeist-surfing pop: this is the sound of an innovating, idiosyncratic artist, whose talent is now far more interesting than her showbiz backstory.Like a pre-costume superhero learning to control the lightning that pours from his hands, this electric display of youthful mic prowess from the 21-year-old Las Vegas rapper makes for arguably the genre’s best album this year. The lyricism is about what’s newly and immediately in front of him, whether it’s women, money or his own skill. Complicating the spunk and braggadocio, the dominant theme is his desire for trust in a romantic partner, or indeed anyone; the naive tenor of a line like “I feel like everyone I meet confuse my heart” reveals one foot still in childhood. The mentor figure in his coming-of-age tale is Kendrick Lamar, and their track Family Ties has been nominated for two Grammys (Keem is also up for best new artist), but their other collaboration Range Brothers is even better: “Every day, the hate restored and the faith get short,” Lamar warns in a lofty treatise on fame. Keem bats him away: “Fuck that, let me get some too!” Range brothers indeed: like Lamar, what marks Keem out is the span of his skill, and while the elder star may still have the edge in lyricism, political acumen and technicality (and has audibly influenced his young charge’s flow), Keem can sing better, and outstrips Lamar with his gift for vocal melody. There are so many incredible hooks in different modes of catchiness: Drakeian crooning (Lost Souls, Scars), Young Thug or Future-style Atlantan fantasias (Cocoa), Mo Bamba-ish lairy taunting (South Africa), and even the monotone syllables of “du-rag ac-tivity” are a minimalist earworm. Baby Keem is marked for greatness.Last month, Spotify heeded Adele’s insistence that albums should be played in the order their creators intended, and removed the shuffle button as the default play option. While many celebrated the move, south London’s Me Rex now come off as the anarchists of the platform: their debut album Megabear is not so much a record as an interactive experience. Comprising 52 pieces at roughly 30 seconds apiece (the minimum track length required to register a play on Spotify), it is designed to be shuffled at will, thanks to similarities in key and time signature, and paired with a card deck and randomised website to offer paths through the music. You’re not going to find any breakout singles here, but rather a commitment to a journey, a choose-your-own-adventure trip through a video-gameworthy soundscape. Novel presentation notwithstanding, it’s a remarkably immersive listen. Shades of midwestern emo mingle with the closer-to-home approach of Los Campesinos! or Frightened Rabbit, weaving diffidence and careful enunciation into strange, tattoo-worthy mantras of hope and pain: “Sickness and discontent made glorious autumn again,” Myles McCabe sings on Distillate. He frequently returns to the imagery of a river, letting it flow through him and cleansing whatever sin he appears to fear. Left broadly open for the listeners’ interpretation, there’s something almost religious in the ritual, a catharsis far greater than the sum of its parts. In the streaming age, the format of the album is undoubtedly worthy of protection. But who’s to say you can’t still have some fun with it?Billy Strings’ third solo album dwells on revelations that befell the Michigan bluegrass punk as he reached his late 20s, about heartbreak, America and the roots of his former addictions and self-destructive tendencies. It is beautifully written (“There’s a poison sickness in my heart and I don’t trust the ashes of my mind,” he sings on The Fire on My Tongue), often puppyishly tender and delivered in an open-hearted voice made for spreading the good news, one filled with humility and awe. Renewal may have a similarly eye-opening effect on the listener, particularly those not naturally inclined to seek out new bluegrass releases. Guitarist Strings is known for his incandescent live improvisations, and there is plenty of that agility here: Secrets is scampering and fleet; the quizzical Ice Bridges, in which he parries with fiddle player John Mailander, practically blurs into one vibrating golden seam. His workouts are characterful, never showy. But the album also takes advantage of the studio, particularly on some staggering epics. Heartbeat of America is grave and dramatic, banjo, strings and mandolin plying shuddering takes on a sad refrain that gives way to a dubbed-out mid-section; halfway through its six minutes, Strings lets out his frustrated protest song about the alienation inherent in his country’s working culture. Better still is Hide and Seek, nine minutes of restless exploration delivered through a furrowed brow, climaxing with shredding fiddle and Strings’ recitation of text messages sent by a friend before their death by suicide: “Incredible light I’m gonna find / Where I don’t have to worry any more.” It’s a moment of release for the friend and those they left behind, testament to the complex humanity that runs through this bold, beautiful album. • This review was updated on 16 December 2021 to more accurately reflect that Strings plays guitar, not banjo as previously suggested.From the title, you might think you know what to expect from LA musician Marley Munroe’s debut album as Lady Blackbird. It conjures up thoughts of Hendrix-ish guitars, P-Funk grandiloquence, Afrofuturism. But the old one about judging a book by its cover remains as true as ever. There are moments of intensity here: rumbling drums and cinematic strings underpin her version of the James Gang’s Collage; the title track, a self-styled “Jackson Pollock jam”, is certainly atmospheric, closing the record with mantric massed vocals, lo-fi organ and an echoing percussive clatter that faintly recalls the sound of Dr John’s Gris-Gris. But for the most part, Black Acid Soul is musically understated, stark and rooted in jazz: bass, piano or guitar, occasional drums and Munroe’s extraordinary voice, devoid of affectation, filled with ease and growling power. It’s all you need: whether she’s essaying an impossibly beautiful version of Tim Hardin’s It’ll Never Happen Again, performing producer Chris Seefried’s ballad Nobody’s Sweetheart or turning the Voices of East Harlem’s exuberant funk track Wanted Dead or Alive on its head – reworking it as a sparse, eerie ballad called Beware the Stranger – the results are utterly haunting. Before she became Lady Blackbird, Munroe tried her hand at alt-rock and R&amp;B: listening to Black Acid Soul, you’re struck by the sense of an artist who’s finally found her calling. It takes serious cojones to take on Nina Simone’s Blackbird, but her version is raw and sublime. Maybe the “acid” in the title makes perfect sense after all: these are songs and performances that burn deep into you.Real-life villains don’t come more sharply drawn than Alex Murdaugh, a greedy and ghoulish personal injuries lawyer who casts a haunting shadow over the state of South Carolina. For nearly a century, his father and grandfather were the prosecutors for a five-county district while also running a powerful private law firm. But it wasn’t until the small hours of 24 February 2019 that the dark veil over the Murdaugh family’s dealings began to slip. That’s when Alex’s son Paul is alleged to have plowed the family’s 17-foot bay boat into a bridge abutting Parris Island, the nation’s largest Marine recruit depot. Among the three people cast overboard was an ebullient 19-year-old former high school soccer player named Mallory Beach. She was found dead in the murky tidewaters near the crash site after a seven-day search. Before an investigation could prove whether Paul was at the tiller and boating under the influence or confirm witness testimony that Alex obstructed the crash investigation, Paul, 19, and his 52-year-old mother, Maggie, were found shot to death at the family’s 1,800-acre hunting estate on 7 June. Three months later the narrative was further confounded by conflicting reports that Alex had been shot in the back of the head and left for dead on the side of the road. He has since admitted the scene was staged to grease a $10m insurance payout for his other son, Buster – himself rumored to be involved with the unexplained death of a 19-year-old nursing student named Stephen Smith in 2015. This was all before Alex’s partners cut ties amid allegations that he had embezzled the family law firm out of millions, allegedly to fund an insatiable opioid addiction. After that bombshell dropped, Alex was charged with stealing millions more from a settlement meant for the children of his former housekeeper, Gloria Satterfield, who died in a 2018 alleged trip-and-fall accident on their property. Shockingly, these are just the highlights. Today Murdaugh sits in a maximum security jail cell in Columbia, South Carolina, where he faced 53 charges for the faked shooting attempt and for defrauding his clients and could be sentenced to 508 years in prison if convicted on all counts. He also had his law license suspended and remains a named party in six related lawsuits and the focus of at least seven investigations – one led by the FBI and another exploring possible ties to a stateside drug trafficking scheme that was prosecuted by current South Carolina governor Henry McMaster. All the while, the mystery of the murder of his wife and son still hangs over Murdaugh – a person of interest, according to his attorney; Murdaugh denies any involvement in that crime. No weapons have been recovered (although police have confirmed that Paul and Maggie were killed with different guns), and no attackers charged or identified. Most troubling: Murdaugh’s profound influence on the state legal system casts considerable doubt on the prospects for a fair trial. At a 13 December hearing, where a $7m bond was set, the 53-year-old Murdaugh finally spoke. “Things were moving really quickly and really negatively,” he said, explaining the murder-for-hire scheme. “My world was caving in as much as it had three months prior to that particular day … I was in a very bad place.” In less than three years Alex Murdaugh (rhymes with “Relic Sherlock”) has gone from legal specter to leading man in a whodunnit that’s only just beginning to unfold. And there’s no question that the scrutiny on him would be nowhere near this intense if it weren’t for Mandy Matney, the meddling reporter who kept a harsh spotlight trained on the Murdaugh family until they became impossible for anyone to ignore. Murdaugh she wrote “My life turned upside down on 7 June,” Matney tells me on the chilly November evening we meet in downtown Beaufort. The Friday night begins with dinner at Luther’s, the pub where CCTV cameras caught Paul Murdaugh downing lemon drops and Jaeger shots just before taking to the water (ostensibly to circumnavigate roadside DUI checkpoints) and ends with digestifs and coffee on a twinkling restaurant deck off Waterfront Park – the last place those same cameras spied Mallory Beach alive. Around these parts Matney, who turned 31 three days before the Murdaugh double homicide, is our Jessica Fletcher – steadfastly connecting all the dots at FITSNews, the Carolina news hub where she is editorial director. Her hit podcast, Murdaugh Murders, has enthralled the country and has Hollywood scrambling to spin off their own versions of this epic true crime story. When I ask her about the podcast’s weekly production process, she likens it to “putting a puzzle together in a hurricane. I go into my office thinking I’m gonna do a deep dive on the Stephen Smith investigation. And something with the Satterfield [the housekeeper] will pop up. Or something with the boat crash.” The boat crash is how Matney landed on the Murdaugh beat. In February 2019, she was working as the breaking news editor for the 16,000-circulation Island Packet, the Lowcountry’s reluctant paper of record, owning the story even as the Packet’s executive editors failed to see the point. “I’ll never forget being in a meeting in March 2019 my boss saying, ‘I’m sick of the boat crash stories,’” she says. “And what was crazy about that was the boat crash stories were bringing in way more page views than anything else.” Matney thought that her editors’ lack of interest in pursuing the Murdaugh was largely due to the paper’s business model of chasing low-effort clicks, but in retrospect, it’s hard not to wonder if, at best, the paper was cowed by the powerful family or, at worst, they simply didn’t get it. Now that the story is unavoidable, their coverage has been noticeably sympathetic to the Murdaughs. A different journalist might have kept churning out stories about shark sightings (another Matney specialty at the Packet), or bolted for a larger market. But for Kansas City native Matney, who joined the Packet in March 2016, lured by the prospect of working from the beach, local reporting was an opportunity to set down roots. “It wasn’t like she was here for a few years,” says Liz Farrell, a former Packet editor and Day 1 collaborator of Matney’s on the Murdaugh beat. “She embraced the community.” But after a demotion to reporter in 2019, despite leading the paper in page views with a 200,000 monthly average, Matney was finally forced to consider the unthinkable: giving in to her bosses and leaving the Murdaugh story behind for the sake of her career and sanity. Connecting the dots “It became pretty clear to me early on that Mandy not only had a heart for the truth of the story, but also was not intimidated by these powerful people,” says Will Folks, an unlikely ally. A Palmetto State politico with a reputation as a hell raiser, Folks was a spokesperson for former governors Mark Sanford and Nikki Haley – with whom he alleged to having an “inappropriate physical relationship” during her 2010 gubernatorial campaign. (Haley, who went on to be Donald Trump’s ambassador to the UN, has forcefully denied Folks’ claims.) In 2006 Folks launched FITSNews – a kind of subscription-based local Drudge Report that has blossomed into an all-purpose read. On the Murdaugh beat Folks found himself competing with Matney for scoops so often that he would kiddingly offer to hire her away. After her Packet demotion, they stopped joking. She signed on in January 2020, lured by a commitment she never got at the Packet – free rein. “I pride myself on being the first person to openly say that there are three deaths connected to this family,” Matney says, referencing the cases of the nursing student Smith, the housekeeper Satterfield, and boat-crash victim Beach. “That was a scary thing to do, and I got shit for it immediately.” Subsequent investigations didn’t just prove her right; they thickened the plot. Matney was first to publish the department of natural resources case file that provides the most complete picture of the events surrounding the boat crash. She tag-teamed with Folks to break the roadside shooting story and on the subsequent twist that police had traced the knife used to disable Murdaugh’s car back to him, upsetting the alibi his legal team was scrambling to establish. Matney also was first to report the reopening of the Satterfield death investigation and the family’s claims of insurance fraud, which led to yet another news break on 27 new charges against him. Meanwhile, she has owned every recent development in the unsolved death of Stephen Smith, which his mother connects to his being gay. Among other scoops, Matney reported the 40 times the investigation file mentions the Murdaughs. Besides shoe-leather legwork and an indefatigable work ethic, the thing that truly distinguishes Matney is empathy. When she was 7 her 9-year-old brother died suddenly from brain complications related to the flu, a loss that still smarts. A botched appendectomy nearly stole her life at 23. Three years later she was diagnosed with basal cell carcinoma, the less serious form of skin cancer – and all because “I was a stupid teenager who tanned a lot,” she wrote in 2017. And this after her mother had beaten melanoma two years earlier. For another reporter, tarrying in so much morbidity might exact a psychic toll. For Matney, “It’s kind of therapy,” she says. “Hearing from grieving mothers like Sandy Smith. I see my mom in her all the time. I feel like I can approach the story in a way that a lot of other people don’t with the level of sensitivity that I do.” With Matney leading on the Murdaugh beat, FITSNews has grown to a robust 1.5 million monthly visitors. Still, Matney couldn’t shake the sense that there was much more story to tell. David Moses, Matney’s fiance, needled her to start a podcast. Matney initially scoffed at the idea of hard journalism as a production. But he was undeterred and forged ahead. He set her up with a mic at their kitchen table, surrounded by a nest of files and their chatty rescue dog, Luna. While Matney focused on the narrative, Moses taught himself how to use free audio editing software. On 22 June, absent fanfare or cover art, the Murdaugh Murders debuted with an episode titled South Carolina’s Chappaquiddick. By episode nine it was the No 1 podcast on Apple. A southern gothic “I just always go back to some time this summer when we were top 100 of all podcasts,” Matney says. “I thought we were peaking then.” The Murdaugh story has always had the elements of a southern gothic. So it figures that Matney’s turf has been crowded by Good Morning America, Nancy Grace and others in the mainstream media who can’t help but ask if she’d mind “getting us up to speed”. When those newcomers aren’t angling to copy her homework, they’re getting spun by Murdaugh protectors like Bakari Sellers – the CNN contributor, Democratic party prodigy and longtime friend of the family – which he described as “salt of the earth” in an interview with People, one in the horde of outlets racing to develop Murdaugh content for the screen. Before a September bond hearing, Dick Harpootlian, the South Carolina state senator and Democratic party operative leading Murdaugh’s defense, wondered aloud to a court gallery that largely consisted of reporters if Matney – who was not present – was Folks’s “alter sexual ego”, drawing big laughs. “Forget about what he said,” Folks says. “Focus on what he was trying to do. He was trying to knock her down a peg.” In addition to the assaults on her credibility, Matney absorbs regular abuse from listeners whinging about everything from her “vocal fry” to the FITSNews paywall to her habitual reminders that much of what we know about the Murdaughs is because of her. “People think she’s saying only she can cover this news,” Farrell says. “But so many [competitors] shortcut their work based on what Mandy had done. It is very frustrating for her to see media that had ignored this story and, suddenly now that it’s profitable for them, they’re going after it. Her whole point is to say, I was doing this when it meant nothing … because we need to keep corruption from happening.” The constant churn of the story has had its affects. “The summer got dark,” says Matney, always flirting with a full-on burnout. “I remember telling Liz that I don’t give a shit if I get money off of all this. It’s just too hard and not worth it. And then to have to channel all that to create a podcast … it was hard to get motivated.” It also wasn’t worth the increasing risk to Matney’s personal safety, something she hadn’t considered until receiving a terse email from a friend of Buster Murdaugh’s over the summer. “The investigation keeps getting scarier,” she says. And even though she has taken measures to protect herself – such as not posting her whereabouts on social media in real time any more – the legion of fans who spring for coffee and mimosas to keep her going still worry about her oversharing. But what they might not appreciate is that “documentation and being in the public eye are my biggest safety net”. Even as the adversities on the Murdaugh beat increase, Matney is determined to stick with this story. For Matney, the proud moments are the small ones that come when the waitress who “got out of” Hampton county thanks her for shining a light on the corruption there, or when a victim’s relative calls to check in. Accountability journalism wasn’t something Matney ever thought she’d fall into. “I was always so afraid of it,” she says. Now, it’s the corrupt among South Carolina’s power brokers who should be afraid of her. • This article was amended on 17 December 2021. An earlier version incorrectly stated that Nikki Haley was US secretary of state under Donald Trump; she was in fact the US ambassador to the UN.Joe Biden this month took another step toward the removal of the controversial postmaster general Louis DeJoy, even as the Trump-era appointee continues to make his mark on the embattled postal service, rolling out new plans to slow down delivery and close postal stations around the country. DeJoy, a Republican logistics executive, caused a national furor last year over his attempts to slow down mail delivery before the 2020 presidential election, in which millions of Americans voted by mail. Biden has not said outright whether he wishes to oust DeJoy, although his press secretary, Jen Psaki, has said she is “deeply troubled” by his leadership. Even so, the president lacks the authority to dismiss the postmaster general. That power rests with the USPS Board of Governors, a nine-member panel that can remove DeJoy with a majority vote. There were three vacancies on the board when Biden took office, and he filled those vacancies with Democratic allies earlier this year. Now the president has taken a further step toward reshaping the board by nominating two new governors to replace those whose terms are expiring. His decision not to renominate the Democratic board chairman, Ron Bloom, is significant, since Bloom was one of DeJoy’s biggest allies on the board and earlier this year said he considered DeJoy “the proper man for the job”. Indeed, the postmaster general bought as much as $305,000 in bonds from Bloom’s asset management firm earlier this year, according to DeJoy’s financial disclosure paperwork. Bloom has said he doesn’t benefit from the purchase. The asset purchases and Bloom’s continued support for DeJoy led some Democratic senators to say they wouldn’t support Bloom’s renomination. Even as Biden appears to inch closer to ousting DeJoy, the embattled postmaster general has begun to leave his mark on the agency. DeJoy abandoned his initial attempts to slow down mail delivery ahead of the 2020 election after he faced lawsuits and backlash, but soon after he announced a significant reduction in the agency’s 60,000-member administrative workforce. DeJoy also released in April a 10-year plan for revamping postal operations. Some provisions are supported by unions and postal advocates, such as a $40bn investment in the agency’s vehicle fleet and logistics network, and modernizing thousands of retail post offices. The plan also calls for an end to a mandate that requires the USPS to fund retiree health benefits decades in advance, which postal management has decried for years as an unnecessary burden on its finances. DeJoy’s plan would attempt to fill the postal service’s $160bn funding hole through a wide variety of cost-cutting measures. The most significant change in the plan is the slowdown of first-class mail delivery, which took effect on 1 October. Under the new rules, long-distance mail can take up to five days to reach its destination before it’s considered late, up from the previous maximum of three days. DeJoy says these changes will improve the agency’s on-time performance and reduce what he says is an expensive reliance on air freight. The changes affect almost 40% of first-class mailpieces. The postal service has achieved only modest performance improvements since rolling out the new standards in October. According to the agency’s most recent statistics, 91% of first-class mail deliveries have arrived on time since the launch of the new standards, up 2.5% from the previous quarter. Nevertheless, it isn’t clear how much of the agency’s recent improvement is the result of DeJoy loosening the agency’s on-time standards. “Great plan, loosen the standards so you can more easily reach the goal,” said Bob Dolan, a retired carrier from New Hampshire who spent more than 40 years with the agency. “I bet I could be a 90% free-throw shooter if they moved the free-throw line to five feet.” Current postal workers who spoke with the Guardian on the condition of anonymity said that the changes hadn’t had much effect on their day-to-day workload over the past few months. The biggest challenge of the job at the moment, said one carrier who delivers in rural New York, was the ever-increasing package load that began with the pandemic. “I talk to carriers all over the country and they have been delivering [a] holiday volume since the pandemic started,” said the carrier from New York, who asked to remain anonymous because postal employees are prohibited from speaking to the media. “Whole offices are down due to injuries, Covid, and the labor shortage. People do not want this job and the process to hire anyone still takes for ever.” A postal service spokesperson told the Guardian that the USPS had taken extensive steps to bolster its delivery network ahead of the holiday rush. The agency has hired more than 40,000 seasonal employees, leased overflow space for package operations, and installed more than a hundred new package sorting machines. “The postal service’s steady performance so far through the holiday season is proof that the significant investments and operational changes being made under [DeJoy’s 10-year plan] are working,” said David Partenheimer, a representative for the Postal Service. The slower delivery standards don’t affect packages, which make up a greater share of postal revenue than ever and which DeJoy hopes will become the centerpiece of the USPS’s business model going forward. The new delivery standard may have a more significant impact for small businesses that rely on the USPS. An analysis by the Washington Post found that states west of the Rocky Mountains and those at the nation’s geographical extremes would suffer the most under the new standards, with states like Nevada seeing an average increase of a full day in their mail delivery times. The other controversial part of DeJoy’s plan is a proposal to close or reduce hours at dozens of low-traffic post offices around the country. This plan revives a previous “consolidation” proposal drafted under the Obama-era postmaster general Patrick Donahoe, who served from 2010 to 2015. The USPS paused that plan after a wave of backlash from unions and advocates. Multiple rural postal workers told the Guardian that reviving the plan could have wide-ranging impacts for customers in rural areas, many of whom rely on the USPS for deliveries of medicine and other essential goods. “Consolidating stations adds quite a time and distance burden on [rural] customers,” said Tim Apley, a retired carrier who delivered for about 25 years in rural Spokane, Washington. Customers in rural areas would have to drive much farther if they needed to buy postal supplies or pick up packages that couldn’t be delivered, he said. “Meanwhile,” he added, “a lot of the savings from a consolidation are offset by the delivery routes driving much further each day.” Even if the board of governors does replace DeJoy, it will be hard for the new postmaster general to fix the agency alone. Postal leadership lacks the unilateral authority to increase its prices or raise money with new initiatives like postal banking, meaning that whoever is in charge, Congress will need to step in to help the agency regain its financial footing.María Irene Campos was a woman on a mission. “I want to send the message that Chile will never again be communist,” the 74-year-old retiree proclaimed as she hit the streets last Friday to catch a glimpse of the man she believes can save her South American homeland from such a fate. That man is José Antonio Kast – an ultra-conservative lawyer and father of nine, who some call Chile’s answer to Brazil’s radical leader, Jair Bolsonaro – and who is now just one step away from becoming his country’s next president. Fifteen million Chileans will head to the polls on Sunday for the second, decisive round of Chile’s presidential election to choose between the far-right politician and his leftist rival, Gabriel Boric, who appears to hold a slender lead. “He seems like a good person to me – somebody with conviction,” said Susana Guajardo, 61, another Kast supporter who had come to see the candidate during a campaign visit to Rancagua, a quiet city 50 miles south of Chile’s capital, Santiago. But the prospect of a four-year Kast presidency has horrified many in Chile and across the region and fueled fears that one of South America’s most prosperous and stable democracies could be on the verge of being captured by Steve Bannon-style extremists. “All of the progress we have made in terms of women’s rights, inclusion and human rights will be affected if Kast wins on Sunday,” warned Gaby Riquelme, 35, who has spent recent weeks pamphleting for Boric. Riquelme feared Kast, whose Germany-born father was recently revealed to have been a member of the Nazi party, risked plunging Chile into “instability and disorder” by opposing the grassroots movement battling to address its many social problems after 2019’s historic protests. “Kast will undoubtedly be a step backwards,” she said of the fervent Catholic who vehemently opposes same-sex marriage, recently legalized by Chile’s parliament. On Tuesday, Chile’s moderate former president Michelle Bachelet threw her weight behind Boric, telling Chileans they faced a “fundamental” choice and urging them to back a leader who could lead the country “down the path of progress for all”. Chile’s 2021 race has uncanny and disturbing echoes of the profoundly polarized 2018 vote that saw Jair Bolsonaro – like Kast long viewed as a political aberration – gain control of Latin America’s largest democracy. While a more graceful orator than his notoriously blunt Brazilian counterpart, Kast has hoisted almost identical banners, including law and order, opposition to “gender ideology” and a flag-waving antipathy toward the left and its alleged efforts to deny citizens their “freedom”. “Communism is advancing”, Kast, who is 55, warned earlier this year. “Chile needs a political alternative that seeks to recover … the freedom we have lost.” Boric, meanwhile, has promised “hope will prevail over fear” – a carbon copy of the pledge the leftist Brazilian Fernando Haddad made before losing to Bolsonaro in October 2018. In the weeks since last month’s first-round vote, which he narrowly won, Kast has tried to soften his tone and play down his links to Bolsonaro in an apparent attempt to attract moderate voters. During the final presidential debate on Monday he rejected claims he was homophobic, claiming that several same-sex couples had attended his daughter’s wedding. But Kast has not always been so coy. On 18 October 2018, 10 days before Bolsonaro won power, the Chilean flew to Rio to meet Brazil’s future president. “Jair Bolsonaro represents the hope of freedom, security, development and social justice in a Brazil that was destroyed by the left,” Kast tweeted alongside a photograph of him delivering a bright red Chile football shirt. The jersey had been personalized with the number 17, then the symbol of Bolsonaro’s far-right candidacy. The two men stayed in touch after Bolsonaro took power, with the Brazilian newspaper O Globo recently revealing that a key connection was the German-Chilean businessman Sven von Storch. He is the husband of Beatrix von Storch, the deputy leader of the far-right Alternative for Germany (AfD) party and granddaughter of Hitler’s finance minister. In December 2018, Kast gave a keynote speech at a conservative congress organized by Bolsonaro’s congressman son, Eduardo, in the Brazilian border city of Foz do Iguaçu. He used part of his address to recast Augusto Pinochet’s September 1973 overthrow of Chile’s socialist leader Salvador Allende, just as Bolsonaro has sought to rewrite the history of the Brazilian military dictatorship. “Allende was overthrown by the people,” insisted Kast, who has praised Pinochet’s “economic legacy”. “We have to rewrite history from our point of view,” he told delegates. After Kast’s first-round victory last month, Eduardo – Steve Bannon’s representative in Latin America – wished the Chilean candidate luck. “Kast is a patriot, internationally well-connected and a thorn in the side of the São Paulo Forum,” tweeted Bolsonaro, in reference to the leftist alliance that has become a bugbear for Latin America’s hard right. Political scientist Robert Funk said insufficient attention was being paid to the links between Kast and the conspiracy-filled, anti-semitism-laced, anti-globalist hard-right “world of Steve Bannon”. “I think it is very worrying and I’m amazed this has not received more play here,” said the University of Chile academic, calling Kast “part Pinochetista-right, part Catholic-conservatism and part Trumpist-Bolsonaro nationalist populist”. “What it shows is that Kast is part of a larger story of international networks … and a movement that is basically trying to be disruptive … Kast is not the conservative candidate. He’s the disruptive candidate,” Funk added. “The story of his contact and support with Bolsonaro, with [the Spanish far-right party] Vox, with AfD – [with] the world of Steve Bannon – is pretty worrying, and not only for Chile. It shows how far they have managed to get in politics around the world.” Kast supporters dismiss claims their guru is a radical, just as Bolsonaristas consider their authoritarian-minded leader a paragon of democratic, godly values. “I don’t find him extreme in the slightest,” Guajardo said, as Kast strode past her during his visit to Rancagua, to cheers of “Viva Chile!” and “God bless you!” Later that evening Kast took to the stage amid flurries of white confetti to address a boisterous crowd in the nearby town of San Fernando. He donned a poncho to dance cueca, Chile’s national dance, and led a solemn rendition of the national anthem while hundreds of Chilean flags fluttered above the crowd. “Each of us must go out into the streets and raise the Chilean flag, which represents all of us,” he declared, to rapturous applause. Many of his supporters are convinced the right-winger could save Chile from being plunged back into what they describe as Venezuela-style socialist turmoil. “I want democracy, peace and stability,” said Campos. “José Antonio Kast represents all of these things.”When John Purnell’s 10-year-old son was diagnosed as autistic, he knew exactly how to respond. “I’ve always been fascinated by research, by detail, by finding out everything there is to find out about something,” he says. “So I did a really deep dive.” As he pored over academic papers and delved into medical science – including how many autistic people have a propensity and appetite for copious research – an unexpected realisation crept into his mind. “I was reading about the traits of an autistic person, the difficulties they often have in social situations, the need for order and planning: and suddenly I thought: this person they’re describing isn’t just my son – it’s me.” Purnell is far from alone in discovering that he’s autistic as a result of his child being diagnosed. Viewers of a recent BBC One documentary, Our Family and Autism, saw the same thing happen to the model Christine McGuinness, whose three young children with her television presenter husband, Paddy, are all on the autistic spectrum. In recent years, the number of people diagnosed with autism has rocketed; a study of diagnosis trends, published in August, found the median age for diagnosis is 10 for males and 13 for females, and there was a 787% exponential increase in its recorded incidence, in the 20 years to 2018. An unexpected result of the greater number of children being diagnosed has been that many parents have discovered that they are autistic, too, often by figuring it out for themselves, as both Purnell and McGuinness did. There are no exact figures, says Professor Simon Baron-Cohen of Cambridge University, Britain’s leading academic on autism, but it is a phenomenon. And it’s not that there are suddenly more autistic people, but that diagnosis in the past was inadequate and medicine is catching up. Often, says Baron-Cohen, these autistic adults do not necessarily need a formal diagnosis. “The key question is: are autistic characteristics interfering with your ability to function?” While he welcomes the more accurate picture, he doesn’t want the new numbers to dilute the understanding of what it means to be autistic. “It’s a medical diagnosis and you only get it if the symptoms you have are causing distress,” he points out. Purnell, managing director of a successful business, has adapted well – on one level at least. “Now I understand my autism, I can see how helpful it has been through my working life,” he says. In a letter to colleagues after the diagnosis, he wrote: “Among the many benefits I see for being autistic is that I’m incredibly organised and get a lot done. I also have a very strong attention to detail, can take into account a lot of information quickly and see relevant patterns that help me make good decisions.” The condition also explains behaviour his colleagues might have found unusual. “There have been times when I’ve said to people I work with: ‘I really don’t care what anyone thinks of me.’ And they have said: ‘Really? Do you really not care?’” All his life, Purnell has found socialising very stressful and his teenage years were extremely difficult: he battled depression, anxiety and anger, which he now knows are linked to his condition. In the McGuinness family documentary, Christine comes close to tears after receiving her diagnosis from Baron-Cohen. It’s such a relief, she says, to realise she wasn’t just being difficult. Like so many autistic people, John included, the hardest thing has been trying to fit in with societal norms established by neurotypical people. The important takeaway for society as a whole, Baron-Cohen believes, is that it’s the world that needs to get used to autism – not autistic people who need to get used to the world. The reason children are more likely to be diagnosed now is down to increased awareness among parents and teachers; and the reason it’s likely to be diagnosed at 10 and 13, is that it usually coincides with the move from primary to secondary school. “Having to navigate a much bigger and more complicated social scene often makes autism more apparent,” says Baron-Cohen. A spin-off from the phenomenon of a parent’s diagnosis, after the child’s, is that it has drawn more attention to the fact that autism also affects women. “You get a lot of women who have been diagnosed with an eating disorder because they were very fussy with their food – but it wasn’t an eating disorder, it was autism,” says Baron-Cohen. Preferring a range of very specific, often bland, foods is another trait of autism – Christine McGuinness describes it in the documentary as “eating beige food”. Kiri-Lynn Gardner, 40, was also diagnosed as a result of her child’s autism: her son Finn, now 17, was diagnosed when he was five. She noticed similarities between her own experiences and his, and sought a test. “My son was very typically autistic – he likes lining things up, he’s highly organised. I could relate to so much in his behaviour.” Getting her own diagnosis in 2016 was still a shock, but she immediately realised there were benefits. “The specialist I saw understood me in a way I’d not been understood before.” Her mother had endured a lifelong struggle with mental health issues, not autism-related, and Gardner feared she had the same difficulties. “I always assumed it was just how things were and how they would always be,” she says. “But unpicking it has meant I’ve learned about the really quite small things that can make a huge difference to my life. Things like realising I don’t have to attend a social event – not because I don’t want to be part of it, but because there’s too much sensory overload. I used to feel guilty about missing things, but now I make allowances for myself, and my family and other people around me do the same. So, for example, when we go on holiday I’ll often have a bit of a meltdown because the place doesn’t look exactly like it does in the brochure. In my head, I’ll have been expecting it to be just the same. But now I know why, and my family expects it, it’s fine.” Lockdown, Gardner thinks, would have been nigh-on impossible without her diagnosis: autistic people need structure and tend to struggle a lot with uncertainty and different routines. She even credits the diagnosis with keeping her marriage together. “I think we might have got divorced if I hadn’t known. My husband can now understand that my behaviour is the condition I’ve got.” Purnell’s marriage has benefited, too. His wife, Paula, has worked with children – he describes her as the yin to his yang and, while all good marriages need that, it’s even more important for autistic people because a partner can take on some of the activities the autistic person finds difficult – organising a social life, for example. Perhaps, too, it’s easier for men to find “caring” partners than it is for women, another reason it can be harder for women with autism to cope with adult life. Paula says a big plus of John’s diagnosis is that they understand some of the difficulties, and can now work around them. “I used to feel guilty about going out with my friends without him, but now I can go out and he stays at home,” she says. “Before, I’d organise nights out with other couples and he’d come along grudgingly – I’d think he was just being difficult.” A game-changer for adults with autism is the Autism Act 2009 (this is the only condition with its own act of parliament) which gives people the right to a diagnosis, regardless of age. “There is now a requirement on the part of local authorities to provide an adult diagnostic pathway,” says Tim Nicholls, head of policy at the National Autistic Society. Yet many people, of all ages, wait far longer than they should for an assessment. This was noticed before the pandemic, and is almost certainly worse now. That is important for many reasons, not least that while autism is not a mental health disorder, people who have it may be more prone to anxiety and depression. Baron-Cohen says two thirds of the adults who come to his clinic have had suicidal thoughts, and a third have attempted to kill themselves. For Gardner, diagnosis has been bittersweet. On one hand, she is pleased that her experience is useful to Finn – like Christine McGuinness, she feels she is a positive role model, and is living in a way that proves autistic people can have a job or career, and a relationship (Baron-Cohen points out that 85% of autistic adults are not in employment). On the other hand, Gardner mourns the childhood and adolescence that she might have had. “It’s disappointing that I didn’t have the help I needed growing up, especially now I know that small things can make a huge difference,” she says. Purnell’s son, who prefers not to give his name, says his father’s experience has brought him benefits, too. “Diagnosis and personal research helped him and, in turn, helped me to understand autism and mental health better,” he says. It’s clear that, in general, increased parental diagnosis is linked to genetics and, indeed, says Baron-Cohen, science has found there are definite chromosomal factors. Recognising a diagnosis because of a child isn’t always down to genetics, though. Kevin Chapman, 39, who lives in Northampton, was diagnosed after he met a new partner, whose son – now his stepson – was found to be autistic, aged eight. That led Chapman to do an online quiz – the AQ or autism spectrum quotient that the McGuinnesses did in the documentary – and his score indicated that he is within the autistic range. “I’ve not finished the formal process, but a lot of things have fallen into place for me,” he says. “I’ve always found it hard to make friends, always thought of myself as an outsider. I tend to get obsessively interested in things – computer coding, for one.” There are many ways in which life can be improved for adults who find they are autistic, says Baron-Cohen. “A lot of autistic people find noisy environments difficult, and they have sensory difficulties. They need a calmer environment, and getting a diagnosis is a good way to say to an employer: ‘I need a reasonable adjustment to my work surroundings, which you’re entitled to do under the Equality Act’.” In fact, as he points out, making life easier for people with autism is all about acknowledging that they are different in the same way that people are different in terms of gender and ethnicity. “What’s really good is that people are realising that neurodiversity is part of a person’s identity in exactly the same way these things are,” he says. What about autistic adults who don’t have children to flag up their issues? Baron-Cohen says other reasons for adults coming forward to be tested for autism include a long history of difficulties in maintaining relationships – friendships and intimate partnerships – and a history of difficulty in getting on with people at work. “I see people, for example, who keep ending up in industrial tribunals, and that prompts them to think: why is this happening to me?” he says. But for some adults, the stigma of being labelled “autistic” is still offputting. It’s incumbent on us all, says Baron-Cohen, to help reduce this stigma: increased diagnosis is good for everyone, not only autistic people. One of John Purnell’s favourite quotes is from Mary Temple Grandin, an American scientist who was diagnosed as an adult. What would happen, she asked, if autism didn’t exist? Her answer: “You’d have a bunch of people standing around in a cave. Chatting and socialising, yes – but not getting anything actually done.”The global market for non-fungible tokens hit $22bn (£16.5bn) this year as the craze for collections such as Bored Ape Yacht Club and Matrix avatars turned digital images into major investment assets. NFTs have drawn from veteran investors similar warnings to those issued about cryptocurrencies: that they are symptomatic of an unsustainable, digital gold rush. NFTs confer ownership of a unique digital item – whether a piece of virtual art by Damien Hirst or a jacket to be worn in the metaverse – upon someone, even if that item can be easily copied. Ownership is recorded on a digital, decentralised ledger known as a blockchain. Data from DappRadar, a firm that tracks sales, showed that trading in NFTs reached $22bn in 2021, compared with just $100m in 2020, and that the floor market cap of the top 100 NFTs ever issued – a measure of their collective value – was $16.7bn. The most valuable NFT sale this year was The First 5000 Days, a digital collage by Beeple, the name used by the American digital artist Mike Winkelmann, that was auctioned for $69.3m in March, making it one of the most valuable pieces of art ever sold by a living artist. Another Beeple NFT, Human One, sold for $29m. Other multimillion-dollar NFTs included the Bored Ape Yacht Club, a collection of 10,000 NFTs represented as cartoon primates that are used as profile photos on the social media accounts of their owners and which raised $26.2m. Celebrity BAYC owners include the talkshow host Jimmy Fallon and the rapper Post Malone. DappRadar said a key factor in the surge in NFT trading was mainstream businesses entering the fray. Coca-Cola raised more than $575,000 from selling items such as a customised jacket to be worn in the metaverse world of Decentraland while the Matrix star Keanu Reeves failed to keep a straight face when told by an interviewer that his Matrix film series now had NFTs attached to it. “Hollywood, sports celebrities and big brands like Coca-Cola, Gucci, Nike, and Adidas, made their dent in the space, providing NFTs with a new level of exclusivity. The power of attraction of these famous names profoundly impacted NFTs and the blockchain industry overall,” said DappRadar. Football fans have been targeted with NFT marketing – including with NFTs backed by the former England players John Terry and Wayne Rooney – and have been warned by experts that they are risky assets, unregulated in the UK. It will take years before NFTs behave like a conventional market, said George Monaghan, analyst at research firm GlobalData. “2021 NFT activity was frenzied. That’ll subside in coming years and NFTs will settle into something more akin to today’s modern art market, where consensus on value is more solid. That said, it’ll be years before any crypto market, let alone NFTs, comes to resemble anything conventional markets would call stable. I wouldn’t throw your rainy day fund into any meme NFTs quite yet,” he said.It has long been understood that no single viewer tunes in to watch the broadcasters of a game. Viewers tune in for, well, the game. The pieces around that – the announcer, the play-by-play analyst, the sideline reporter – are interchangeable. When Tony Romo was set to hit broadcasting free agency, the reports about his proposed salary became a point of public contention, even among active players. Sure, Romo might be the best in the business right now, but is he really that much more valuable than the average analyst or the second person on CBS’ bench? Romo’s deal made some sense. ESPN offered Romo a record-breaking $20m-per-year deal to try to resuscitate the network’s flagging Monday Night Football brand. Romo instead re-upped with CBS for a reported $17m annually, a figure that will see him earn more than all but four active quarterbacks this season and would rank 10th among all active NFL players. Broadcast companies pay top money for the highest-rated announcers through a belief that there is a tangible benefit. And while it’s true that the barrier for entry is low, that no one is tuning in for the broadcasters themselves, it’s also true that bad broadcasters can sour the mood, not so much with the viewing public as with the companies’ broadcast partner: the NFL. The viewer might only care who’s calling the game in the mythical They Hate My Team sense. But the league office puts tremendous thought into the visual and audio presentation of its games. The big four want their production to be the slickest, to encourage people to hang around, to flog adverts, and to stay in the good graces of the league’s head office for the next time rights deals roll around. Think of it as an ever-evolving broadcasting power ranking, if you will. So, let’s power rank. A quick caveat: this is about the game broadcasts only, not the entire inventory of the company. ESPN’s NFL Live and The Matchup Show are, by some distance, the most informative and entertaining shows on any of the traditional networks. But for this, we’re focusing on the game broadcasts. 1) Fox Fox’s main broadcast team, led by Joe Buck, Troy Aikman, and Erin Andrews, has started to grow stale. But it’s the network’s undercard that has re-invigorated broadcasts this season, pushing Fox ahead of NBC’s all-dominant Sunday night production. The Kevin Burkhardt-Greg Olsen duo has already elevated to the top of the heap, sitting firmly in must-listen-to territory every Sunday. Informative, entertaining, the pair hit all of the crucial markers. Olsen, the former Panthers tight end, is armed with all the knowledge of having just walked off the field. He knows the players. He knows the coaches. He gets the tendencies and schemes. And like early Romo, there is just enough broadcasting naivety for him to deliver all of the juicy tidbits and insight without feeling the need to dumb the information down. In Olsen, Burkhardt now has the perfect foil for his brand of intelligence and humor. But it’s not just the Burkhardt-Olsen team. Fox has leaned heavily into the notion of pairing a player fresh off the field with a veteran broadcaster. Aqib Talib continues to bring a degree of chaos to the established order, offering informative, charming analysis at all turns. Even Mark Sanchez, he of butt-fumble fame, has proven to be a sneakily good in-game analyst, though you will have to wade through a steady dose of cringe-worthy gags designed to show Sanchez is much more than a football-playing jock. Most importantly: The Fox executives finally relented and brought the Gusgasm to the NFL in full force. Adding the game’s top-rules analyst, Mike Pereira, is just running up the score at this point. 2) NBC The league’s beacon of consistency continues to chug along. Al Michaels, Cris Collinsworth and Michele Tafoya, and the Sunday Night Football broadcast have long been the league’s gold standard, aided by the cleanest graphics department and best overall presentation – not to mention the best matchup of the week. Yet it’s likely to be the final year for NBC’s current crew. Tafoya, NBC’s sideline reporter, is set to walk away at the end of the season, according to the New York Post. Michaels is expected to follow suit, with Mike Tirico moving up from part-time duty into the full-time slot. Michaels is the leading candidate to be the voice of Thursday Night Football when Amazon takes over the exclusive rights next year. Losing the trio on Sunday nights will be a loss, but it opens up the exciting possibility of a fresh broadcast with new voices backed by the top supporting cast in the industry. 3) CBS Not even the stylings of Tony Romo and Jim Nantz and the top game of the afternoon slate is enough to drag the dust-soaked CBS broadcasts into the top-tier. You have to hand it to CBS: They unapologetically chase the mature TV viewer. In-between Greg Gumbel’s yammering, you’re treated to a star-studded cast of Phil Simms, James Brown, Boomer Esiason and Bill Cowher breaking it all down. It’s the kind of group that still views Esiason, out of the league since 1997, as its young pup. Adding Nate Burleson to the proceedings has been a welcome move towards the 21st century. But the same ethos that drives the pre-game and mid-game show has seeped into the game broadcasts, too. It is a sports television empire that appears to be broadcasting with a 1980s mist hovering wafting through the screen. Romo and Nantz at their best remain the game’s best in-game booth. The further removed from the game, though, the more Romo has drifted into his aw-shucks, don’t-we-all-love-football schtick rather than the early Romostradamus style that earned him such a high approval rating. But he still delivers enough quarterback-centric nuggets to enlighten the viewer. 4) ESPN Of all the major broadcasts, ESPN’s Monday Night Football continues to lag behind its rivals. There are plenty of positives: Louis Riddick offers refreshing insight, always focusing on the big picture evolution of the game beyond the specific matchup he is currently working; Brian Griese is good for one-to-two unique insights into the schematic makeup of the game; the pair’s dynamic, one a former safety and front office executive, the other a former quarterback, has its merits; Lisa Salters continues to reign as the league’s top sideline reporter. After that, it’s slim pickings. No broadcast misses more action as it tries to cram in a carefully crafted feature. The three-man booth, Reddick and Griese paired with Steve Levy, feels cramped. There’s a general sense that something is off. And that something is fun. It’s a broadcast that takes itself too seriously, as though everything about this wonderful dumb game should be hyper-analyzed in the moment rather than enjoyed – the balance that helps elevate the likes of Romo and Olsen. Levy, the lead announcer, suffers from a strong case of Joe Tessitore-itus. There is no modulation. There is none of Michaels’ self-effacing charm about the state of a dud game. What is happening right now must be the most important because Levy delivers each call with such volume and force, the moment elevated, perhaps, because it is being called by Mr Levy himself. You know a broadcast is in trouble when a couple of million viewers click over to its own network’s companion show. The ManningCast has become ESPN’s top option, even if 40% of the show remains unlistenable due to shoddy internet connections. The lack of sheen has given the ManningCast a sort of folksy charm, as if it’s just another YouTube or Twitch show rather than a sanctioned NFL production from the Walt Disney company, piloted by one of the finest quarterbacks of any generation. Already, the ManningCast accounts for the seven most-watched ‘alternative broadcasts’ delivered by ESPN. And Amazon now has eyes on poaching the Manning brothers for its games next season. If anything, the show is a touch too loose. As the season has shuffled along, the early issues with wifi connections and lack of overall production have only increased. Yet few shows have more potential. It could expand, perhaps into a quarterback roundtable style with the participants all *shock, horror* in the same room. Or it could contract, focusing more on Peyton and Eli watching a game than talking to College Coach X about his upcoming recruiting class in 30-minute, echo-y, delayed increments. Either option would be positive, and a welcome distraction from the bloated mess on the companies main feed. Ideally, ESPN would fold the ManningCast into the main broadcast. If not, the company will be looking at yet another hard reset for what was once pro football’s most prestigious broadcast.Business groups have accused the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, and Kwasi Kwarteng’s business department of failing to act as the Omicron variant hammers consumer confidence and forces many firms to shut down ahead of the usually busy Christmas period. The British Chambers of Commerce (BCC) said businesses have “heard nothing from the Treasury since this new round of Covid interventions arrived over a week ago”, adding that it was crucial more support was made available as shops, theatres and pubs see “their vital festive income melt away in front of their eyes”. Here are some of the emergency support measures that businesses are calling for: Reduce VAT for hospitality and tourism back to its emergency rate of 5% In July 2020 the government cut the 20% VAT rate to 5% before increasing it in March this year to 12.5%. The current discount runs out in April, when it is due to return to 20%. Reinstate 100% business rates relief for retail The BCC said this was needed to give businesses “the financial headroom to weather this challenging period”. Firms were able to claim 100% business rates relief until July when the discount was cut to 66%. Sunak said the programme would expire next April. Make additional grant funding available Funding to be administered locally by councils after they have judged which businesses face a cash crisis. If ministers adopt plan C measures that come close to a fourth lockdown then “the government should remain open to increasing grant funding” to all businesses, the BCC said. Reintroduce furlough (including flexible furlough) for those sectors most exposed to the new measures The furlough scheme closed altogether in September after the level of government support was reduced from 80% to 60% over the preceding three months. Business groups have asked for the 80% scheme to be reinstated. Further support for businesses who have used government loan and tax deferral schemes. Hundreds of thousands of businesses have taken out loans that must be repaid. Those that have yet to repay loans or applied for tax deferral schemes should be allowed to take longer repaying them. HMRC, which has preferential creditor status in insolvencies, should also outline what steps it will take to play in supporting businesses at risk of failure.In his 2021 Reith lectures, the third episode of which airs tonight, the artificial intelligence researcher Stuart Russell takes up the idea of a near-future AI that is so ruthlessly intelligent that it might pose an existential threat to humanity. A machine we create that might destroy us all. This has long been a popular topic with researchers and the press. But we believe an existential threat from AI is both unlikely and in any case far off, given the current state of the technology. However, the recent development of powerful, but far smaller-scale, AI systems has had a significant effect on the world already, and the use of existing AI poses serious economic and social challenges. These are not distant, but immediate, and must be addressed. These include the prospect of large-scale unemployment due to automation, with attendant political and social dislocation, as well as the use of personal data for purposes of commercial and political manipulation. The incorporation of ethnic and gender bias in datasets used by AI programs that determine job candidate selection, creditworthiness, and other important decisions is a well-known problem. But by far the most immediate danger is the role that AI data analysis and generation plays in spreading disinformation and extremism on social media. This technology powers bots and amplification algorithms. These have played a direct role in fomenting conflict in many countries. They are helping to intensify racism, conspiracy theories, political extremism and a plethora of violent, irrationalist movements. Such movements are threatening the foundations of democracy throughout the world. AI-driven social media was instrumental in mobilising January’s insurrection at the US Capitol, and it has propelled the anti-vax movement since before the pandemic. Behind all of this is the power of big tech companies, which develop the relevant data processing technology and host the social media platforms on which it is deployed. With their vast reserves of personal data, they use sophisticated targeting procedures to identify audiences for extremist posts and sites. They promote this content to increase advertising revenue, and in so doing, actively assist the rise of these destructive trends. They exercise near-monopoly control over the social media market, and a range of other digital services. Meta, through its ownership of Facebook, WhatsApp and Instagram, and Google, which controls YouTube, dominate much of the social media industry. This concentration of power gives a handful of companies far-reaching influence on political decision making. Given the importance of digital services in public life, it is reasonable to expect that big tech would be subject to the same sort of regulation that applies to the corporations that control markets in other parts of the economy. In fact, this is not generally the case. The social media agencies have not been restricted by the antitrust regulations, truth in advertising legislation, or laws against racist incitement that apply to traditional print and broadcast networks. Such regulation does not guarantee responsible behaviour (as rightwing cable networks and rabid tabloids illustrate), but it does provide an instrument of constraint. Three main arguments have been advanced against increased government regulation of big tech. The first holds that it would inhibit free speech. The second argues that it would degrade innovation in science and engineering. The third maintains that socially responsible companies can best regulate themselves. These arguments are entirely specious. Some restrictions on free speech are well motivated by the need to defend the public good. Truth in advertising is a prime example. Legal prohibitions against racist incitement and group defamation are another. These constraints are generally accepted in most liberal democracies (with the exception of the US) as integral to the legal approach to protecting people from hate crime. Social media platforms often deny responsibility for the content of the material that they host, on the grounds that it is created by individual users. In fact, this content is published in the public domain, and so it cannot be construed as purely private communication. When it comes to safety, government-imposed regulations have not prevented dramatic bioengineering advances, like the recent mRNA-based Covid vaccines. Nor did they stop car companies from building efficient electric vehicles. Why would they have the unique effect of reducing innovation in AI and information technology? Finally, the view that private companies can be trusted to regulate themselves out of a sense of social responsibility is entirely without merit. Businesses exist for the purpose of making money. Business lobbies often ascribe to themselves the image of a socially responsible industry acting out of a sense of concern for public welfare. In most cases this is a public relations manoeuvre intended to head off regulation. Any company that prioritises social benefit over profit will quickly cease to exist. This was showcased in Facebook whistleblower Frances Haugen’s recent congressional testimony, indicating that the company’s executives chose to ignore the harm that some of their “algorithms” were causing, in order to sustain the profits they provided. Consumer pressure can, on occasion, act as leverage for restraining corporate excess. But such cases are rare. In fact, legislation and regulatory agencies are the only effective means that democratic societies have at their disposal for protecting the public from the undesirable effects of corporate power. Finding the best way to regulate a powerful and complex industry like big tech is a difficult problem. But progress has been made on constructive proposals. Lina Khan, the US federal trade commissioner advanced antitrust proposals for dealing with monopolistic practices in markets. The European commission has taken a leading role in instituting data protection and privacy laws. Academics MacKenzie Common and Rasmus Kleis Nielsen offer a balanced discussion of ways in which government can restrict disinformation and hate speech in social media, while sustaining free expression. This is the most complex, and most pressing, of the problems involved in controlling technology companies. The case for regulating big tech is clear. The damage it is doing across a variety of domains is throwing into question the benefits of its considerable achievements in science and engineering. The global nature of corporate power renders the ability of national governments in democratic countries to restrain big tech increasingly limited. There is a pressing need for large trading blocs and international agencies to act in concert to impose effective regulation on digital technology companies. Without such constraints big tech will continue to host the instruments of extremism, bigotry, and unreason that are generating social chaos, undermining public health and threatening democracy. Devdatt Dubhashi is professor of data science and AI at Chalmers University of Technology in Gothenburg, Sweden. Shalom Lappin is professor of natural language processing at Queen Mary University of London, director of the Centre for Linguistic Theory and Studies in Probability at the University of Gothenburg, and emeritus professor of computational linguistics at King’s College London.The Farallon Islands are home to squawking seabirds, floppy harbor seals, brightly freckled arboreal salamanders and rare, delicate camel crickets. They are also home to what ecologists have called a “plague-level infestation” of European house mice. On Thursday, the California Coastal Commission will vote on a proposal to eradicate the invasive rodents from the islands, located just off the San Francisco coast, by dropping 3,000lb of poisoned bait from helicopters. If the contentious plan moves forward and earns approval from the regional director of the US Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS), it could be implemented starting in the autumn of 2023. The vote marks the culmination of years-long debate over how to address the Farallones mouse infestation. Officials from the FWS have been developing a plan to use rodenticide since the early 2000s, saying that the mice – whose population could reach up to 60,000 in the fall – are a threat to endemic species of birds, insects and reptiles. The agency described the strategic use of rat poison as the only feasible solution to fully exterminate the mice, which breed and reproduce quickly. But critics say that sprinkling rodenticide – which is also toxic to birds and other animals – is too risky. They’re skeptical that “nuking the island with a poison that kills everything” could end well, said Richard Charter, a senior fellow at the Ocean Foundation, who helped in the founding of the Gulf of the Farallones National Marine Sanctuary. In 2019, FWS put forward and then withdrew a proposal to use the rodenticide brodifacoum after the coastal commission requested more detailed information on how officials would protect birds and other species. The latest proposal says FWS staff would begin by “hazing” gulls to ward them away from the islands before the rodenticide is deployed, using techniques including “lasers, spotlights, pyrotechnics, bionics, predator calls, air cannons, effigies, and kites”. Burrowing owls and other raptors – who might eat poisoned mice and themselves get poisoned – would be gathered up and transported off the island. The proposal asserts that although the risks to endemic Farrallon arboreal salamanders are low, as a measure to safeguard the species, officials would also collect about 40 individuals and hold them in terrariums until the risk of exposure to the rodenticide has disappeared. After helicopters rained brodifacoum-laced pellets on the islands, wildlife officials would walk around collecting mouse carcasses and uneaten pellets, so that other animals don’t ingest them. After a few months, the brodifacoum would also break down on its own, according to the proposal. Wildlife officials and ecologists conducting research on the island say they need to act quickly to address the infestation. The mouse population, which was inadvertently introduced by sailors in the 19th century, now peaks at about 500 mice per acre. “At times, if you’re out in the evening, you’ll see the ground moving as mice are digging their tunnels,” said Pete Warzybok, the Farallon Islands program leader at the non-profit Point Blue Conservation Science, which does biological research on the island. “It is a truly remarkable density of mice.” Warzybok said that although the plan might seem drastic, similar strategies had worked on other rodent-infested islands. “The benefits of the project to the native wildlife will far outweigh any risks,” he said. There is evidence that mice directly prey on vulnerable endemic species including salamanders and crickets. They also affect plants and animals on the island in indirect ways. A study from Point Blue found, for example, that the mice draw in larger numbers of burrowing owls, which feed on them during the fall but then nosh on small seabirds like ashy storm petrels during the winter and spring. Charter, however, was skeptical that such mitigation measures would do enough to protect wildlife and marine life. Even with precautions taken, the proposal includes caveats that some western gulls would be killed, he noted. The use of brodifacoum is already restricted in California, he pointed out, because it tends to travel up the food chain – killing not only rodents but also the raptors and mountain lions that eat them. He and other critics of the poison plan advocate for waiting until more humane alternatives – such as mouse contraceptives – are developed. In the meantime, he said, wildlife officials could explore alternative means of protecting species such as storm petrels, by looking holistically at the impacts of the climate crisis, light pollution and offshore oil drilling. Brodifacoum, Charter said, “is the wrong chemical, and it’s being used in the wrong place”.Devastating images and video captured by photojournalists in California have documented the toll an intense rainstorm – one of the most powerful to hit the state this year – took on a homeless community in the city of Santa Cruz this week. The damage caused by the downpour highlighted the risks that unhoused people face during increasingly extreme weather events. As dark clouds gathered over the weekend, photojournalist Alekz Londos said he raced out with a megaphone to warn hundreds of people living on the embankment of a river he feared was at risk of flooding. “I was worried they were going to get hypothermia,” he says. He spent the weekend doling out black trash bags meant to serve as makeshift raincoats. The area was eventually pummeled with rain and Londos returned on Tuesday to document the aftermath. Photos and drone video posted to Facebook live capture the devastation: dilapidated tents billowed in the breeze, sopping mattresses, overturned chairs, and other debris strewn through the thick mud. In the video, people can be seen – some soaked up to their knees – trying to salvage what was left of their things, and a woman can be heard calling out “help us”. “It looked like a nightmare,” Londos says. “I saw people frantically trying to get their stuff together. They looked exhausted. It was cold.” The scene is a stunning example of the dangers unhoused communities are grappling with as the climate crisis sets the stage for conditions that will hit the most vulnerable hardest. “In natural disasters, like storms and flooding, the most vulnerable communities, like the homeless, are often forgotten about when talking about who the storms affect,” said Nic Coury, a photographer who captured the disaster for the Associated Press. In California, a state that already vacillates quickly between fires and floods, droughts and deluges, more than 161,500 people are without permanent housing on a given day, according to an official census taken in 2020, and the majority of them live outside. The issue is pronounced in Santa Cruz county, a high-priced area located on the coast south of San Francisco, which has one of the highest per-capita rates of homelessness in the state. The county is home to roughly 273,200 people and more than 2,160 unhoused people were counted during the county’s last survey. As the storm approached, there were between 200 and 250 people living along the San Lorenzo River in a city-sanctioned encampment known locally as “the Benchlands”. City officials say that they deployed workers to the area through the weekend to inform the community. They also set up an emergency shelter area in a nearby parking lot on Monday. Only a fraction of the residents, between 50 or 60 people, took refuge there. “We live normal, everyday life here. So we couldn’t just leave everything,” John Palacios, who lives in the encampment, told local news KION. “We made little floating boats to move heavy stuff through the water because the water almost got knee deep. And I mean, it was cold.” But most residents of the encampment say they weren’t given enough warning before the storm descended on the area. When Londos went out with his megaphone he encountered shock and surprise. “Most of the people I talked to said they didn’t know there was a storm,” he says. Elizabeth Smith, a spokesperson for the city, claims they just “didn’t heed the warning” and said that a forced evacuation would have been met with resistance. The land was designated for the encampment during drier times, she added, but there have been concerns raised about the impact on the river and ecosystems, especially after the downpour. “None of this is optimal,” Smith says. “We have great empathy for what they are going through but we are trying to balance how we support the unhoused residents in our community and how we mitigate the impacts that come from large encampments.” Smith says cleanup work will continue and that the city is working to find places for people to relocate. She added that county resources have fallen short and no longer match the scale of the problem. Still, she was heartened that during this disaster, there haven’t been reports of injuries or fatalities. Phil Kramer, the chief executive officer of the nonprofit Housing Matters, which works to secure permanent housing for the unhoused in Santa Cruz county, said he thought the city was working hard and diligently but that the Benchlands is “far from an ideal location”. “I think it really shows how precarious the support structures we have as a community for people who are unhoused,” he says. People living in encampments have been impacted by fires. They have been exposed to bad air quality. Now, they have been caught in the torrential rains. “I think it shines a bright light on the need for safe sleeping locations,” he said. Londos, who also builds tiny homes for the community, echoed the concerns, especially in light of the intensifying climatic conditions. “Things are going to get much, much worse in the following years and decades,” he said. “There is going to be more disasters – and people are not prepared.”Winning tip: Load up the rucksacks, Cumbria Our local Christmas walk is an amble up Arnside Knott, to meet our friends and neighbours, rucksacks laden with bubbly and nibbles. Hopefully someone brings a guitar to add to the cheer. The spectacular views over Morecambe Bay, the Lakes and the Dales from this modest hill, which is maintained by the National Trust, provide the most fabulous backdrop to start the day. Then it’s back down to one of the secret bars that appeared during the past couple of years for a cheeky drink or two before heading back home. Kaushik Mistry Lapping up the atmosphere at Silverstone, Northants When Covid hit last year, we were stuck for things to do, but then Silverstone came up with the Lap of Lights event. We went and it was brilliant! Everyone was safe in their cars, they had a dedicated radio station that played Christmas music on the trip and you could even get a shout out to your family if you tweeted them. The lights were great and the boys loved the idea we were driving along the Hamilton Straight. It proved a great family event that Covid didn’t spoil. We have booked again this year and they have introduced food and a skating rink. There was a shout-out to dressed-up cars so a great fun event for all the family. From £30, until 3 January, silverstone.co.uk Kelly Dawe Advent calendar walk A family tradition, keenly anticipated by visiting grandchildren, is a different advent calendar walk every Christmas Eve, often from our front door. The preparation is worth the effort. We choose a route in advance, take 24 pictures on our phone of things to spot (decorations, post box, holly bush, park bench etc) then print them off as thumbnail pics. Each child has a copy, and ticks them off as they find them. An added incentive? We end with an image of a treat to be enjoyed “in real time” – for example, superb mince pies from a local market stall. M Ashley Royal finery, Brighton The Royal Pavilion gets decked out in its Christmas finery at this time of year, and I love seeing how the banquet hall might have looked back in the Prince Regent’s day. When you come out, you’ll see the ice rink in the gardens – though I prefer grabbing a mulled wine and watching from the sidelines. brightonmuseums.org.uk Kayleigh Tanner Flowers and music, east London Columbia Road is famed for its Sunday flower market, but it also has Christmas openings on Wednesdays (next one 22 Dec) until 9pm with choirs and a brass quintet. There’s an amazing collection of independent shops where you can shop for gifts and enjoy a glass of mulled wine and a mince pie. You can even pick up Christmas trees and plants from a handful of stalls, and head to one of the delicious local restaurants afterwards. It’s got a lovely festive, neighbourhood atmosphere. columbiaroad.info Emma Bracing beach walk, East Sussex Every New Year’s Day we drive to Camber Sands to walk along the huge beach with its dunes and vast skies and to grab a hot chocolate at the KitKat cafe. We aren’t alone – there are usually hundreds of dog walkers, people on horseback and kiters. It’s a great time for blowing away the cobwebs and doing something together as a family. Tanya Vincent Ice and lights, east London Our Christmas tradition is a big family ice skating trip and this year’s outing did not disappoint. Set against the sparkling skyline of Canary Wharf, we whizzed around the ice for an hour, the kids holding on to their rented penguin skating aids. The roof, lined with thousands of twinkling lights, keeps the weather at bay and makes this the perfect activity for a rainy day. If you don’t fancy skating, you can grab a rink-side seat and a mulled wine at the OffPiste Bar next door. £17.95/£11.95, icerinktickets.co.uk Jay Louise Gee Christmas on the cliffs, North Yorkshire On Christmas Day the family meet at the top of the cliffs and walk down the steep steps to beautiful Cayton Bay, between Filey and Scarborough. On the beach the kids look for fossils and peek into the deserted pillboxes. We gather dry sticks and seaweed and light a fire. Because it’s Christmas we share a bottle of fizz. If we are really lucky we might see a seal. Jenny Street football, north London Every year (but not 2020 for obvious reasons), I organise a street football match. For two weeks before, I leaflet all the cars and houses to make sure that our little street in Camden will be completely empty of cars. On Christmas morning the empty street sounds echoey. Then the raucous fun starts: one match for adults, one match for the children, with lots of spectators. Afterwards there’s a tipple available. It all works up a wonderful appetite for lunch. This year we will be collecting for the local food bank. Micheline Lobjois Stand outside your house and peer in On Christmas Eve, we light candles in all our rooms, open the curtains and peep inside from the street. It’s called House by Candlelight and doesn’t involve any travel or spending extra money. First we sing a carol outside the duck shed (they ask for it every year!) and then venture back indoors, visiting each room as if we are burglars but we don’t steal anything. We spin stories about the “family who must live here”. Seeing the everyday by candlelight makes us love where we live and feel grateful, rather than the envy and dissatisfaction that can come from visiting other places. MaryThe quiz master is already enjoying his Christmas break, but before he left he deposited 15 sealed envelopes in mysterious locations around London which have since been collated into the quiz you see before you. Fifteen questions to test your topical and general knowledge, featuring some of your favourite Thursday friends: Ron from Sparks, Kate Bush, and that Doctor Who reference to spot. Let us know how you get on in the comments The Thursday quiz, No 34 If you do think there has been an egregious error in one of the questions or answers, please feel free to email martin.belam@theguardian.com but remember, the quiz master’s word is always final, and you don’t want him breaking in and stealing all your presents.Good morning. The former Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin has pleaded guilty to violating George Floyd’s civil rights during the arrest that killed Floyd in May 2020 and that sparked mass racial justice protests across the US and beyond. Chauvin appeared in federal court in person yesterday morning to change his plea to guilty. It means he will not face a federal trial in January, though he could end up spending more years behind bars when a judge sentences him at a later date. As part of the plea deal, Chauvin also pleaded guilty to violating the rights of a then 14-year-old boy during a 2017 arrest. Chauvin is charged with two counts of depriving Floyd of his rights for pinning his knee against Floyd’s neck as the Black man was handcuffed and not resisting, and for failing to provide medical care to Floyd during the 25 May 2020 arrest that resulted in Floyd’s death. Hasn’t he already been found guilty of Floyd’s murder? Yes, he has has already been convicted of state murder and manslaughter charges and is serving a sentence of 22 and a half years. A federal grand jury indicted Chauvin for this additional charge in May this year. What about the other officers? A federal trial for the other three men still appears to be scheduled for January. They also face state trial on aiding and abetting counts in March. Biden pledges aid on Kentucky trip: ‘I’ve not seen this much damage from a tornado’ Joe Biden said he had never seen “this much damage” from a tornado as he walked past debris piled shoulder-high, furniture torn to pieces and homes without roofs or walls during a visit yesterday to a Kentucky town rendered unrecognizable by tornadoes. Red brick dust swirled through Mayfield’s streets when Biden spoke to local officials and viewed the storm damage in one of the dozens of communities ravaged by the storms. More than 30 tornadoes tore through Kentucky and seven other states, killing at least 88 people. Thousands of residents have lost their houses or are without power. Biden held hands with Graves county executive Jesse Perry and a church pastor in prayer and spoke to a family gathered in front of a destroyed home. He told reporters he was “impressed how everybody is working together” on the recovery. What did Biden say about the disaster? He pledged that federal aid would continue to flow. Biden said this kind of tragedy “either brings people together or it knocks them apart”. Bruce Springsteen sells song catalogue to Sony for $500m Bruce Springsteen has sold his entire song catalogue to Sony Music in a deal worth $500m, according to anonymous sources speaking to Billboard and the New York Times. The sale, which encompasses his recorded work and his songwriting, will give Sony ownership of one of the most admired bodies of work in pop and rock: more than 300 songs spanning 20 studio albums plus other releases. The huge sum dwarfs even the reported $300m paid by Universal for Bob Dylan’s songwriting catalogue in December 2020, and the reported $150m paid for a 50% share of Neil Young’s catalogue to the UK investment fund Hipgnosis in January 2021. Is it common to sell off song rights? Numerous other artists have sold off the rights to their work in the last couple of years, including Stevie Nicks and Christine McVie of Fleetwood Mac, Paul Simon and Tina Turner. Why do artists sell their song catalogues? While the musicians could potentially stand to make more money in the long term by holding on to their song rights, a huge cash payout while they are still alive is an attractive prospect, giving them and their estate a simple asset to deal with. In other news … Gloria Jean Watkins, better known by her pen name, bell hooks, has died aged 69. The author, professor and activist published more than 30 books in her lifetime, covering topics including race, feminism, capitalism and intersectionality. Joe Biden has nominated Caroline Kennedy, daughter of John F Kennedy, to be the US ambassador to Australia. Kennedy, 63, a member of one of the US’s most famous political families, has long been considered a leading candidate for a high-profile envoy position. The British public do not share the government’s appetite for perpetual conflict with the EU and more people see the bloc as a key future partner than have that view of the US, according to a report on post-Brexit foreign policy. Five children have died and three remain critically injured after they fell about 10 metres from a jumping castle that was blown into the air in north-west Tasmania, in Australia. The premier Peter Gutwein said the tragedy was “devastating and heartbreaking”. Stat of the day: 9,915 more calls to suicide helpline following release of US rapper Logic’s song A song by the rapper Logic that references the name of a suicide prevention helpline led to a “notable increase” in the number of calls to the service and may have reduced the number of suicides, research has found. Titled 1-800-273-8255 – the number for the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline – the song generated strong public attention upon its release and following two notable performances. Following these events an additional 9,915 calls were recorded and there was evidence of a reduction in the number of US suicides. Don’t miss this: America’s death penalty divide In March, Virginia became the first southern state to scrap capital punishment. Virginia’s seismic shift away from judicial killings has created a death penalty-free zone on the north-east seaboard of the US that runs from Maine’s border with Canada down to the edge of the Carolinas. But there is a powerful sting in the tail. As the support for judicial killings generally recedes, those states that are sticking with capital punishment are displaying grotesque aberrations in its application. Here’s why capital punishment is getting better – and worse. … or this: what Covid taught us about racism – and what we need to do now If ever there was an illustration of how the inequalities of race and class work together, the pandemic was it. We were told coronavirus didn’t discriminate, but it didn’t need to – society had already done that for us. For at the very moment when consciousness was raised to the issue of racism through Black Lives Matter, we were presented with a clear example of how racism operates through Covid. But there is a path to a fairer future if we want it, argues Gary Younge. Climate check: how crypto mining became the oil industry’s new hope Cryptocurrencies such as bitcoin, the most popular decentralized digital currency, have a notoriously large carbon footprint. So to leverage a cheap source of energy to run their bitcoin mining operations, two graduates found themselves partnering with oil companies to repurpose a byproduct, primarily methane, that’s typically vented or burned off in flares. But climate experts warn that plans to repurpose waste gas is not a solution, but more like placing a Band-Aid over a gaping wound. Last Thing: what’s it like to star in a flop play? Movies, TV shows and books can all get terrible reviews and small audiences, but the difference when this happens in theatre is that the actors have to go back on stage and remake the work just after critics have declared it disastrous. “If I had to articulate what it feels like to be in the middle of a play you feel is dying on its arse, it’s a cold sense of dread, like battery acid in your stomach,” says the actor Michael Simkins. “The first thing you do is tell all your friends who have booked tickets to cancel.” In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.Why did eight workers at a Kentucky candle factory and six workers at an Illinois Amazon warehouse die this week? They were killed when a powerful tornado destroyed their workplaces, but it wasn’t really the storm that killed them, any more than a sailor forced to walk the plank is killed only by the waves. They were not random victims. They were sacrificed. We here in the most advanced nation on earth offered them up to the gods that we actually worship. Why did they die? They died because they were inside their workplaces in the path of the storm. They died because they did not leave work before disaster struck. And they did not leave work because they were allegedly ordered not to, by their bosses. The factory workers in Kentucky say that managers threatened to fire them if they left. Amazon workers say that they were told not to leave in advance of the storm. They also say that lack of adequate safety procedures is par for the course at Amazon, where the employee handbook notifies workers that they can be fired for leaving without “permission”. Why couldn’t they leave work? Because none of them had a union to protect them. None of them had a union to empower them to stand up to a boss who demanded that they do something that put them in danger. None of them had a union to give them the collective ability to require their employers to value their lives. Unions are the only – the only – reason industries from construction to coal mining are far safer today than they were a century ago. Unions have fought for generations to force – to force – companies to take safety seriously. Under capitalism, a dead worker is nothing more than a small debit on a company’s ledger. Companies do not allow worker safety to impinge on their all-important profits unless they are absolutely required to. Unions are the things that require them to. The workers who died this week had no unions. They had inadequate protections at work. And now they are gone. Why didn’t they have unions? They didn’t have unions because employers believe that unions will cost them money, and therefore all of corporate America and much of our political structure has conspired for many decades to make it extremely hard for regular working people to form and maintain unions. Amazon, in particular, goes to great lengths to fight unionization everywhere. It spies on workers; it hires expensive anti-union consultants; it violates labor law; it lies to its workers and tries to scare them. It does this because it knows that unions might eventually require Amazon to treat its workers as employees, and as humans, rather than as automatons who exist to fill tiny interchangeable roles in Amazon’s logistical operations. A union might, for example, endanger Amazon’s two-day delivery process, by requiring a warehouse to momentarily shut down when a deadly tornado is approaching. That simply won’t do. It is vital that Amazon remain union-free, so that its founder may continue to accumulate a vast and unspendable fortune that he will use to build rocket ships for his own personal amusement. That is the highest purpose of this wondrous corporation, and nothing must interfere with that. And why is it that despite being treated as disposable machines, despite having their safety ignored and their right to organize crushed and their basic human identity discarded, people still take jobs like these? Why did these workers stay at work when their manager told them to, rather than listening to the alarms going off in their own heads? Because they need to, in order to survive. This is the American system as we like it. As a society, we prefer a world in which a large number of people live paycheck-to-paycheck and will therefore take jobs as “independent contractors” with few rights and little safety and no union and low wages. We want a world in which people are so afraid of losing their jobs that they will quite literally ride out a tornado for less than $20 an hour, because the alternative is poverty. This is the social arrangement that allows us to have lots of cheap stuff, fast. So many of our most respected citizens can claim responsibility for this achievement: every corporate executive who hires an anti-union law firm; every politician who passes “right to work” laws and opposes public health care; everybody who votes Republican because of some weird race panic; every member of the Chamber of Commerce who conspires with local leaders to give tax breaks to companies like Amazon to build a vast warehouse in their dreary county; every institutional investor who demands constant growth and utmost efficiency and never, ever peeks behind the curtain to see how it is accomplished; and every one of us who has fallen in love with the seductive ability to click and receive an infinite assortment of consumer goods, whenever and wherever we want. What would it take to avoid a tragedy like this? Perhaps three-day delivery, instead of two. A few bucks more for those bluetooth headphones. A few percentage points lower corporate profits, a few points higher taxes. A few people at the company to take safety seriously, and a few more to deal with the union respectfully. That’s all, really. It doesn’t sound like much. But we have clearly judged it to be a price too high to pay. We choose instead to pay with the lives of working people, and cling fervently, like deluded gamblers, to the belief that we will always be the lucky ones. Hamilton Nolan is a labor reporter at In These TimesIt was an evening of not one ending, but two, in Lower Saxony. It took two nods of Anthony Modeste’s head; the first, of the gentlest kind, to score one of the easiest goals of his curious career and end a mini-drought, the second a more forceful show of aerial power to provide an 89th-minute winner and send Köln’s travelling supporters into ecstasy. “My strength is my heading, not my right or my left foot as you saw in that move,” he laughed afterwards with some self-deprecation, having missed an arguably better chance 10 minutes before. The look of deflation on the face of Florian Kohfeldt, the Wolfsburg manager, after another defeat was all down to Modeste, whose incredible return to form at 33 is one of the stories of this Bundesliga season. The Frenchman is also the scorer of more headed goals than anybody else in the league so far, and of more headers than anyone at this stage of a Bundesliga campaign since the towering Jan Koller for Borussia Dortmund in 2004-05. So plus ça change for Effzeh’s centre-forward, you might say. To dismiss it as a given, however, would underplay the journey to get here. It is remarkable. Until a four-game dry spell leading into the trip to the Volkswagen Arena, “Turbo Tony” was scoring at a faster rate than he did during 2016-17. He still has 10 in 16 starts so far, which is way more than anyone would have dared imagine when he was loaned out to Saint-Étienne (where his late father, Guy, had also played) last season or when he returned to Geißbockheim in summer after the completion of a miserable spell back in France, comparable to his inglorious temporary move to Blackburn Rovers in 2012. A huge part of the wildly popular Steffen Baumgart’s revival of the team has been his ability to get the best from Modeste. The coach recently recounted some words of direction he gave the player in pre-season. “We talked about what he wants to achieve,” said Baumgart. “Whether he wants to relax for the next two years [the remainder of his contract at the start of the season] or step on the gas, be successful and have fun.” Modeste’s response was clear, committing body and soul to be ready for a fast-paced brand of football under the new manager, following jaw and groin surgery. Baumgart had begun to succeed where his predecessor Markus Gisdol failed, with Modeste never really clicking with the former Hoffenheim coach. “I’ve never seen him work so hard,” said the defender Rafael Czichos. Baumgart’s personality and tactical bravery has changed fundamentally changed Köln but none of it would make as much of a difference if Modeste had not rediscovered his scoring touch. Köln have gained a superstar forward they never could have afforded on the open market. To do it again here means so much. This is Modeste’s home – which is why, when it all started to fall apart in China and his new club wanted to wriggle out of his lucrative deal, he was only ever coming back to one place. In dispute with Tianjian Quanjian, he came back to Germany in late summer 2018 and training with his former team before finally being re-signed in the November. After months of wrangling between the clubs and Fifa, it took the intervention of former European Parliament president Martin Schulz, using his connections in China to clear him to play. Modeste scored, naturally, four minutes into his second debut, at Paderborn, in February 2019. It brought him to tears, as all the months of struggle and the feeling that bridges with the faithful might have been burned by his departure flooded in. He went on to score some important goals as the team won the second tier title and went straight back up to the top flight. Off-pitch relationships were repaired but on the field, it was never quite the same. Modeste was hampered by injuries which cast serious doubt over whether such an imposing whirlwind of a striker could ever come close to recapturing anything near his best. “In mid-April I was at the point where I couldn’t walk any more because of the pain,” he recently told Bild, discussing his groin problems, even if much of last season in Germany was about managing his knee. Modeste got in touch with the surgeon Gilles Reboul, who he knew and trusted from his time at Bordeaux a decade ago, and had him operate on his groin. It was a last throw to rediscover his peak. He had scored 25 times in the Bundesliga in 2016-17 as they made Europe for the first time in a generation, with the top scorer and his teammates rushing Peter Stöger’s press conference to joyously given the coach a drenching after the final-day win over Mainz sealed the deal. Then Modeste left for China and from the moment he was strongly criticised over it by then-Effzeh (and now Wolfsburg) sporting director Jörg Schmadtke, it didn’t work for either party. Stöger was out before Christmas, Köln were relegated, and the centre-forward lost his mojo. Now back in the saddle, Modeste is loved. He inspires songs, such as this Mallorca classic by Ikke Hüftgold, embraces the city’s fabled Karneval and charms with his interviews and displays of closeness with Baumgart, like when he stole the manager’s trademark cap for a dance after a recent equaliser against Union. He is also, in the words of Uth, “Köln’s life insurance”, and has the edge to be decisive. “You always meet twice in life,” Modeste told Sportschau after the game, not hiding his pleasure in getting one over Schmadtke. In a club and a city that knows how to enjoy the moment unlike any other, the man who has become one of their own deserves to do just that. Talking points • Bayern Munich are officially the Herbstmeister – autumn champion – after a 5-0 win at Stuttgart that was a tad flattering but underlined just how good they are and what Martin Schneider of Süddeutsche Zeitung described as the “still-immense possibilities of the Bayern squad”. Serge Gnabry returned to his former club to strike a super hat-trick despite Julian Nagelsmann’s suggestion “he’s still struggling a bit with his back”. Meanwhile Marc Roca, brought in after a spate of midfield injuries, received a dressing-room ovation for his performance. • Dortmund beat Greuther Fürth – emboldened by their first win of the season, and playing bravely – 3-0 but it was nowhere near as it easy as the scoreline looks, with Erling Haaland’s two goals coming at just the right time to avert trouble. Fürth’s sporting director, Rachid Azzouzi, meanwhile, was furious with the referee for not giving Jude Bellingham a second yellow card on the stroke of half-time. • Borussia Mönchengladbach’s leaky defence sunk them again as they went down 3-2 to Adi Hütter’s old club Eintracht Frankfurt (“undeserved”, in his opinion). Kevin Trapp was excellent in goal for the visitors but Gladbach’s fourth defeat in a row (in which they’ve conceded 17 goals) casts a shadow over Hütter.When flower vendors put out the red and green kokina on the streets, holiday season has arrived in Istanbul. Widely believed to have begun as a Christmas tradition of Turkey’s Greek community, kokina is made by tying together two different plants that grow in the wild, and looks like a picture-perfect version of holly. Its name comes from the Greek for red. Romany florists have been making this bouquet for at least a century, collecting the blood-red berries and stems, both from prickly plants found in woodlands. It is a vital source of income for many Roma – members of one of Turkey’s poorest ethnic groups, who are barred from all but the lowest paying jobs by widespread discrimination – and especially this year, when there is little other work available and the economic situation is getting worse. The Turkish lira sank to a record low against the dollar on Monday, having already lost half its value since the beginning of 2021. The cost of goods has been skyrocketing because of the government’s insistence on low interest rates despite inflation wiping out earnings, especially for the poorest households. Social media is full of pictures of long lines for subsidised bread, sold by opposition-run municipalities in Istanbul and in the capital, Ankara. Eyüp, 23, a Romany cleaning worker in Istanbul, used his annual leave to forage for the red berries in Samsun, a city by the Black Sea. He had to leave his wife and two small children at home, and has been staying in a makeshift tent in the cold for weeks, climbing tall trees and bushes to reach the clusters they call gıcır. Kokina does not wilt for months after being foraged, which could explain the popularity of this laborious invention that Eyüp called “a torture to make”. “My hands are awful because of the thorns,” he said. “But I needed to pay my bills.” The family has no fridge at home, and has not been able to afford milk formula and nappies for their children lately. According to official statistics, annual inflation reached 21.31% in November, a figure critics say is too low and does not reflect reality. An independent group of academics called the Inflation Research Group has been challenging official data with calculations of 58.65% in November. The leader of the main opposition, Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu, wrote to owners of supermarkets in December, asking them to not raise the prices of “10 items for survival” during the winter, including flour, salt and pasta. That seems unlikely: since January, prices for eggs have increased by 48% and yoghurt by 45%, according to research by teyit.org, a factchecking platform that compared price tags in two popular retailers. “We’ve all become poorer, but for some, there is no lower step,” said Hacer Foggo, a veteran civil society activist who founded an NGO called Deep Poverty Network during the pandemic to support the neediest, many of whom are Roma. Some Romany families she meets cannot pay for baby food, replacing it with sugared water. In almost every home NGO workers visit now, they see delayed development in young children because of chronic undernutrition. “A six-year-old looks three,” Foggo said. In a 2020 survey, the group found that 49% of the families could not even afford clean drinking water. “It’s got a lot worse since then,” she added. A 2012 Council of Europe report said Turkey had the largest Romany population in Europe and attempts had periodically been made to improve their lot. Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, the Turkish president, apologised to the Roma in 2010 for decades of discriminatory policies and announced an initiative to help. Another action plan followed in 2016 but critics have said both remain on paper. Poverty is passed on from one generation to the next, Foggo said. “Roma children I met years ago are now collecting trash like their fathers.” Kokina, too, has been passed down the generations. A Turkish newspaper article from 1934 mentioned “Gypsies selling kokina for Christmas” on Istiklal Caddesi, a popular shopping avenue at the heart of Istanbul. “We learned how to make it from our grandparents as kids,” said Eyüp. He has assembled at least 10,000 branches since October. “All hopes are on kokina now,” Foggo said.Even within the noisy, raucous world of punk music, Thomas “Mensi” Mensforth stood out from the crowd. Forthright, outspoken and unswervingly political, he was the charismatic frontman of Angelic Upstarts from their formation in 1977 until his death, from Covid-19, aged 65. The Upstarts, who had two Top 40 UK singles and three Top 40 albums in the late 1970s and early 80s, were pioneers of the subgenre of Oi music, which owed less to the suburban art school milieu from which some of the first wave of punk bands emerged and more to the council estates and football terraces with which Mensi was familiar. “We were living what other groups were writing about,” he said. Like many of the early Oi protagonists, Mensi and the Upstarts were inspired by bands such as the Clash and the Sex Pistols, but were even more raw and musically unschooled than their idols. Mensi’s rough, passionate vocals, often delivered at breakneck speed and, at least in the early days, with more emphasis on the lyrics than the melody, were typical of Oi’s do-it-yourself commitment to documenting the highs and lows of working-class life. Many of the songs he wrote were dismissed by the music press as little more than football chants – even his hero, the Clash’s Joe Strummer, accused him of being “a shouter, not a singer”. But Mensi’s heart-on-the sleeve compositions – anthems with titles such as We are the People, Police Oppression, Never ‘Ad Nothin’ and Kids on the Streets – generated a large and loyal base of fans, many of whom regarded him as a folk hero. Mensi was born in South Shields, Tyne and Wear, where his father, Thomas, was a coalminer in the Westoe colliery and his mother, Dorothy (nee Smith), was a housewife. After schooling at Stanhope Road secondary modern he followed his father down the Westoe pit, but during that time 19-year-old Mensi was mesmerised by seeing the Clash on their 1977 White Riot tour. Later that year he formed Angelic Upstarts with Ray “Mond” Cowie (guitar) and Derek “Decca” Wade (drums), shipyard workers from the Brockley Whins estate where he lived, and Steve Forsten, a bricklayer, on bass guitar. Their debut, self-financed single, The Murder of Liddle Towers (1978) – about a local man who had died in police custody – caused an immediate stir, while in 1979 their second release, I’m an Upstart, made it to No 31 on the UK singles chart. With the forceful presence of Mensi up front, the Upstarts quickly became a popular live attraction, although for a spell their gigs were magnets for violence, and their notoriety made it difficult to get bookings. Resorting to subterfuge, in April 1979 Mensi managed to secure an engagement at the local Acklington prison by convincing the chaplain that they were a religious group. Once set up on the prison stage, to the horror of the guards and the delight of 150 inmates, he unfurled a “Smash law and order” banner featuring a pig in a police helmet, and began to run through the band’s repertoire of anti-establishment songs, generating tabloid outrage in the process. With help from Sham 69’s Jimmy Pursey, the Upstarts signed to Warner Bros. Following the success of their 1979 debut album Teenage Warning (its title track made it to No 29 in the singles chart and gained them an appearance on Top of the Pops), their next two albums, We Gotta Get Out of This Place (1980) and 2,000,000 Voices (1981), also sold well, with the latter peaking at No 32. Mensi had initially expected the Upstarts to last three years – “one year getting known, one year at the top and one year on the slide” – but they proved to be remarkably resilient. After five more studio albums there was a hiatus in the late 80s when the band split and reformed on more than one occasion, before new albums – featuring various line-up changes but with Mensi always the linchpin – were issued in 1992, 2002, 2011 and 2015. Their most recent stage appearance was in September this year. As time went on, Mensi’s songwriting developed more sophistication, but the lyrics remained as blunt as ever. A provocative, patriotic leftwinger, admirer of Arthur Scargill and an active supporter of the street-level Anti-Fascist Action group from the mid-80s onwards, he appeared to become even more angry and radical as he grew older, latterly taking to calling himself “Mensi Marx”. Yet he was also a naturally canny entrepreneur and had a head for business sidelines, including in secondhand car dealing and as the owner of the Alexandra Hotel pub in Jarrow, which added to his living as a musician. “He was the biggest socialist in Oi and the only one who ended up minted,” joked the journalist Garry Bushell. Outside music and business, Mensi had a complicated personal life that he blamed on “the rock’n’roll lifestyle”. He is believed to be survived by at least 16 children from various relationships. • Thomas William Mensforth, musician, born 4 July 1956; died 10 December 2021The fast fashion group Boohoo has warned that full-year profits and sales will be lower than expected after being hit by more customers returning clothes, delivery disruptions and surging costs. Shares in the online clothing retailer plunged 15% in response to its second warning in four months, despite its insistence that the current difficulties facing the business were mostly related to the pandemic and therefore “transient in nature”. Boohoo said that while overall demand had grown since the first and second quarter, it was suffering the effects of global shipping delays, rising costs linked to the pandemic, and “exceptionally high” levels of returns linked to an increase in sales of dresses that forced the group to slash full-year expectations for sales growth to just 12-14%. It was down from previous guidance of 20-25% sales growth in the year ending 28 February. The group said profit margins would also be hit by the return rates and lower than hoped for sales overseas. “This reflects our expectation that the factors impacting our performance in the period persist through the remainder of the financial year, and recent developments surrounding the Omicron variant could pose further demand uncertainty and elevated returns rates particularly in January and February,” Boohoo said in a trading statement on Thursday morning. In the UK, Boohoo said net sales were up 32% in the three months to November, compared with a year earlier, reflecting “exceptional” local demand. However, returned items were up 12.5% on an annual basis, and 7% higher than before the pandemic due primarily to selling more dresses, which are more fitted than the comfy clothing in vogue during the first year of the pandemic and so customers are more likely to buy several sizes and send some back. The company’s acquisition of brands including Coast and Karen Millen, which sell higher priced dresses, has heightened the impact of those shopping patterns. That trend is likely to have continued into December, as Christmas and end-of-year parties are cancelled due to the spread of the Omicron variant. Boohoo – which also owns the Debenhams, Burton, Wallis and Dorothy Perkins brands – is among a raft of retailers struggling during the pandemic due to global shipping delays. Some ships have failed to dock at ports due to local lockdowns or staff shortages, creating a ripple effect that has affected deliveries internationally. However, the fast fashion group’s UK business has been partly shielded from those effects, due to local warehouse storage that has made it faster to ship clothing to British consumers. “The group has gained significant market share during the pandemic. The current headwinds are short term and we expect them to soften when pandemic-related disruption begins to ease,” the Boohoo chief executive, John Lyttle, said. “Looking ahead, we are encouraged by the strong performance in the UK, which clearly validates the Boohoo model,” he added. “Our focus is now on improving the international proposition through continued investment in our global distribution network.” Caroline Gulliver, an analyst at Stifel, said: “With multiple profit warnings across the retail industry in recent weeks the factors behind Boohoo’s warning are not a surprise, but the magnitude of the slowdown and hit to [profit] margin is, given the confidence the company had three months ago.” She said the problems were likely to continue beyond February as freight capacity had not bounced back as quickly as hoped and it could take at least a year for Boohoo’s US and European distribution centres, which would reduce the need for shipping from the UK, to be finalised.Three days before last Christmas, Gabriel Martinelli set about making up for lost time. The young forward had arrived in England with a bang but knee surgery meant he missed the opening months of 2019-20. He finally returned to the starting lineup for a Carabao Cup game against Manchester City and it was some performance: for 45 minutes Martinelli ran around like a man possessed, charging down clearances before putting himself in the line of danger. There was serious concern when he hurled himself into a 50-50 with Zack Steffen, who was marginally the favourite for a through ball, and went down in a heap; he was soon up and about but, in a poor side, the Brazilian had been the only player operating on the edge. That frenetic night’s work came to mind on Wednesday after Mikel Arteta was asked whether Martinelli had put in the best performance of his Arsenal career against West Ham. It was certainly up there: the 20-year-old had opened the scoring with a sleek finish and, alongside the characteristic hustle, there was a refinement and precision to his general work. “He’s able to put some gears into his play,” Arteta said, referencing a tendency to “do everything at 100 miles per hour”. The message to Martinelli has been simple: pick your moments, slow it down when the game demands and, at times, just take a breath. It is filtering through. The challenge is to channel his zest and spirit rather than curb them; there was little time spent chasing marginal causes in the win over David Moyes’s side and most of his contributions around the penalty area had purpose. An accurate cut-back for Bukayo Saka would have brought Arsenal’s second goal without Issa Diop’s intervention; earlier he had taken up threatening positions where, at least once, the right release from Saka or another teammate would have found him unmarked. Arteta knows the exhilarating, emphatic edge to Martinelli’s game can elevate him among the best. Before that tie with City a year ago it was put to him that, in a dismal winter for Arsenal, the comeback kid might offer salvation. “We cannot put that pressure on his shoulders – it’s not fair on him,” he said. “He brings that enthusiasm the fans can see because he’s got something special, a special energy every time he steps on that field.” Expectations were high because of the bar Martinelli set when, in his first season, he scored 10 times. Nobody could miss his rough edges but the eye test did not lie: he ran with the pack-dog gait of Luis Suárez and finished with the explosive, fully meant thrust of Gabriel Batistuta. It is gratifying that South America still produces players like this, with a seemingly innate taste for drama. You can barely take your eyes off them and, watching Martinelli, the parallels with past greats were clear. Although his predatory gifts lend themselves, on the face of things, to the centre-forward role, Martinelli has been preferred on the left by Arteta and Unai Emery. It is an area more conducive to smoothing those jagged parts but also, famously, to unique menace. Thierry Henry and Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang thrived through a blend of directness and smart timing, measuring their runs into the inside-left channel and duly augmenting their goalscoring stats. Martinelli’s goal against West Ham was reminiscent of both and, in its measured nature, perhaps the type he had not previously scored for Arsenal. Aubameyang looms large in the Martinelli conversation now. When Martinelli arrived from Ituano at 18 there was little serious suggestion he could immediately depose his older teammate, who was still banging in the goals for fun, despite those early flourishes. The picture is different now, with question marks gathering around the succession plan to Arsenal’s club captain even before he was stripped of the armband on Tuesday. Martinelli’s most convincing display yet could not have been better timed and, given he is now at an age where regular starts are a realistic aim, may make the transition into a new era considerably easier. As always, notes of caution hover. Martinelli scored a smart goal against Newcastle last month but had only started twice in the league this season at that point, Arteta giving short shrift to clamour for his greater involvement. After those headlong dashes against City, his performances in feeling a way back from injury were sometimes scratchy and fitful; the endeavour was never in question but the clarity and combinations with teammates were off beam. Arteta was right to preach patience and, on Wednesday, Arsenal were rewarded with something close to the complete package: now they must see whether Martinelli can produce it over a sustained run. “We have such a young team and we have to find the right timing,” Arteta said earlier this month. “It’s very clear what we want to do with Gabi.” Arsenal’s opponents are beginning to see at first hand.Christ’s sacrifice and the erotic death wish of earthly glory: these are the components of this freaky folk horror from writer-director David Lowery, a mysterious and sensationally beautiful film inspired by the 14th-century chivalric poem Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, which was written by an anonymous contemporary of Chaucer. Its creator’s identity remains a puzzle to the present day – though the film playfully hints at the question of authorship. The story could not be more simple or more perplexing. A nobleman at the court of King Arthur is challenged by a stranger to a martial contest on Christmas Day. But the contest utterly negates or deconstructs the whole idea of manly valour, strength, courage and skill in battle. All that is required is submission. In this film adaptation Dev Patel plays Gawain, who must go on an extraordinary quest across a stunningly rendered landscape. Like a haunted pilgrim in something by Bergman, Gawain is to come across strangers whose own intentions are sinister. Barry Keoghan is a malign scavenger, Erin Kellyman is the spirit of Saint Winifred, whose own decapitation made her a Christian martyr; and a certain lord and lady, played by Joel Edgerton and Alicia Vikander (an eerie doppelganger of the lowborn woman he has left behind), who startle him with what appears to be a taste for medieval swinging. There is a sensational speech from the lady of the castle about the meaning of green: the colour of nature, the colour of remorseless amoral growth, the grass that will grow out of the grave and the moss that will cover the tomb, the endless process that will make a mockery of individual heroes and their paths of glory. And there is a stunning sequence in which Gawain is robbed and bound by the scavenger and his accomplices, left to die, to rot down to his bones but then to be born again, a rebirth that happens within the blink of an eye … or within the victim’s mind, or in metaphysical parallel with his ignominious roadside death. Gawain is being tested. So are we. The visual brilliance of this film combines with shroomy toxicity and unexplainable moral grandeur. What a stunning experience.The Bank of England has unexpectedly raised interest rates for the first time in three years amid growing concerns over inflation, despite the rapid spread of the coronavirus Omicron variant. Threadneedle Street’s monetary policy committee (MPC) voted by a majority of eight to one to raise rates from the historic low of 0.1% to 0.25%, judging that pressure on households from surging living costs outweighed the risks to the economy from the new variant. The increase will add to financial pressure on households with variable-rate mortgages and hit firms with higher borrowing costs, and comes after the government cut universal credit and announced plans to raise taxes from the spring. With inflation at the highest rate for a decade, the Bank warned there was unlikely to be any reprieve over the winter months from soaring energy costs driving up the rate from 5.1% at present to 6% next spring – three times its 2% official target. However, the surprise decision comes amid a severe deterioration in the economic outlook with Omicron triggering a collapse in consumer confidence, leading to a wave of cancellations for hospitality businesses during the key festive trading period. Samuel Tombs, the chief UK economist at the consultancy Pantheon Macroeconomics, said: “The MPC’s decision to hike bank rates today, before it knows the full extent of the economic damage wrought by the surging Omicron variant, underlines how worried it is about the outlook for inflation.” The pound rose sharply on the global currency market on Thursday, up by almost a cent against the dollar,trading above $1.33 after the central bank became the first of its major peer global peers to raise rates. In a sign of institutions scrambling to tackle inflationary pressures worldwide, the European Central Bank also said on Thursday it would scale back its multi-trillion euro quantitative easing pandemic support package. The US Federal Reserve said earlier this week it anticipated raising rates three times in 2022. Putting the Bank on a path to higher borrowing costs despite immediate short-term concerns over the economy, Threadneedle Street warned inflation was rising by more than expected due to soaring energy costs and global supply bottlenecks that would take time to dissipate. In a pre-emptive strike to temper inflation concerns, it said it could have waited to gauge how Omicron unfolds but there was a “strong case for tightening monetary policy now, given the strength of current underlying inflationary pressures and in order to maintain price stability in the medium term”. With the Bank sounding the alarm on living costs and scaling back its emergency stimulus for the first time since the pandemic began, Labour said the government urgently needed to take action to support households. Rachel Reeves, the shadow chancellor, said: “Prices have been soaring and many are feeling the pinch, so families will be concerned about additional pressures on their finances from higher mortgage payments and other debt.” The Bank had wrong-footed the City in November by holding back from raising borrowing costs, preferring to wait for more official figures to assess the impact on jobs from the end of furlough despite expectations it would raise rates. Although Britain’s jobs market remained robust according to the latest available figures, economists had expected the emergence of Omicron would again tempt the Bank of England to wait for more information. In the minutes of its decision the MPC said the new wave of the pandemic would weigh on the economy in the short term, but its impact on inflation over the months ahead was still unclear. The rate-setting panel revised down its expectations for GDP growth in the final three months of the year to 0.6%, from 1% in November. Only one external member of the nine-member panel, the economist Silvana Tenreyro, voted against raising rates. The Bank warned that fresh government restrictions and voluntary social distancing would hold the economy back this month and into early 2022, and that it would stand ready to review its position by the time of the MPC’s next meeting in February. Despite the rate rise on Thursday, 0.25% is still a lower interest rate than before the pandemic, when borrowing costs were set at 0.75% before the first wave spread to Britain in early 2020. Jack Leslie, a senior economist at the Resolution Foundation thinktank, said few households would see a rise in mortgage costs as most were on fixed rates. “While the timing of the Bank’s decision to raise interest rates is odd given the economic damage currently being caused by Omicron, the fact is that it is unlikely to make much difference to either inflation or household budgets,” he said. Explaining the rate increase, the Bank said successive waves of Covid had less impact on GDP as households and businesses gradually adapted to life with the pandemic. Although there was uncertainty this time around, it said Omicron could fuel persistently high levels of inflation if it led to sustained disruption to supply chains through factory closers and bottlenecks at ports. However, Hannah Audino, an economist at the accountancy firm PwC, said speculation the Bank would embark on further rate hikes in the spring could be wide of the mark. “With [Covid-19] cases at record levels and expected to continue rising, the risk of further social distancing measures, and signs that business confidence is already weakening, it is likely this modest rate rise could be the first and only one for some time.”Here’s a report from Adelaide: Here ends Test two, day one. A day when Marnus Labuschagne played and missed 20 times, was dropped twice, and which he ends unbeaten on 95. Australia are 221-2, England’s seam bowlers have all bowled between 13 (Stokes) and 18 (Anderson) overs, with very little reward. Tomorrow it’s going to be 36C in Adelaide, and hard work in the field. Still, sunset was nice. That’s all from me. We’ll be back for more tomorrow. Bye! Now BT Sport are interviewing a knackered student who hasn’t slept for 28 hours and has basically lost the power of speech. He’s not happy. Matt Prior on BT Sport says Jos Buttler became a bit “lazy” in the final hour, looked tired, stopped moving his feet, and hence the drop. Labuschagne is grabbed on his way from the field for his instant reaction: That was massive for the team. Just getting through that really sets us up well for tomorrow. Probably the last bit I wavered there with that shot and got dropped - a few prayers up there, I don’t know how that happened. A bit of disbelief, but my job is to make sure I capitalise on that now. I’ve got to make sure tomorrow, no chances. 89th over: Australia 221-2 (Labuschagne 95, Smith 18) Broad’s second ball is a cracker, Labuschagne pushes at it and it beats the edge. The fifth is full and straight, but this time Labuschagne does get an edge - into the pads. He deals with the next, and that’s stumps, with England knackered and disheartened by that late drop, and Australia on top. 88th over: Australia 221-2 (Labuschagne 95, Smith 18) Robinson to Smith, who leaves the first, and the second, and the third, and the fourth, has a little half-nibble at the fifth as it angles across him and down the leg side, and leaves the sixth. Not good enough from the bowler. 87th over: Australia 221-2 (Labuschagne 95, Smith 18) Broad to Labuschagne who twice leaves with ostentatious full-body twists, still with energy to spare at the end of a long day/night. Maybe two overs to go? 86th over: Australia 220-2 (Labuschagne 95, Smith 17) Good stat: Before this series Buttler had taken 118 catches and dropped 10; in this series he’s taken three and dropped three. Today started with a brilliant catch to get rid of Marcus Harris, but since then he’s dropped Labuschagne twice, and the second was as bad as it gets. Now Labuschagne raises arms to one from Robinson that comes in, and only just misses off stump. 85th over: Australia 217-2 (Labuschagne 95, Smith 14) HIDEOUS DROP! The moment arrives, the one England have waited and worked for! Labuschagne edges, it’s a regulation catch, completely straightforward, just to Jos Buttler’s right and chest high. And somehow it goes down! That will be a hammer blow to England’s morale. Labuschagne leaves the next couple, and there are ironic cheers from the crowd as Buttler collects those. 84th over: Australia 217-2 (Labuschagne 95, Smith 14) Smith pushes wide of cover and gets Australia’s first boundary in a little over 15 overs. 83rd over: Australia 212-2 (Labuschagne 94, Smith 10) Another maiden, but Anderson sends a couple harmlessly down the leg side, a couple more are too short, and having pinned their hopes on the new ball England haven’t made best use of it so far. 82nd over: Australia 212-2 (Labuschagne 94, Smith 10) Broad comes on, and crashes his first delivery into Labuschagne, off the elbow into the thigh. That’s going to be sore. Then two swing away and just past the bat. Labuschagne has played and missed 20 times now, and is cashing in all his lucky chips. “New ball or bust here,” writes Guy Hornsby. “A couple of wickets before the close or we’re in the deep stuff. A scene so typically wintry for us England fans. I’ll have a pint of hope with a chaser of desperation, please barman.” 81st over: Australia 212-2 (Labuschagne 94, Smith 10) Anderson takes the new ball and gets a bit of movement out of it, but no instant reward. 80th over: Australia 212-2 (Labuschagne 94, Smith 10) Another Woakes maiden, ending with a beauty to Labuschagne that rears off the pitch and just past the shoulder of the bat. England have been unlucky not to take another couple of wickets so far. But is their luck about to change with the sounding of the new ball claxon! 79th over: Australia 212-2 (Labuschagne 94, Smith 10) Crawley is on the field at the moment, I’m not sure who for. Root rips through another over. 78th over: Australia 211-2 (Labuschagne 93, Smith 10) A maiden from Stokes to Smith, starting with a cracker that moves away. 77th over: Australia 211-2 (Labuschagne 93, Smith 10) Root keeps bowling wide of leg stump, and keeps leaking singles to backward square leg. 76th over: Australia 208-2 (Labuschagne 92, Smith 8) Woakes to Labuschagne, who takes two from the last. 75th over: Australia 206-2 (Labuschagne 90, Smith 8) Four singles this time from Root’s over. There will be lots of talk about the slow over rate, and clearly England haven’t been in any kind of hurry, but if you’ve got an all-seam attack and spend most of a day bowling to a right/left-hand combination, you’re going to go a bit slower than normal for entirely acceptable sporting reasons, surely? 74th over: Australia 202-2 (Labuschagne 88, Smith 6) A Broad maiden. It certainly helps to get the over rate ticking when neither batter hits the ball off the square. 73rd over: Australia 202-2 (Labuschagne 88, Smith 6) Three singles off Root. We are in a holding pattern. 72nd over: Australia 199-2 (Labuschagne 86, Smith 5) Broad to Labuschagne, and what would have been a third successive maiden is spoiled by a single off the last. 71st over: Australia 198-2 (Labuschagne 85, Smith 5) Another maiden, from Root to Smith. We are nine overs from a new ball. 70th over: Australia 198-2 (Labuschagne 85, Smith 5) A big appeal for lbw against Labuschagne, but England decide not to review. It looks probably high, and almost certainly wide. A maiden from Robinson, and that’s drinks, and a chance for the players to calm down from the dizzying pace of this game. “While we’re putting up random stats, when did Australia last have three different captains in three successive Tests?” wonders Max Bonnell. “I suspect it was in the 1950s: in India in 1956-57, Ray Lindwall was captain in the second Test before Ian Johnson, the regular captain, returned for the third; but when Australia next played a Test, in South Africa in 1957-58, Ian Craig had taken over from Johnson. It may have happened since – can anyone recall?” 69th over: Australia 198-2 (Labuschagne 85, Smith 5) England, and Stokes in particular, just keeps banging it short against Labuschagne, and quite often against Smith. Perhaps the ball would swing under lights, but it’s not really being given a chance. Smith fends the last, but it falls short of Hameed at short leg. 68th over: Australia 192-2 (Labuschagne 80, Smith 5) There’s a fabulous scarlet sunset over Adelaide Oval now. Robinson bowls seven times to Smith, one a no-ball, and the seventh is dispatched past square leg for four. 67th over: Australia 188-2 (Labuschagne 80, Smith 1) Edged! Labuschagne edges a short ball but his own shoulder comes to his rescue, sending the ball looping up and dropping short of Buttler. He’s got away with a few today, has Labuschagne. He had started the over with a couple of pulls, the second of which found a gap. 66th over: Australia 180-2 (Labuschagne 72, Smith 1) Robinson to Smith, and one goes just past the edge, another clips something on its way through - just a pad, it turns out - and the last couple square him up but Smith, a little awkwardly, survives. 65th over: Australia 178-2 (Labuschagne 71, Smith 1) Stokes to Warner, who ignores fact that two fielders have been placed on the boundary for precisely this shot and pulls anyway! It’s not well controlled, but it does go into the gap and away for four. Emboldened, he ignores the field again next ball, and hits it straight to Broad. There is a no-ball here from Stokes, but fortunately it’s not the one that brought the wicket. Warner is out in the 90s again, after slapping the ball straight to cover! 64th over: Australia 172-1 (Warner 91, Labuschagne 70) Root bowls. They could do with him ripping through a few overs of spin to get them to the 80-over mark and the fresh cherry while they’ve still got enough time to do something with it this evening. 63rd over: Australia 169-1 (Warner 89, Labuschagne 69) Stokes comes on, and is almost into his delivery stride when Warner puts up a hand to tell him to pause. “Oh no, David!” the bowler cries. And he might be thinking something similar as a couple of deliveries later he lifts the ball over point for four. Australia look to have finally located second gear here. Labuschagne then takes a step back to spank one through the covers, so to speak. 62nd over: Australia 160-1 (Warner 84, Labuschagne 65) Warner pulls Anderson for four, after one ball short of 17 boundary-free overs, and then Labuschagne does it too! England’s bowlers have all put in a good shift today, but as a group they are looking short of spark and variety. 61st over: Australia 151-1 (Warner 79, Labuschagne 61) Warner hits Woakes down the ground, and Stokes sets off again. 60th over: Australia 148-1 (Warner 76, Labuschagne 61) Anderson’s first ball moves sharply away from the bat, and Labuschagne watches it go. Later the bowler drops down to field, and almost literally creaks as he gets back up again. If he felt fresh after being rested for the first Test, it’s probably a distant memory by now. 59th over: Australia 146-1 (Warner 76, Labuschagne 59) A couple of singles off Woakes. Almost the entire ground is in shadow now, and we’re waiting for the magic to happen. Something like this, perhaps. 58th over: Australia 144-1 (Warner 75, Labuschagne 58) Anderson bowls a maiden to Labuschagne, notable mainly for this puzzling hand signal from Stokes: 57th over: Australia 144-1 (Warner 75, Labuschagne 58) Poor Ben Stokes twice has to sprint from mid-on/off to the boundary to save a run. He’s puffing after the first run, and then a dot later he’s got to do it again. He does so, though, with a smile. 56th over: Australia 136-1 (Warner 70, Labuschagne 55) “Once again baffled by England’s apparent belief that there are only five sessions in pink-ball tests rather than the usual 15,” sniffs Will Vignoles. “Not quite as odd as the selection for the India pink-ball test earlier this year, and injuries to Archer and Stone haven’t helped, but I don’t understand why England seem to think that they need to put all their eggs in the swing basket when even in England, where the ball moves a lot more than Australia, you still want a balanced attack. The thinking in the camp just seems so muddled under Silverwood.” I’ve got some sympathy with England, who would have picked a very different group of bowlers if they were all injury-free, but there has been some very rum selection decisions in both Tests this series. For all Shane Warne’s grumbling on commentary I don’t think I’d have picked Leach for this one, though. 55th over: Australia 133-1 (Warner 67, Labuschagne 55) Labuschagne inside-edges Woakes’ first delivery, but well wide of the stumps. That yields a couple of runs, and no more follow. 54th over: Australia 131-1 (Warner 67, Labuschagne 53) Anderson gets us restarted. As England toil in the field it’s worth noting the weather forecast: after peaking at 31C today, tomorrow temperatures are expected to reach 36C in Adelaide, an absolute scorcher, and stay in the 30s until midnight. They then drop to 27C on Saturday and 22C on Sunday and Monday. A full day in the field tomorrow will be a grind. The players are on their way back out. Will the ball move? Will England bowl the 27 overs they require to get their hands on the new ball before the day’s out? The answers to these questions and more will come in the next couple of hours. Some interval reading for you. I’ll be back shortly: Curious statistic alert: Australia average 49 in the middle session of home day/night Tests: 53rd over: Australia 129-1 (Warner 65, Labuschagne 53) Root ends the session, with five balls of spin and one surprise unexpected faster ball to close. Four runs off the over, and England need a refresh. 84-0 across the session. “So, it turns out the time between hope and despair is 4 hours and forty minutes,” writes Phil Withall. “It’s the misplaced expectation that does you.” 52nd over: Australia 125-1 (Warner 63, Labuschagne 51) Lovely ball from Robinson to Labuschagne! Somehow he doesn’t get anything on it, and then he drives past mid-off for a few to bring up his half-century, off 156 balls. He has played and missed plenty, and been dropped by Buttler, along the way. 51st over: Australia 119-1 (Warner 61, Labuschagne 48) Root does some spin - and it does spin! That will be massively encouraging for, um, teams with spinners! Labuschagne works one round the corner, just wide of Stokes at leg slip, diving to his right. Then Warner tries a reverse sweep - apparently just the second reverse sweep he has attempted in Test cricket - which flicks off his bat, goes up onto his right shoulder, rolls down his back and heads towards the stumps, but doesn’t quite get there. A full list of the batters who have reached 3,000 runs in fewer innings than Labuschagne: 22 innings – Don Bradman (Australia) 32 innings – George Headley (West Indies) 33 innings – Herbert Sutcliffe (England) and Michael Hussey (Australia) 34 innings – Marnus Labuschagne (Australia) 50th over: Australia 113-1 (Warner 60, Labuschagne 43) Alastair Cook pipes up with a bit of match analysis. “They’ve got to keep going. If it does start nipping around and they get Australia five down on what looks a pretty good wicket, they’ve had a good day.” That is one very busy if there. Meanwhile Labuschagne hits straight for three to pass 2,000 career Test runs, in just his 20th match. 49th over: Australia 107-1 (Warner 58, Labuschagne 38) Warner clips past point for a couple to bring up the 100 partnership, 101 off 249 to be precise. 48th over: Australia 103-1 (Warner 56, Labuschagne 37) Robinson to Labuschagne. “No run!” 47th over: Australia 103-1 (Warner 56, Labuschagne 37) Labuschagne gets three after Hameed dives over the ball at square leg, not his first misfield of the day. England are keeping it tight, patiently waiting for the moment the ball starts to hoop around. Or for bedtime, whichever comes sooner. 46th over: Australia 100-1 (Warner 56, Labuschagne 34) Beauty! Labuschagne plays and misses as Woakes gets one to leave him. Warner starts the over with a bit of aggression, even if his drive is cut off at the rope. He’s been a different batter since drinks, when he has gone full-on attack at the first scent of a hittable delivery: 4 . 4 . . . . 3 . 3 . . 45th over: Australia 96-1 (Warner 53, Labuschagne 33) Hello! Broad’s back, and Warner biffs his first ball down the ground! The ball plugs when it returns to earth and they run three, but smell that intent! Labuschagne then faces the last five, without scoring. “I have a lovely memory of taking my very bright eight-year-old son to the 1994-95 Ashes game at Adelaide Oval,” writes Don. “An English batter hit a ball racing to the boundary with the Aussie fielder chasing it. The crowd was calling out and he asked me why. I said because they are encouraging him to get the ball. He looked at me and said, ‘But surely he is already running as fast as he can.’ England won that game. And he is now an anaesthetist.” 44th over: Australia 93-1 (Warner 50, Labuschagne 33) Woakes finds Labuschagne’s edge this time, but it goes low to third slip with a bounce or two along the way. The next is a slow full toss which the batter clips square for four. The next is pushed gently back to the bowler. “No run!” “England’s dismal (and entirely predictable) over rate suggests that they’ll lose five or six new ball overs tonight,” writes Gary Naylor. “That really will be unforgivable if it transpires.” 43rd over: Australia 87-1 (Warner 50, Labuschagne 27) Stokes to Labuschagne, with a silly mid-off and a short leg waiting in case he fends one of the many short balls being sent his way into the air. He doesn’t. Five more dots, another loud shout of “No run!” as the ball rolls gently to midwicket, which seems mainly of comic value, and then a single off the last. 42nd over: Australia 86-1 (Warner 50, Labuschagne 26) Woakes to Labuschagne, who gets one to leave the right-handed Labuschagne nicely, even if the batter isn’t that close to getting anything on it. 41st over: Australia 85-1 (Warner 50, Labuschagne 25) Hello everyone! During the drinks break Stuart Broad gives a little on-field interview, looking forward to the time twilight hits, “it starts moving and we can put the slips back in and take some wickets”. We’ll see about that. Warner, having taken on some fluids, converts it into liquid cricket and hits Stokes for two boundaries, including a super back-foot hoist over cover, to reach his half-century off 108 balls! Therein lies the drinks break. And that is my signal, after 40 overs of enthrallment, to reluctantly hand over the OBO (don’t say that with the acronym fully enunciated) to Simon Burnton. 40th over: Australia 77-1 (Warner 42, Labuschagne 25) Chris Woakes is back. Hasn’t looked like a great threat today. He isn’t helped by a misfield at point that lets Warner off strike, after Warner has just punched two. Ian Walton has some questions about Buttler. “How many chances does he get as both wickey and bat? Pick the best keeper, can’t do much worse as a bat either and Ben Foakes can wield a decent willow. He’ll make up for any perceived weakness by being a proper wickey. Maybe I’m old-fashioned and want red ball players for red ball (and pink, ok!) and white ball players for pyjama cricket. Buttler only committed to the tour late anyway.” I can’t disagree with much of that. Buttler in about 2017 looked like he could be transformative in Test cricket in the way he was in one-dayers. It hasn’t panned out though. 39th over: Australia 74-1 (Warner 39, Labuschagne 25) Here’s a hot stat: only once has Warner played a slower innings than this having faced over 100 balls. (Obviously this can change if he speeds up, but still.) Labuschagne, similarly, sees off another Stokes over. 38th over: Australia 74-1 (Warner 39, Labuschagne 25) Warner opens up a bit against Root. First he goes over mid-off for a couple, Stokes chasing back and then asked to stay halfway back to the fence by Root. Warner goes again through cover, and there’s a rider on that rope to keep the scoring to one. 37th over: Australia 69-1 (Warner 36, Labuschagne 23) Stokes short, Labuschagne rides the bounce and glances fine for one. Three fielders out on the rope for Warner on the hook, plus three closer to the bat on the leg side, but he sways away from the bouncer. Pulls a slightly less short ball, trying to go in front of midwicket but can’t elude Broad there. Stokes bowls another proper bouncer that has Warner bailing out of the shot, then bluffs with a full ball that misses off stump. 36th over: Australia 68-1 (Warner 36, Labuschagne 22) Root to try to burn through some overs, but Warner fires him to the cover boundary instead. A couple of singles follow. That must be the biggest over Australia has had all day. 35th over: Australia 62-1 (Warner 31, Labuschagne 21) Ben Stokes with the short-ball barrage approach again, and it nearly works! England drop another catch. Oh, this team. Rory Burns in Brisbane, Jos Buttler in Adelaide. The ball is about ribcage height, tending towards leg. Labuschagne steps across and swivels to try to catch it up. Gets a fat chunk of glove on it. Buttler has to go high to his left, but not outrageously so in either aspect. That’s regulation for a keeper. He gets it in his left palm, then somehow it pops out again. Marnus is nailed on for a big score now. 34th over: Australia 61-1 (Warner 30, Labuschagne 21) Another Anderson over for one run to Warner. The bowler taking a very leisurely approach to getting back to his mark. “Any chance that England might try and bowl more than 26 overs in the last session, given that their entire test cricket strategy for the last three years has been built around exploiting the pink ball at Adelaide?” I doubt it, Peter Salmon, I doubt it. 33rd over: Australia 60-1 (Warner 29, Labuschagne 21) Just over, this time! Marnus hooks Robinson just over square leg, who is up about 30 paces from the bat. Broad under the sunhat, who leaps up one-handed, back-handed, but it’s a metre too high for him. This is a weird old innings from Labuschagne. Gets four for another streaky shot, in between impersonating a traffic island. 32nd over: Australia 56-1 (Warner 29, Labuschagne 17) An edge from Labuschagne! That’s the most eventful thing we’ve seen in a while. Anderson draws the nick but Marnus has soft hands and the edge dies in front of the cordon. He pushes a single to point next ball. 31st over: Australia 55-1 (Warner 29, Labuschagne 16) Robinson gets back in the channel for this over, settling in at Warner and doing it nicely. Slips too short once and is cut, but saved at point. Otherwise, it’s another quiet one. The sun is getting lower, the shadows of the billowing roof of the stand are reaching across the field, and it’s still very warm out there. 30th over: Australia 55-1 (Warner 29, Labuschagne 16) This is a real bunker innings from Labuschagne. Gets beaten once by Anderson, past the edge again, while defending the rest. No attempt to score. Recognising that this is good bowling and all he has to do is wait it out. 29th over: Australia 55-1 (Warner 29, Labuschagne 16) The discipline has been good from England’s seamers, so Robinson is the one who has been noticeable having strayed too straight a few times. Not often, but here and there. Labuschagne gets a leg bye to one of these balls, and the change in target makes Robinson stray wide outside Warner’s off stump, cut behind point for four. 28th over: Australia 50-1 (Warner 25, Labuschagne 16) Warner kicks away! He has a few looks at Anderson, shouldering arms when he doesn’t like the length of the delivery. But when Anderson gets fuller, even though the line is tight around off stump, Warner drives with a flourish through cover point for four. Open blade, swishing. At long last, Australia reach the first milestone score. 27th over: Australia 46-1 (Warner 21, Labuschagne 16) Ollie Robinson from the Cathedral End, seeing Warner get off strike first ball with a clip that is half stopped at mid-on. Once again Labuschagne drops anchor. 26th over: Australia 45-1 (Warner 20, Labuschagne 16) James Anderson to commence proceedings, as expected. His weary walk to the top of his mark. His economical run in. Labuschagne is happy to camp on the front foot and send everything back down the pitch. We’re back. After a particularly dour first session and an extremely confusing meal break. There are people eating hot dinners around me. It all feels wrong. If you want something to do during lunch, here is yesterday’s Final Word podcast, in which Adam and I absolutely did not anticipate Cummins being isolated out of the match, but we did get some good insight from Ali Martin about some of England’s broader problems. Audio here. Here’s Sarah Jane Bacon, “from balmy west London”, by her account. “Upon learning that Our Dear Leader, Pat Cummins, has to self-isolate for the Test, I couldn’t *not* get up at stupid-o-clock to see the ramifications (and get the BT Sport’s pundits’ reactions to the news). Suffice to say: Cook et al are frothing with joy. I know Adelaide is a different prospect to the Gabbatoir, but I do hope there are some surprises in store for everyone.” Not much yet, aside from the scoring rate. I don’t think we’re going to see this ball start to swerve once the sun dips. David Shepherd (not the Reverend) writes in. “Look, I’d be as happy as anyone if Marcus found his range, but as of now he’s had 1.5 Marshes worth of chances with far less to show for it. I’m sure Usman is very sorry for whatever he’s done, so can we let him have a bat soon?” Some would call that an absorbing session, but bear in mind that toilet paper can also be absorbing. A strange exercise of the two teams testing one another out. All dance. Honours probably to Australia, having just killed the most shiny and lacquered part of the ball’s lifespan, but the data analysts say there was no swing at all on offer out there. England haven’t given away runs, so if they manage to find a wicket after the break then they could still take ascendancy quickly. The bowling approach though seemed to be that they had to use everyone they had picked, because they had picked them. I can’t recall Warner ever batting a session for such a low score, but jog my memory if that’s wrong. 25th over: Australia 45-1 (Warner 20, Labuschagne 16) Stokes bowls another over of short stuff, and that is lunch. Or effectively lunch. They will call it dinner even thought it’s 4:30pm local time. A few correspondents have enquired about my earlier comments regarding Marcus Harris. I will say this. There are 274 players in men’s Test cricket who have made more runs than Harris opening the batting. There are seven of those who have done so at a worse average. Currently he’s at 22.15 after 22 innings. 24th over: Australia 44-1 (Warner 20, Labuschagne 15) England supporters, it is 23 overs into a Test match and Joe Root is bowling. Not too badly, because he’s not too bad at it, but... this doesn’t feel like something that happens when things are going right. He does beat the top edge of a Warner cut, and gets a leading edge to lob into the off side. Maybe he was the secret weapon all along. 23rd over: Australia 42-1 (Warner 19, Labuschagne 14) At last a shot from Labuschagne, who has been quiet: he backs away from Stokes and ramps his short ball over slip for four. Streaky shot, Root thinks he’s in the game but there’s too much height and it’s a bit square of him. 22nd over: Australia 38-1 (Warner 19, Labuschagne 10) Warner takes on Broad! First ball of the over, whack, over the leg side. Pulling a short ball. Settles down for the rest of the over, defending and leaving. 21st over: Australia 34-1 (Warner 15, Labuschagne 10) Deep square leg in for Warner, who pulls there for a single. Stokes in going to try the short strategy then. A big change in the field for Labuschagne, going leg theory. Mid-on, midwicket, deep forward square, regulation backward square, and long leg. On the other side, two staggered slips, point, mid-off. Stokes bowls over his head, called wide. Gets him another shot at Labuschagne. Plus another with a no-ball - the technology is working in this match, and it picks up the front foot this time. Jon Lewis gets an automated pay cut. Around the wicket, Stokes. Another no-ball. A foreclosure sign is hammered to the door of the Lewis residence. Stokes in the end gets eight short balls to Labuschagne after one at Warner. None of them look very effective, and it’s a strange use of an outswing bowler with a ball that doesn’t age, after 20 overs on day one. 20th over: Australia 30-1 (Warner 14, Labuschagne 10) A boundary for Warner from Broad! Pitches full, Warner leans over his front leg and times it beautifully through wide long-on. We’ve heard a lot about Broad’s dominance of Warner in 2019. In the Ashes before that, in Australia, Broad didn’t get Warner out once while Warner averaged 66. Swings, roundabouts. 19th over: Australia 25-1 (Warner 9, Labuschagne 10) Bingo, full set, we’ve cycled through all five England seamers. Ben Stokes on for his first over. Bowling from the Cathedral End, loping in. I saw him doing a lot of work on landing his front foot in the nets yesterday. After each delivery, bowling coach Jon Lewis would move the marker for Stokes’ run-up. Meaning the bowler randomly started at different spots and had to land on the front line. One run for Warner behind point. 18th over: Australia 24-1 (Warner 8, Labuschagne 10) Broad returns. Warner facing. Immediately something happens again: Warner lashes wide with a cut shot, hitting on the bounce straight to point. He’s tucked up and defending the next on leg stump. Then Broad has it tailing into leg stump, letting Warner drive through mid-on, that long chase down Adelaide Oval that has them thinking of a fourth run, deciding against it due to Stokes being the fielder with the throw. Broad looks good against Labuschagne, too. Tests his outside edge a couple of times. Warm day in Adelaide, lovely afternoon. Very full in all of the western stands, empty tranches on the eastern side. 17th over: Australia 20-1 (Warner 5, Labuschagne 10) Robinson to Labuschagne, who also bats out the set. Australia very happy to wait out the even vaguely newish ball. 16th over: Australia 20-1 (Warner 5, Labuschagne 10) Another maiden from Woakes to Warner, who is now 5 from 44. Broad has only bowled four overs, and is the one to have made things happen. “I sympathise with that review process taking so long, although it’s infuriating,” writes Robert Speed. “The ICC want a clear protocol for how LBW reviews are undertaken, only going to ball tracking once its is established there was no bat involved. Unfortunately it cost us 5 minutes of nothing happening, but I can understand the protocol.” I see where you’re coming from - the protocol was largely so that umpires didn’t forget anything and audiences knew what was happening. But I’ve been in the truck where the tech guys are, and they know almost everything simultaneously. Aside from sometimes a processing delay for 20 seconds or so with ball-tracking. There is someone running the audio waveform, someone on Hot Spot, someone on ball-tracking, all separately. As it stands, they get no input to the third umpire, who sits upstairs and goes over each thing in order. But it seems absurd that one point of the process that would obviate the need for the rest can’t be put in front of the adjudicator. 15th over: Australia 20-1 (Warner 5, Labuschagne 10) This would have been a much better story had England batted first, the new Australians pushed immediately into the spotlight. This way around it gives the home team time to settle without feeling the loss of a captain. Robinson is testing out Labuschagne, who is doing Tony Hawk Pro Skater moves while leaving the ball outside off stump. Do a 720, dude. 14th over: Australia 20-1 (Warner 5, Labuschagne 10) Warner hits a four! Finally, after 13 overs of largely suffocating bowling, Woakes dishes him up a short wide one and Warner has both feet off the ground as he makes contact with the cut shot, slamming it through cover. Emphatic. Woakes follows with a genuine wide, called by the umpire. 13th over: Australia 15-1 (Warner 1, Labuschagne 10) Drinks break after 12 overs, which augurs well for England’s run rate. Wonder if they’ll be playing for free again, after losing 100% of their match fee in Brisbane? And yes, if you’re wondering, they did lose a review for that last effort, so they have one left for the innings and Australia three. Robinson resumes to Labuschagne, who keeps him out. 12th over: Australia 15-1 (Warner 1, Labuschagne 10) Another review down. Ok, this one will cause some consternation. Woakes, over the wicket to Warner. Pitched up, swing into the lefty. Hits him in line, but he’s pushing forward at the ball at the same time. Not 100% sure it was going on to hit, might have gone over, he’s a fair way down the wicket. But all of the DRS analysis is on the inside edge. Like Kohli the other week, it’s bat and pad at the same time. But not really. I’m pretty sure that’s pad first. The leg is pushed forward, the bat is angled back. But the third umpire says he can’t tell what was first, thus the review is void. Wait. Aaaaah ha ha! It was pitching outside leg. By a fraction. So the umpire just rock-and-rolled the inside edge for about six minutes, instead of looking at the pitch map for 0.04 seconds. Cricket, you are a foolish sport. 11th over: Australia 15-1 (Warner 1, Labuschagne 10) Young Marnus is in serious touch. Scoring from the get go. He’s helped by Robinson starting rustily, two straight balls that Labuschagne can tuck away for two runs apiece. 10th over: Australia 11-1 (Warner 1, Labuschagne 6) Broad goes off the field for a minute, then back. Chris Woakes gets a bowl for the first time today, the specialist No8 in this side. He’s right-arm over, angling across the left-hander, so Warner is pretty happy to leave him alone. 9th over: Australia 11-1 (Warner 1, Labuschagne 6) How often would David Warner have got into the 9th over of a match without scoring? Anyone want to work that out for me? He finally gets moving here with a driven single, after Labuschagne eases another drive from Anderson through mid-off. 8th over: Australia 7-1 (Warner 0, Labuschagne 3) You can’t say that the early wicket of Harris is exactly a surprise, given his entire Test career has been comprised of the early wicket of Harris, but at least it means the match can start for real. Marnus Labuschagne gets going immediately with a push for three runs past the bowler. Bringing Warner on strike, who is immediately prompting an England review after walking at a ball and fencing as it cut back in off the seam. England’s players all think or hope there was an inside edge, but no, and it’s clearing the stumps on ball-tracking. Review lost. Broad one wicket for four runs from four overs. That one can’t be overturned! Not a great ball from Broad, short and angled across the left-hander from around the wicket but Harris hooks, gets nothing but glove on it, and Buttler side-steps before completing a very fine diving catch down the leg side. Broad is away. 7th over: Australia 4-0 (Harris 3, Warner 0) Three runs off the bat in 42 balls thus far, the opening bats taking their task of survival seriously as Warner defends Anderson. “Morning Geoff, from a very dark south London,” writes Andrew Cosgrove. “Are you in Adelaide? I spent a few months there many years ago, and absolutely loved it, so it’s always my favourite Ashes test. Is the British pub still there in North Adelaide? On the edge by the parkland. You can probably see it from the Oval.” I am indeed in Adelaide, beautiful city that it can be in summer. Walked down the river here this morning, the gardens are bursting, the markets are full with fruit, life is good for anyone who didn’t get contact-traced in a restaurant last night. Haven’t got to North Adelaide yet, so can’t offer a recce. Outings limited to the Exeter thus far, fine institution that it is, plus a live podcast at the UniBar. 6th over: Australia 4-0 (Harris 3, Warner 0) Stuart Broad so nearly has the early influence on this match. The ball did hit Harris around the knee roll, but he had that front leg straightened and he isn’t very tall. Quite the reprieve. He carefully sees out the over - which includes a late no-ball. Looked very out live, and still looked out on the front angle. But the ball-tracking shows that given Broad’s angle at delivery, the ball would have missed down the leg side. Given, and sent upstairs! Looks good. 5th over: Australia 3-0 (Harris 3, Warner 0) Anderson to Warner now, another good looking ball that leaves him and beats the edge, but again too short in pitch, too far from that edge. Tries a proper short ball to follow, then at last pitches up and draws a forward defensive. One scoring shot in 30 balls now. Only one attempt, too. 4th over: Australia 3-0 (Harris 3, Warner 0) Now it’s Harris who has to deal with Broad, and he too faces a big lbw shout early in the over. Might have been a little inside edge, might have just hit outside the line. Harris gets the line to allow a few leaves. Tight start. 3rd over: Australia 3-0 (Harris 3, Warner 0) Anderson keeps angling across Harris, trying to draw him across, then bowls straight at the stumps and gives up the first runs of the Test, Harris clipping him away through midwicket and hustling for three runs. 2nd over: Australia 0-0 (Harris 0, Warner 0) Here comes the contest, Broad to Warner, first ball... Huge appeal, not out! Warner leaves the ball! Seaming into him, he leaves it alone on length, and it crashes into his thigh pad, just above the flap. Going over, but he didn’t read that. Broad from around the wicket, of course, using that angle to work the ball in. Slips one down leg side looking for inswing. The radar is being generous to Broad, claiming he’s 141 kph. Three slips, gully, point, mid-off, mid-on, deep square, long leg. Short ball but Warner rocks back and leaves. No run in two overs. 1st over: Australia 0-0 (Harris 0, Warner 0) Anderson with the new ball, Harris on strike, and Anderson is looking good! Starts with a wider one across the left-hander, but follows it with one that snorts off a length and beats the outside edge of an unsure defensive push. Probably pitched it too short though, it was no chance of taking that edge. A bit of an Anderson theme early in spells. Harris sees out the rest of the over. Apparently the stump mic just picked up Broad from mid-on asking Warner if he still takes an off-stump guard. Ready? Let’s play a little game we like to call Test match cricket. “Did no one give any thought to viewers in Dallas when they planned a day-night test? The first ball isn’t going to be bowled until 10pm my time. How can I force my six year old to like cricket if he’s already asleep when it starts? Bah humbug.” Ben Mimmack, I can assure you that viewers in Dallas are actually relatively high on the agendas of people at the ICC. Before the anthems though, there’s a tribute to Keith Bradshaw, the pioneer of the game, with the inaugural ringing of the Bradshaw Bell - symbolic of the tradition Keith established at Lord’s. The Welcome to Country follows, and then the national anthems. Here they come. “And Australia, led by captain Steve Smith” the stadium announcer booms over the tannoy, to what sounds like pretty enthused applause from the stands. Today’s field umpires are Rod Tucker and Paul Wilson, the third and fourth umpires are Paul Reiffel and Sam Najoski, respectively. And match referee is David Boon. The start of play is not too far away now and that means the prospect of Broad to Warner looms. The players are about to come out for the anthems. The weather? Have we talked about the weather yet? It’s currently 28C in Adelaide and it looks quite glorious out there. Not a chance of rain , and we’ll have a full day of play. With Stuart Broad in the England side, it’s spinner Jack Leach who misses out. “Made a brave call,” says Root. “But we said we’re going to do that from the outset. It’s a good opportunity for our seamers to hopefully make use of a fresh wicket.” Root says: “It looks a good surface. As you would expect here. But the one thing we will have is that pink ball in hand early on, especially with the glare, could work in our favour. We will have to wait and see.” On the big news of the day: “It’s unfortunate, it’s the world we’re living in. It’s one of the things you’re obviously very wary of as players. It’s one of those very unfortunate set of circumstances where he has had to miss out. But we fully respect the rest of their squad and we know what they’re capable of. So we just need to play well. Especially first innings, make a big score and hopefully first up take some early wickets and drive the game there.” Smith says it was a straightforward decision to bat. “I think you can control the game and sometimes when you want to bowl at certain times if you bat first. So hopefully we can put some runs on the board and control the game.” On taking on the captaincy again, he says: “It’s a huge honour, obviously. It’s been a pretty interesting morning. A bit been going on, but, yeah, feel for Patty. Obviously missing this game. But I will try and lead on the way he started last week, and hopefully he can have a really good week. “He just said “Good luck, go for it, it’s your team this week, control the boys and just keep moving forward.” Steve Smith, back as captain for the first time in three years, wins the toss. His counterpart Joe Root says he would have batted too. “Weren’t Smith and Warner ruled never to be allowed authority positions in the Oz team after sandpapergate? Has that been overturned or overlooked or did I dream it?” You didn’t dream it, Clive Darwell, you just embellished it. Warner is banned for life, Smith was banned for two years. “Let’s not ask why some idiot was at a restaurant when he should have been in quarantine awaiting his test results,” writes in Peter Hutchinson. I’m not sure what the details around the rules and the case are there, so I’ll hold fire before I start sledging anyone. Less involved warm-ups for the Australians. Nathan Lyon is twirling down a few on one of the practice wickets. A few others are wandering about, taking a few high balls in fielding drills, that sort of thing. Carey is rehearsing some squats and sidesteps, getting his frog muscles warmed up. Pretty casual stuff. Anderson has given Broad his 150th cap, that’s how Ali knows that. So Broad will play. Anderson will play. Mind you, Jack Leach is out in the middle warming up with everyone else. So is he playing after all? That could only happen if Woakes (the only No8) or Robinson misses out. They’re both in the middle too. Maybe England have dropped a batter. Maybe it wouldn’t make much difference. Ali Martin, my colleague in the next seat, suggests that yesterday’s speculation at the nets is all thistledown on the winds of time. Short break there, I’ve just been listening to Nick Hockley, the CA boss, who stopped by to give us the update. A fairly comprehensive non-answering of questions, as ever, aside from confirming what we already knew from the press release about how Cummins got implicated (and how Starc and Lyon didn’t). He doesn’t answer a question about whether they went up the chain to the prime minister’s office in an effort to get Cummins cleared to play. He doesn’t answer whether the protocols for players will change in the wake of this. He does say that everyone should accept Steve Smith’s return because he’s a changed man. What about England? I just watched Stuart Broad walk across the ground in the arriving stream of players. He was with Anderson, Stokes and Robinson. My analysis of body language is: inconclusive. He was wearing blue sneakers. WHAT DOES IT MEAN? If the Adelaide Strikers were out of town today, Australia would have been grabbing someone from first-grade cricket. My colleague Bharat Sundaresan, an Adelaide local, suggests that Tim Oakley would have been the frontrunner for an emergency baggy green. Speaking of Starc, he was at the same restaurant last night, with Nathan Lyon. By fortune they were at an outside table, so they weren’t near the problem case and they’re free to play. Imagine if Australia’s whole Brisbane bowling attack got wiped out? Usman Khawaja and Mitchell Swepson are the only remaining players in the squad. Well! Jhye Richardson and Michael Neser are both very good operators, but if England can’t win this match then they can’t win anything. What an opportunity. The effect of losing a captain isn’t necessarily the most influential, but the discombobulation of losing the team’s pace spearhead is much bigger. In Brisbane, as per usual, Josh Hazlewood had the new ball and Cummins took it over from Mitchell Starc after two overs. This time, both Hazlewood and Cummins are gone. Hello from Adelaide! Just a quiet, uneventful morning, the long build-up to an afternoon Test match... No, who am I kidding. The Australian captain has been close-contacted out of the match thanks to South Australia’s rules. Patrick Cummins was out to dinner last night, Australian time. I’m reliably informed it was at the Little Hunter Steakhouse. They have a home-made royal blue potato gnocchi that looks worth a lockdown. Someone at the next table then got a health department message that they had tested positive for Covid, and told the diners around them. Which meant that Cummins was now a close contact. (Phone check-in data would have pinged him on this anyway, but maybe not for a few more days.) So, protocol says he has to isolate for seven days. He can’t play here. Michael Neser will make his long-delayed Test debut. And Steven Smith is now captaining Australia once again.Thousands of hospitality firms across the UK could go bust by January because of a “fear campaign” and a lack of financial support following the surge in the Omicron variant, the boss of a leading pub chain has warned. Young’s chief executive, Patrick Dardis, said a surge in cancellations for Christmas bookings would be dire for the hospitality sector, which relies heavily on the holiday season for its earnings. He said the mixed messaging from government about risks and restrictions was leaving patrons “terribly confused” about whether to keep their bookings at a time when restaurants and pubs were already “hanging on by their fingernails”. While the prime minister, Boris Johnson, struck an upbeat note about the rollout of the booster programme, England’s chief medical officer, Chris Whitty, sent a clear message on Wednesday that people should cut back on socialising in the runup to Christmas, despite a lack of formal restrictions on group gatherings. “Unfortunately, with the latest fear campaign that’s being run, it’s damaging so many businesses that could have possibly survived, and as a consequence, thousands and thousands of businesses will now collapse in January”, Dardis told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “There are a lot of individual owner-operators who’ve been running their businesses for years and have thrown the kitchen sink – people have lost their marriages, they’re losing their livelihoods, and this is the last straw. This is the bit that they were desperately clinging on to and it’s been taken away from them without any support from government,” he added. The boss of the Young’s chain, which owns more than 200 pubs, 80% of which are in London, is calling for business rates to be scrapped and a permanent reduction in VAT. Dardis said there should also be a campaign to encourage more people to come to the UK once travel reopens. On the high street, footfall has also fallen by nearly 20% in recent weeks, as shoppers become more cautious as a result of the variant, according to The Entertainer toys chain founder Gary Grant. However, he said customers were actually spending more money as they pulled back from online shopping due to concerns over shipping delays. “A lot of focus is now on managing our queues in our shops to exit people as quickly as we can, with the right level of customer service. We have to keep our shops safe. We have to keep our staff safe”, he said. The Entertainer accounts for one in every 10 toy sales in the UK. “This is the second highly disruptive Christmas that we’ve had. But at least we’re not in lockdown, so we’re open and we’re trading and people are in generally good spirits,” Grant said.In Sunday evening’s extraordinary televised address, when the prime minister warned that Britain was facing a “tidal wave” of Omicron cases, it was notable that the only focus was the mission to vaccinate the nation with boosters. There was no mention of the other vital public health measures needed to urgently reduce the levels of social mixing and prevent the NHS from being overwhelmed. Given the reduced effectiveness of two vaccinations against the new Omicron variant, there is absolutely no doubt that the accelerated booster campaign is crucial to control the spread and impact of the virus – but we cannot rely on this alone. The alarming pace with which it is spreading through the country, with a record of more than 78,000 new daily cases yesterday, shows the pressing need for additional effective infection control measures to be introduced immediately to protect the population. Despite the assertion that all adults will be offered a booster by the end of December, millions of people will not be eligible for their booster by the end of the month – either because they aren’t vaccinated, have only had one jab, or received their second dose less than three months ago. This group of people needs protection against Omicron until they too can get their booster jab. Many will be younger and more likely to mix socially, more likely to become infected and more likely to spread Covid-19. Projections have suggested that the Omicron variant risks hospitalisation rates that could overwhelm the NHS at a time when it is already in a desperately precarious state. We are facing a record backlog of waits for hospital treatments, escalating pressures on general practice, and are failing to meet emergency ambulance response targets. The sudden exponential rise in infections presents a major challenge. There is no slack in the system to accommodate any increase in Covid-19 hospital admissions, which will directly affect our ability to treat the nearly 6 million patients on waiting lists in England, with more than 300,000 having waited for longer than 12 months. Indeed, a recent report found 13,000 planned operations had been cancelled in a two-month period at 40 hospitals because of lack of capacity from increased hospital admissions. Measures are urgently needed to slow the spread of the virus and prevent further additional strain being placed on the NHS, while we also deliver the enormous feat of the booster vaccination programme. This is not a choice between health and the economy. We have seen from previous variants that not introducing timely interventions is counterproductive for businesses and employers if it allows Covid-19 to spread unfettered through the population, resulting in staff being off work due to sickness or self-isolation. Let us not forget that, earlier this year, staff absences due to high levels of transmission impaired many businesses from functioning. High levels of infection are also likely to disproportionately affect some population groups and exacerbate inequalities. The measures outlined in the government’s plan B rules announced last week not only fall short of what is needed but are also inconsistent, with glaring omissions. Vaccine passes will not do enough to stop the spread of Omicron, since they require only proof of double vaccination or a recent negative lateral flow test to gain entry to nightclubs and mass events such as football matches. By the government’s own admission, two doses of the vaccine does not confer sufficient protection from the new variant. Furthermore, the government has drawn a false equivalence between a negative lateral flow test and proof of vaccination. This presents a clear public health risk, as vaccinated but infectious asymptomatic people will be able to mix at will with unvaccinated people with a negative lateral flow test. Testing should be the minimum requirement for entry to all hospitality venues and, as the BMA has already argued, the government should be acting to significantly reduce large social gatherings. Requiring mask wearing in indoor settings but not in hospitality venues defies public health logic. Staff in takeaways are rightly required to wear masks, yet waiters in restaurants taking orders in the direct line of customers’ faces, at close distance, are not. Customers should also be required to wear face coverings unless eating or drinking. The measures are not just confusing, but also undermine the public’s understanding of this virus and its high transmissibility. There is no requirement for social distancing in indoor public settings when it’s clear that this can reduce transmission. Rather than simply state that indoor settings should be adequately ventilated, there should be proper specifications, including the use of filtration devices and CO2 monitors, which we know can make a difference to risk of transmission in enclosed areas. In healthcare settings, we need to see the reintroduction of stronger infection control measures, with clear advice around the use of PPE and segregated care pathways. Patients attend their GP practice or hospital to get better, not to be put at risk of getting ill from infection. Likewise, we need further guidance for schools, which have had the highest rates of infection since September, and where children have been a source of household transmission, with many not having been vaccinated at all. This should include mask wearing in all places in secondary schools, reintroducing distancing, as well as ventilation – and if needed, government-supplied air filtration systems, given the proximity of pupils in classrooms. By doing nothing there is a far greater threat to children’s learning through absenteeism and high levels of staff and student sickness and self-isolation. For businesses in the hospitality sector, who will suffer loss of income as a result of these measures, it is important that the government provides necessary financial support. As it stands, the country will incur the greater economic cost of the illness burden on the NHS and lost workforce capacity due to sickness. For patients at higher risk of serious ill health from the virus, such as those who are clinically vulnerable, they should be recommended FFP2 masks, given that they protect the wearer through being able to filtrate airborne spread – another simple measure which could have a huge positive impact for individuals. Implementing these additional protections will prevent many more people from becoming ill, hospitalised or dying, and will help keep the NHS afloat at this critical moment. Crucially, it will also buy us time to deliver this accelerated booster campaign and help get us on the front foot in the battle against Covid-19. Dr Chaand Nagpaul is chair of the British Medical Association councilKoci Selamaj, 36, has accepted responsibility for the death of the schoolteacher Sabina Nessa in London in September, but has pleaded not guilty to her murder during a pre-trial hearing at the Old Bailey. Nessa, 28, was found dead in Cator park, Kidbrooke, south-east London, on 18 September, a day after leaving her home to meet a friend in a nearby bar. The prosecution told an earlier hearing that Nessa was struck with a 60cm weapon by someone believed to be a stranger. Selamaj, from Eastbourne in East Sussex, appeared in court for a pre-trial hearing on Thursday. He entered a formal plea of not guilty to a single count of the murder of Nessa. The court was told Selamaj accepted responsibility for her death. The judge, Mr Justice Wall, said the facts of the plea and Selamaj’s acceptance that “he is the person responsible for the death” could be reported by the media. The body of Nessa, who taught a year 1 class at Rushey Green primary school in Catford, was found covered with leaves near a community centre in the park. Selamaj, an Albanian national who worked as a garage mechanic, appeared in court to enter a plea and to set a timetable for the trial. Members of Nessa’s family attended and sat in court a few metres from the defendant, who was helped by an Albanian interpreter. Selamaj, wearing a face mask and grey T-shirt, spoke to confirm his identity and to enter his plea to the charge of murder. He was arrested in Eastbourne by officers from the Metropolitan police investigating Nessa’s death, and later charged with her murder. A further pre-trial hearing was set for 25 February 2022, and reports are awaited. A trial date was set for June 2022 and is scheduled to last two weeks.Batuhan, 25, Bournemouth Occupation Support worker and neuropsychology research assistant Voting record Batuhan is not eligible to vote in the UK. In the last Turkish local government elections, he voted for the centre-left Republican People’s party Amuse bouche Huge fan of basketball; supports any team LeBron James is playing for Ron, 60, Salisbury Occupation Semi-retired; runs a mental health charity, Sporting Recovery Voting record Votes Labour, except when Tony Blair was leader, when he voted Green or for the Socialist party Amuse bouche Was the first black person in the country to be a football community development officer: that was in the 80s, for Millwall, where he received death threats For starters Batuhan We arrived at the same time. The first thing I realised was that he was wearing a traditional scarf from my home country. I said: “In the eastern part of Turkey, people wear this.” He said: “Yeah, I wore it on purpose.” He’d looked up my name. I thought that was really nice. Ron I’ve been to Turkey a couple of times, and fell in love with the place. They like black people. Batuhan’s a nice guy, extremely clever. As I say in the trade, double-clever. I took the lead and ordered burgers for us. The big beef Batuhan I support Brexit. The idea behind it was to liberate the UK from taking on the debt of other countries. We are working here, and making money – why are we giving money to Greece and other European countries? We could spend that money here, for the children of England, Scotland or Wales, building new facilities. I supported Turkey joining the EU because of the passport exemptions; I thought it would ease the travel pressures. But it’s different for the UK. Turkey would have had more advantages than disadvantages from membership, whereas I think the opposite is true for the UK. Ron He’s such a nice guy, but supports Brexit, the so-and-so! He’s young; it’s not normal for a young guy to be pro-Brexit. When the Brexit vote happened, I felt I wasn’t wanted in this country, even though I was born here. It was just Johnson and Farage, selling their rhetoric, which was xenophobic. I think he took it on board. Batuhan Right now, I think the EU is taking its revenge on the UK. And they will learn that England is not a country you can take revenge on. Ron Not being funny, most people who voted for Brexit were quite thick. Batuhan He said something offensive about the English people, that I do not want to repeat. We agreed we need people from other countries to work in healthcare, supermarkets, lorry drivers. But he has this belief that Brexit will be the end of the UK. It’s the capitalist world. It’s always going to right itself. Sharing plate Ron My dad sold his two cows in Jamaica to get here. A tenner each. He came first, my mum came after, then they had us here. They named us Ronald and Derek. Subconsciously they knew that if we had British names we’d be more likely to get on. I said to Batuhan: “I bet you’ve been discriminated against just because of your name. You’ve got to do twice as much, be twice as good.” He agreed with that. I think he was quite shy and I … well, not bullied him, I beat him over the head a few times. Batuhan We agreed on that – we also agreed that, 100 years ago, 50 years ago, if a black man or an Asian person was walking down the street, he would have been verbally assaulted. Just because those behaviours no longer happen doesn’t mean racism is dead. For afters Ron There was an important crossover: he does neuroscience and I’ve worked in mental health – all our interests are from the neck upwards. I deliver exercise to people with brain injuries, for them to recover their coordination, learn to walk again. And he’d done work on brain injuries in neuroscience. Batuhan Our jobs aren’t similar, but they do overlap; we’re both very interested in rehabilitation. Takeaways Ron It was a nice, pleasant afternoon. We got on well. You can differ, can’t you? Batuhan Friendship doesn’t need you to agree on everything. You can still sit and talk like gentlemen, like civilised people. I really enjoyed talking with Ron. I’m going to see him in Salisbury. Additional reporting: Naomi Larsson • Batuhan and Ron ate at Goat and Tricycle in Bournemouth Want to meet someone from across the divide? Click here to find out more • This article was amended on 17 December to correct some personal information.Once upon a time, if you wanted to invest according to a set of moral or ethical values rather than simply for financial profit, you would most likely focus on avoiding so-called sin stocks. Historically, these have been companies that make alcohol, tobacco products and arms, and more recently oil and gas companies. Alternatively, your investment decisions might have been guided by a specific cause – for instance, shunning the shares of companies that engaged in animal testing or that operated in South Africa under the apartheid regime. In short, your guiding principle would have likely been: “Do no harm.” Indeed, for much of its history, responsible or ethical investing was generally a niche activity pursued for political, religious or moral reasons. And while big firms would often respond to high-profile consumer boycotts, they were unlikely to change their ways due to the wishes of what generally amounted to a tiny proportion of investors. But the world of responsible investing is very different today. The guiding principle of “Do no harm” has been joined by the imperative to “Do good” by investing in companies that are actively trying to tackle ethical, social and environmental issues. Some investors refer to this distinction as negative screening versus positive screening – terms that describe the sifting of which companies’ shares to include in investment portfolios and funds. However, this binary approach to investment isn’t necessarily the best way to make the world, and financial markets, a better place. For instance, ditching shares in a company because it falls below acceptable standards on the environment or human rights can often mean that those shares end up in the hands of an investor who is less concerned about ethics or the environment. And that doesn’t encourage the company in question to change and be run more responsibly. In short, doing good isn’t always so straightforward. John Fleetwood, director of responsible and sustainable investing at Square Mile, an investment research and consulting company, says that disinvesting in a company is an important option, but is usually a last resort. He adds that doing good and doing no harm in ethical investment are “two sides of the same coin” and that fund managers need to use both tactics. Some investors define the principle of doing good more narrowly. One approach to ethical investing commonly known as “impact investing” involves only investing in companies that actively do good – for example, by creating renewable energy or by providing clean water to communities and reducing poverty. But the question remains as to which investment approach will do the most good? Consider two utility companies. One has a poor record on the environment, but says it wants to improve. The other has a tiny carbon footprint and an impeccable record on the environment, society and how it’s run. Encouraging the utility with a weaker environmental record to become greener might well have more impact than investing in a company with a tiny carbon footprint because that smaller company has less room for improvement. Some asset managers – who manage pension and investment funds on behalf of individual investors – therefore highlight the need for a more pragmatic approach. “To really move the needle [on environmental, social and governance (ESG) matters] you need to be more forward-thinking and see the bigger picture, which is about making the world a better place,” says Matthew Burgess, head of passive and quantitative equities at Royal London Asset Management, part of the Royal London Group. “If you can’t hold investments in [certain companies], how can you engage and make them better?” In a similar vein, pragmatic asset managers say that it’s important to look at a company’s plans regarding the environment and society, and the medium- to long-term potential for improvement, rather than only judge them according to their behaviour in the past and present. For everyday pension holders and investors, this makes it all the more important to have confidence in the judgment of the asset managers who are responsible for investing your money. An increasing number of investment products incorporate so-called ESG criteria by tweaking the investments in their portfolio to favour companies with a strong rating for ethics. In August, Royal London made changes to its £23bn pension equity funds, to focus them on ESG criteria. The “tilted” equity funds have increased holdings of companies with good ESG practices and reduced holdings in companies with poorer practices. These adjustments will not significantly affect the risk of the pension funds or their financial returns. Tilts and weightings such as these are one way that investment products can embody a less binary approach. Don’t just invest for the future, invest in it. Learn more about Royal London’s commitment to The Invested GenerationIf you want to put your pension to work tackling the climate emergency, you might assume you should be backing new businesses in areas such as clean technology. After all, these startups will often have sustainability built into their DNA. In reality, much of the heavy lifting needed for a global transition to a zero-carbon world will have to be undertaken by established companies – specifically the heavy polluters in high-carbon sectors such as energy, construction, transport and agriculture, that are responsible for the majority of greenhouse gas emissions. Ultimately the largest companies in these sectors have the size and scale to make the biggest impact, which is part of the reason some pension firms believe investing in these companies is an essential part of responsible investing – to exert pressure on them and help fund their transition to net zero. “Rather than exclude companies, we want to ask them how they plan to be better,” explains Paola Binns, a fund manager at Royal London Asset Management, part of Royal London Group. “And then [we] ask ourselves if those plans are credible.” So what kinds of progress can heavy polluting industries make? “Significant reductions in emissions are hard to achieve because it is technically challenging and often calls for major investment,” says Jessica Robinson, founder of Moxie Future, a platform that empowers women to invest sustainably, and author of Financial Feminism: A Woman’s Guide to Investing for a Sustainable Future. “The good news is that many in these sectors are already undertaking complex transformations to reduce their emissions, often in a phased approach. “Take the aviation industry, for example, where many airline companies are researching alternative fuels, or the energy industry, where we are seeing power stations install combined-cycle power plants [which produce more electricity from the same fuel]. All of these activities have the potential to make a significant contribution to reducing emissions.” Likewise, other sectors have demonstrated the ability to transition away from carbon intensive operations. Power companies, for example, are setting zero emission targets and focusing on clean, renewable energy sources, backed up by more efficient electricity storage and demand flexibility. “Leading utilities provide a great example,” says Erik Kane, director of environmental, social and governance (ESG) research, Americas, at Bloomberg Intelligence. “The industry is the biggest source of emissions, and is one of the few where the technology exists for companies to really decarbonise without relying on offsets, etc. At the same time, I think it’s important to understand transition strategies, and to be wary of strategies that may be less likely to be actualised.” The transportation industry’s strategy for carbon reduction is focused largely on cleantech. In short-haul road travel, electric vehicles are on their way to becoming a solution. For heavy transport and haulage, hydrogen is being hailed as an alternative energy source. However, some viability barriers exist around infrastructure investment and the generation of sufficient initial demand. In shipping, a project to launch the world’s first ammonia-powered supply vessel has received major funding from the EU, with the testing of the carbon-free fuel due to start in 2024. For aviation, the route to cutting carbon emissions is through the development of biofuels. By 2030 these could represent about 10% of aviation fuel demand, and close to 20% by 2040, according to the IEA. Agriculture, another heavy producer of emissions, faces the added challenge of providing food security for an expanding global population while reducing its sizeable carbon footprint. The industry has been slower than others to adopt new technologies, but new developments in agritech and alternative business models have led to greater automation of farming equipment and adoption of analytics solutions that facilitate more accurate monitoring of livestock and crop growth, boosting productivity, while reducing emissions. In construction, the manufacture of cement alone is responsible for about 8% of global CO2 emissions, therefore finding replacements for high-carbon materials is a top priority. Alternatives to traditional cement and concrete, including concrete that stores CO2, and concrete made from alternative materials, are becoming more widely available. Researchers from Australia’s RMIT University have devised a new method for casting prefabricated concrete products made from rubber tyres, and construction and demolition waste. Elsewhere, with progress in off-site fabrication of materials, lean practices, waste reduction and landfill avoidance, buildings are becoming greener. With the climate crisis getting ever more urgent and consumer and investor pressure rising, big businesses in the hard-to-abate sectors are having to make a concerted effort to reduce their carbon footprint and improve their ESG credentials, creating opportunities for investors. Another key factor is the emergence of hard data and the development of comparable standards and metrics that can back up their claims of progress. Jessica Camus, chief corporate affairs officer at the business consultancy Diginex, says this data can give sustainable investors the confidence to include these traditional businesses in their portfolios: “The companies that have been able to demonstrate their ESG credentials in words, numbers and action have been able to appease investors and provide reassurance that they are taking genuine steps to create a more environmentally conscious future.” Don’t just invest for the future, invest in it. Learn more about Royal London’s commitment to The Invested GenerationWhen trying to marry your ethical or environmental concerns with investing, it can be tempting to focus on companies and projects that feel exciting or that reflect your own spending habits. These might include, for instance, eco-tech startups, sustainable fashion labels or new plant-based food businesses. As well as better capturing our imaginations, many of these companies will have also built sustainability into their business models from the outset. While smaller startups offering solutions to pressing sustainability and ethical issues are undoubtedly deserving of financial support, some could take years to scale. By contrast, larger, more established companies might be less exciting, but their actions can potentially be more impactful thanks to their financial muscle and market clout. Shareholder engagement with them to accelerate their shift to greener, fairer ways of operating can often have an outsized impact on wider global efforts by dint of their sheer scale. For instance, investor pressure on them to reduce their carbon emissions or tackle other environmental, social or governance (ESG) issues can have far-reaching repercussions because big, mainstream companies usually have larger supply chains. Likewise, they can more readily afford the capital expenditure needed for ambitious projects, such as carbon capture technology. And while corporate behemoths tend to be less nimble, their size and firepower can mean that their actions ultimately have a more rapid effect on the world than would be the case if we waited for them to be supplanted by smaller startups. “Larger companies are more likely to be in the public eye and thus susceptible to media, consumer and political pressures,” says Peter Elwin, director of fixed income at the financial thinktank Planet Tracker. “[This] can provide leverage to investors who are willing to go public with their ESG requests in a way that might not be possible with smaller companies.” Elwin also notes that it can be easier for shareholders to coordinate their engagement with larger, more mainstream companies as those companies generally feature in more investment portfolios than smaller ones: “It can be easier to get other investors to collaborate, whereas with a smaller company it is much more likely that fewer investors have any financial exposure to it in their portfolios … and thus no interest in engaging.” Engagement by investors has already triggered big changes at some of the world’s largest firms. HSBC plans to phase out financing for coal companies after a campaign by the bank’s shareholders, and the chemicals company BASF has set a net zero target following engagement with concerned shareholders. In May, the small activist investor Engine No 1 won three seats on the board of ExxonMobil as part of an effort to force the firm to reduce its carbon emissions. Furthermore, boards will often look to resolve issues directly with shareholders behind closed doors rather than let their concerns develop into an embarrassing public spat. HSBC’s proposal to phase out coal financing came after months of negotiations with large investors, for example, and led to the withdrawal of the original shareholder resolution that prompted the bank to take action. Shareholder resolutions can also empower board members and others within the company who have been advocating for change. “Financial organisations, such as pension providers, have substantial funds invested in some of the biggest companies in the world. As such, this grants them real influence over corporate strategies and behaviours,” says Tracy Walsh, a partner and head of ESG at the law firm Womble Bond Dickinson. “ESG investing presents a genuine way for these institutional investors to be a real force for good in the world.” If engagement doesn’t deliver the desired results, investors may decide that selling the shares is their only remaining option. However, divestment comes at the price of an ongoing say in how the company operates. There is also the danger that investors with fewer environmental or ethical scruples will snap up the shares. The question about whether it’s better to to divest or engage has therefore become a key debate. Exit vs Voice, a 2020 study, found that engagement is ultimately more effective in pushing companies to act in a socially responsible manner. And just as ESG action by larger, more established companies can have a bigger impact, the same can apply to the pension and investment firms that engage with them. “In general, having a larger holding in terms of votes will gain more attention from the management of a particular company,” says Elwin. “But the investor’s willingness to engage actively with management and in shareholder meetings will also be a significant factor.” Harness your pension power at Royallondon.comThe Bank of England has increased interest rates to 0.25% from the historical low of 0.1% in an attempt to tackle rising inflation in the UK, but what does that mean for the public? Will my mortgage go up? Only if you have a variable rate mortgage – typically a tracker that follows the base rate, or a loan on a lender’s standard variable rate. A tracker mortgage will directly follow the base rate – the small print of your mortgage will tell you how quickly the rise will be passed on, but next month your payments are likely to increase and the extra cost will fully reflect the base rate rise. On a tracker currently costing 2.1% the interest rate will rise to 2.25%. On a standard variable rate it is less straightforward – these can change at the lender’s discretion. Most commentators say there is no reason for banks and building societies not to pass on the full increase, so you should expect a rise. If your lender wanted to, it could increase rates by more. As an example, HSBC’s standard variable rate is 3.54%; if it passes on the full rise borrowers paying it will move to a rate of 3.69%. On a £150,000 mortgage arranged over 20 years that will mean monthly repayments go up by £11.66. Most borrowers are, however, on fixed-rate mortgages. Interest rates have been so low in recent years that locking in has been attractive, and since 2019, 96% of new mortgages for owner-occupiers have been taken on fixed rates. In total, 74% of outstanding mortgages are fixed, and these borrowers will not see any immediate impact from the change. Several million homeowners are now unmortgaged, thanks to years of low rates and enforced saving during lockdowns. For them the rate rise will have no impact on their housing costs. What about my other borrowing? Most personal loans are taken on fixed rates, so if you have unsecured borrowing you should continue to repay it as agreed. The Finance and Leasing Association does not have figures for what percentage of car loans and other consumer finance is on a variable rate, but says that most borrowing is done on a fixed interest rate. Credit card rates are variable, but not typically explicitly linked to the base rate, so won’t automatically go up. Card providers can usually change rates as and when they want – recently, for example, American Express announced it would be charging its cardholders more, blaming the rising cost of offering rewards. They are already at a 23-year high. What about my savings? Savers have been the losers from years of rate cuts, and when the base rate was cut last year banks and building societies embarked on a new round of reductions. By the summer, many accounts were paying just 0.01%. Account providers are at liberty to do what they want with rates, so the Bank of England’s decision will not necessarily translate to rises across the board. However, it should give those who want to attract savers’ cash the scope to offer a better deal. “This base rate change may take a few months to trickle down to savers who have a variable rate deal, but there is also no guarantee the rate will be passed on to them in full, or at all,” says Rachel Springall, a finance expert at Moneyfacts.co.uk. “Should savers see 0.15% passed onto them, it would mean receiving £30 more a year in interest based on a £20,000 investment.” Anna Bowes, of the Savings Champion website, says after a base rate rise in November 2017, interest went up on only half of variable rate accounts and after a rise in August 2018 just 32% of accounts were improved. “Unfortunately savers tend to lose out in these circumstances as savings rates tend to fall more when the base rate is cut and rise by less when the base rate increases,” she says. “The link between the base rate and providers’ savings rates has detached over the years and some providers didn’t increase rates at all following the last rise in the base rate back in 2018 – others by far smaller margins than you would expect.” That said, some providers have already started to increase rates in recent weeks. Recently, for example, Hodge Bank increased the interest paid on its one-year fixed-rate bond from 0.9% to 1.25% and returns on its five-year bond from 1.80% to 2.08%. Last month NS&amp;I increased the interest rate on its Income Bonds by 14 basis points, from 0.01% to 0.15% Will it have any other impact on my finances? If you have a private pension and want to buy an annuity to provide an income in retirement you could benefit from the increase. Annuity providers invest in government bonds and these are expensive when rates are low as other investors want to hold them. When rates rise those other investors are inclined to sell the bonds, which makes them cheaper. As a result, annuity providers are able to offer better returns. Annuity rates have already been rising and a rate rise could help those who are about to retire. Will this affect the housing market? A small rise like this is unlikely to have much impact – according to Dominic Agace, the chief executive of estate agents Winkworth, it has been “priced into the market in the costs of mortgages and buyers’ expectations” since before the Bank’s last decision. Mortgage rates remain historically low, so people will still be able to borrow large sums. Further rate rises and/or sustained high inflation will have an impact though, as longer as lenders’ affordability checks remain in place. Currently, most lenders use their standard variable rate plus three percentage points when “stress-testing” applicants’ finances, and as their rates increase the mortgages that are judged affordable will get smaller. The Bank plans to scrap that rule, which would ease that problem. However, monthly bills are likely to remain a factor in affordability checks, and if they continue to get higher again the sums people are allowed to borrow will get smaller. • This article was amended on 17 December 2021. HSBC’s standard variable rate is 3.54%, not 3.59% as an earlier version stated.Think of bonking. Not the activity, but the word. As a shorthand for sex, it was popularised, if not invented, by the tabloid press in the 90s – back then, “Bonking Boris” referred to a former Wimbledon champion rather than a future prime minister. You can see why it appealed. “Bonking” slipped easily under the bar prohibiting expletives in family newspapers; it sounded fun rather than pornographic. It was clear and direct, yet had all the advantages of euphemism. Now think of sleaze. As it happens, that word performed a similar role in the same period. It could be hurled at politicians – specifically the Conservative government of John Major – relatively free of legal risk. You could say an MP or minister was “mired in sleaze” without having to prove that they had broken a specific law. It was handy. And it did great service in the 1990s. It became a catch-all for everything from criminal wrongdoing to an extramarital “three-in-a-bed romp” – to deploy another tabloid phrase of the age – and suggested moral decay in a Tory party that had been in power for the best part of two decades. It laid the ground for the landslide Labour victory of 1997, in part by suggesting that it was not only time for a change of government, but time for a clear-out, even a cleansing of our public life. Now “sleaze” is back. “SHAMELESS MPs SINK BACK INTO SLEAZE,” roared the Daily Mail in early November (though taking care not to mention the MPs’ party affiliation: the paper was not yet ready to speak of “Tory sleaze”). Once again, as it was a quarter-century ago, sleaze is an umbrella word, under which can shelter a full range of sins. It extends from Boris Johnson’s wallpaper to the multibillion-pound PPE contracts handed out to politicians’ mates, from a prime ministerial holiday in Marbella to the installation of Tory allies in key public jobs. But it’s the wrong word. The explanation for why it’s wrong, and why that wrongness matters, is a tale of modern Britain, full of liars and lawyers, of cheats and chancers, of politicians on the make and on the take, of secret love affairs, mysterious middlemen and the perennial temptations of power, money and sex. It’s a story that reveals how much the politics of this country and its dominant party have changed – and how the crimes of the past have come to look almost quaint next to the much greater crimes committed in the here and now. It starts in 1993 with Major’s closing address to the Conservative party conference in Blackpool. The party had been rocked by Black Wednesday a year earlier, a currency crisis that shook the public’s faith in what had been the Tories’ strongest suit: their reputation for economic competence. “The cabinet were thinking, ‘What can we do to bolster our credentials, particularly with our own people?’” Edwina Currie, a former minister, then on the backbenches, tells me. The answer was a return to Conservative first principles. “The old values – neighbourliness, decency, courtesy – they’re still alive, they’re still the best of Britain,” Major told his audience. “They haven’t changed, and yet somehow people feel embarrassed by them. We shouldn’t be. It is time to return to those old core values, time to get back to basics, to self-discipline and respect for the law, to consideration for others, to accepting a responsibility for yourself and your family and not shuffling off on other people and the state.” There was no mention of sex or single-parent families, but the talk of “responsibility” and “family” was enough to ensure the phrase “back to basics” was heard as a call for a return to Victorian standards of personal morality. It meant any deviation from that standard was evidence of hypocrisy, and therefore the legitimate subject of journalistic inquiry. The prime minister might as well have sent out stiff, embossed cards to Fleet Street’s tabloid editors, inviting them to rummage in the private lives of his MPs. Currie smiles at the memory of it. She says that when “back to basics” was brought to the cabinet – she suspects it was the invention of John Redwood – the PM’s response should have been immediate. “What John Major should have done was look around the table with a slightly raised eyebrow and say, ‘Well, hands up everybody here who’s perfect, whose personal life is perfect.’” He would not have been able to raise his own hand: in the late 80s, he had had a four-year extramarital affair of his own with, as it happened, Edwina Currie. “That’s what’s called self-deception,” she says now. A few months later, Major was desperately insisting that “back to basics” was not “a crusade about personal morality”, but by then it was too late. From the moment he had got to his feet in Blackpool, right until the election of 1997, it was open season. Each week seemed to bring another revelation of the gap between the Conservatives’ public rhetoric and the private reality. It might be the news that junior transport minister Steve Norris had been having simultaneous affairs with three different women, in addition to the two long-term “mistresses” at his side before that, a situation captured by the red-top headline: YES, YES, YES, YES, YES, MINISTER!!! Or it could be the revelation that environment minister Tim Yeo had fathered a child outside marriage, even as he had spoken publicly of the need to reduce the number of single parents. Hypocrisy was the thread that ran through and connected every one of these episodes. The Tories were the party of Section 28, prohibiting the “promotion of homosexuality” in schools. Yet the tabloids found that David Ashby MP had shared a hotel bed with a man on a rugby tour, Jerry Hayes MP had had a relationship with a much younger man and Richard Spring MP had been caught in bed with both a man and that man’s girlfriend. For a while in the mid-1990s, it became a Sunday ritual: open up the News of the World and see which Tory had been exposed as a raging hypocrite. In among all that were revelations of wrongdoing of a quite different nature. The Guardian discovered that Neil Hamilton MP was being secretly paid by a lobbyist, and that he had received thousand of pounds – in cash, stuffed into envelopes – from Harrods owner Mohamed Al Fayed, in return for asking questions favourable to Harrods on the floor of the House of Commons. Other MPs were in the cash-for-questions business, too, but Hamilton soon became the face of the scandal, not least because he tried to deny it. Later Hamilton was joined in notoriety by Jonathan Aitken, who had allowed aides of the Saudi royal family to pay his £1,000 bill for a stay at the Paris Ritz in September 1993 – a gift that was forbidden, given that he was the minister in charge of defence procurement at the time, and was therefore banned from receiving favours that might place him under an obligation. Like Hamilton, he denied the Guardian’s account of events, and was eventually jailed for perjury. *** All of these stories were captured by the single word “sleaze”, and they set the tone for the 1997 campaign that swept Tony Blair to power. And yet talk now to Alastair Campbell, who served then as Blair’s press secretary, and you’ll hear him say two arresting things about the whole business. The first is that Blair was a reluctant warrior against sleaze. “Tony was always worried about going on this,” he says. Not just the sexual stuff, but even the financial wrongdoing. “If all you go on is sleaze, the public will think that’s all you care about.” Campbell believes, incidentally, that there’s a lesson here for Keir Starmer: Blair kept himself slightly above the fray, leaving the sleaze talk to others, allowing the leader to focus on Labour’s core messages on crime, jobs and education. But his second observation is the important one. “What this lot are doing is in a different league from John Major and his lot.” He’s right. “Sleaze” is not the right label for the behaviour of Boris Johnson’s government, chiefly because that behaviour does not bear comparison with the scandals that felled the Major administration. Not because, as the Tory cheerleaders at the Telegraph or Express would have you believe, today’s misconduct is not as bad but, on the contrary, because it is much, much worse. Yes, the sexual revelations of the 1990s exposed a florid hypocrisy, while the Hamilton and Aitken affairs involved a serious betrayal of the public trust. But the charge sheet against Johnson is on a different scale. Hypocrisy is a theme once again, of course, typified by the Barnard Castle and Downing Street Christmas party rows – the government breaking the rules it had imposed on everyone else, in the latter case knocking back the booze and playing games while the rest of the country was locked down and, often, alone. But begin with the mildest accusations against the prime minister – which, paradoxically, are also the ones that have cut through most sharply to the public. What’s significant is that they relate not to no-mark backbenchers or previously unknown junior ministers, as most of the 90s stories did, but to the man at the top. The matter of who paid for Johnson’s £840-a-roll designer wallpaper for his apartment in Downing Street, or for his holidays in Mustique or Marbella, may seem trivial, but it goes to an important question, the same one that proved Aitken’s undoing. If any minister, including the prime minister, receives something of value, then won’t they feel beholden to their benefactor? And if they do, then who, ultimately, will they be serving – the public interest or the person they owe? Johnson’s long refusal to disclose the identity of his generous friends – only revealing under intense pressure that the No 10 refurb had been funded by Tory donor Lord Brownlow or that the provider of his luxury Spanish villa was the family of Tory peer Zac Goldsmith – adds to the concern. Why the reluctance to come clean if there’s nothing to hide? Back in the 1990s, there were no such questions asked about the PM himself: it was all about his subordinates. Indeed – and this is the second key difference between now and then – when his ministers were found to have broken the rules, Major threw the book at them, eventually setting up a new standards process that has endured to this day. But when the ardent Brexiter and former cabinet minister Owen Paterson was found to have engaged in what was a forbidden, richly rewarded and “egregious case of paid advocacy”, to quote the Commons investigation into his lobbying, Johnson’s response was the very opposite: he didn’t throw the rulebook at Paterson but demanded his MPs vote to rip it up. He wanted to let Paterson off the hook. Only a national outcry forced him to back down. Major himself drew the contrast when, in a rare intervention last month, he spoke of the “pain and anguish” he had endured over sleaze more than 25 years ago. “The striking difference is this: in the 1990s I set up a committee to tackle this sort of behaviour,” he told the Today programme. “Over the last few days we have seen today’s government trying to defend this sort of behaviour … It needs to be stopped.” Still, what puts the conduct of the current administration into an entirely different category – one ill-suited to so gentle a term as sleaze – relates not to the dodgy behaviour of individuals, but to the conduct of the government itself. When you look at that, you realise the word “sleaze” will not do – that it minimises the problem, that it puts what’s happening now on a par with a Tory minister sucking the toes of his actress lover while wearing full Chelsea strip (to cite two details of the scandal that helped defenestrate then heritage secretary, David Mellor, both details invented out of whole cloth by publicist Max Clifford). You look at that and you think: don’t call this sleaze, call it what it is – corruption. To see the problem clearly, it pays to stare hard at the government’s response to the global pandemic that struck weeks after Johnson’s big election win in December 2019. In those first, panicked days of Covid, ministers scrambled to get hold of the personal protective equipment (PPE) doctors and nurses needed to stay safe: gloves, gowns, masks. To the public it looked like a wartime requisition drive, with Whitehall rightly stretching every sinew to ensure the frontline was properly protected. But what the public didn’t see was that, to those in the know, that first surge of the virus was a gold rush. Entrepreneurs stampeded to reach new terrain that held apparently unlimited reserves of taxpayers’ money. What’s more, access to those riches did not require any knowhow or track record in PPE manufacture, but simply connections to the Conservative party. The specific cases are eye-popping, brought into the daylight by, among others, the Good Law Project, an initiative founded and run by the Twitter-friendly former tax lawyer Jolyon Maugham. Having made a tidy fortune defending the often elaborate tax arrangements of the wealthy, Maugham now takes a salary that he describes as a “single-digit percentage” of his former earnings in return for exposing wrongdoing by government. Gradually, crateloads of documents have come his way. Whether through leaks from whistleblowers, from within Whitehall or from companies who lost out on contracts, or handed to him as part of the legal process of suing the government, he has, he says, obtained enough pieces of the jigsaw “to make a pretty good guess at the picture”. And what a picture. Take the case of pub landlord Alex Bourne, who famously went from pulling pints at Matt Hancock’s local to landing a slice of a £40m contract to make medical equipment, even though he had no experience in the field. Earlier this month, Hancock dismissed the story as a “fabrication pushed by the Labour party”. But then it emerged that Bourne’s lucky break had simply been well hidden. The Department of Health had signed a contract with a different entity, Alpha Laboratories. But in the small print there was a stipulation that the manufacturing of the goods had to be done by Bourne’s outfit. Nice work if you can get it. Or there was the deal that saw at least £156m of taxpayers’ money wasted on 50m face masks eventually deemed unsuitable for the NHS. They were bought from a private equity firm through a company that had never produced a single item of PPE – or indeed anything for that matter – and that had a share capital of just £100. But this company, Prospermill, had a crucial asset. It was co-owned by one Andrew Mills, adviser to the government, staunch Brexiter and ally of the cabinet minister Liz Truss. Somehow Prospermill managed to persuade the government to part with £252m overall, boasting that it had secured exclusive rights over a PPE factory in China. There was just one problem: the masks it produced used ear loops, when only masks secured around the head were deemed suitable for NHS staff. In the fight against Covid, they were useless. The government’s own figures estimate that some £2.8bn was wasted this way, splashed out on goods and services that didn’t work. The government’s defence is, in effect, that there was a war on – that when faced with the urgent task of fighting a mysterious pandemic, there was no time for niceties. No time for competitive tendering or formal procurement processes: you needed to get the kit to the frontline and damn the details. In Maugham’s view, once that decision had been taken, once the usual procurement rules – demanding that rival suppliers present competing bids to be assessed for quality and value for money – were suspended, corruption was always bound to follow. “If you ditch process, you’re going to have corruption,” he says. “That’s just inevitable.” What made the Covid bonanza different was that the government did not only make corruption inevitable, it “institutionalised that corruption”. That’s not rhetoric, but an accurate description of what happened. Ministers created a VIP lane for their “contacts”, granting friends or party donors a fast track into the procurement process and a place at the head of the queue for those juicy contracts. Around 50 companies have been named as having benefited from the VIP lane, with Michael Gove, Grant Shapps, Hancock and others among the politicians who lent a helping hand in the form of an all-important referral. No less than £1.6bn worth of contracts were awarded as a result of referrals from just 10 Tory politicians. Those referrals were golden: if you got one, and found yourself in the chums’ club, you were more than 10 times more likely to bag a contract than those companies left outside. And there was serious money to be made. One pandemic startup, PPE Medpro, won two contracts worth £200m a matter of weeks after it was born: its founder was a former business associate of Tory peer Baroness Mone. Meller Designs, then the firm of Tory donor David Meller, bagged over £160m in PPE deals, after a referral into the VIP lane from Gove. Cabinet office minister Lord Agnew was an especially useful friend to have in high places. Two companies referred by him won contracts that were, between them, worth more than £500m. *** Some might shrug at all this, wondering if it really matters if politicians’ pals did well out of the pandemic, so long as British hospitals got the kit they needed. But there’s strong evidence that Britons were ripped off – with documents suggesting that some VIP bids were chosen even when they were charging way above market rates, and that government bought up equipment in far greater quantities than was needed, even when the panic of the first wave had passed. That was great for the lucky companies with high-powered friends, not so great for the taxpayer. Indeed, Maugham estimates that the government spent £12.5bn on PPE that it could have got for £4.5bn. “We’re talking vast amounts of waste,” he says. It didn’t have to be this way. “It’s not the inevitable corruption that comes when, at the time of national emergency, you put aside process in the interest of speed. It’s the institutionalisation of corruption to benefit your friends.” He notes that the government’s own Counter Fraud team has assessed what it describes as a “high risk of fraud in the procurement of PPE”, which prompts a question: why are the police not investigating? But the VIP lane is not the only example of public goods being handed out to party friends. Note the astonishing run that has seen nine of the party’s former treasurers given a seat in the Lords since 2010, with each of those appointed since 2014 having donated at least £3m to party coffers. In one case, the ermine was handed out in defiance of the advice of the Lords appointments body, which deemed Tory donor Peter Cruddas unworthy of a seat in the upper house – but Johnson ennobled him anyway. You can forgive Alastair Campbell for smarting as he remembers the cash-for-honours investigation into the last Labour government – which saw several leading Labour figures, including Blair, interviewed by police, but no charges brought against any of them – and contemplates the lack of action, or even coverage, today. “If this had been us, it would have been on the news day after day after day.” Campbell mentions the Bernie Ecclestone affair, when it emerged that the Formula One boss had donated £1m to the Labour party in 1997, not long before the Blair government exempted the sport from a ban on tobacco advertising. Blair was forced to go on television to assure viewers that there had been no quid pro quo, no “cash for policy” deal; that he was, instead, a “pretty straight sort of guy”. Campbell insists that the Ecclestone affair was aggravated in part by a Labour desire not to replicate Tory misconduct: Downing Street deliberately avoided telling then health secretary Frank Dobson about the donation, “because we didn’t want that affecting his judgment” when drawing up the tobacco ban. All the same, he admits Labour got it wrong – and that it should have been “up front” about the money from the start. In the end, Labour gave the £1m back to Ecclestone, having sought the advice of the standards watchdog. That has not quite been the approach of the Johnson administration. On the contrary, what adds to the gravity of the charges against it is its attempt to put itself beyond the reach of accountability or even the law. It has made repeated efforts to weaken or control those institutions that might restrain its power. Most direct are its serial threats to curtail judicial review, limiting the courts’ ability to check decisions of government. Early December brought word, unconvincingly denied, of an imminent drive to give ministers new powers in such cases to throw out judicial judgements that they don’t like. Whether or not this is born of Johnson’s desire to get even for the humiliation the supreme court inflicted on him in 2019 – unanimously defeating the PM’s prorogation of parliament – it looks like a clear effort to remove a curb on his might. The regular swipes at the BBC, and the appointment of a longtime enemy of the corporation, Nadine Dorries, as culture secretary, should be seen the same way: as an effort to intimidate or cow a scrutinising institution that would ordinarily be outside government control. The same goes for its proposed “reforms” of the Electoral Commission, placing a hand around the throat of democracy’s referee. Attacks on the right to protest, changes to the Official Secrets Act targeting journalists and whistleblowers, the unveiled campaign to place ideologically loyal Tory allies into key public positions – just because they did not succeed in installing former Daily Mail editor Paul Dacre as the chair of Ofcom should not obscure how hard they tried – are all part of the same pattern. The aim is to corrode the checks and balances that make democracy function, to allow the government to do what it likes, for itself and for its allies, by ensuring those who might hold it to account – whether judges, press or protesters – are too weak to stop them. It ends in a government that is, in effect, beyond the law. This is why Campbell says, with some vehemence, “It’s not ‘cronyism’ or ‘chumocracy’ or ‘sleaze’. It’s corruption.” There’s so much of it, whether it’s Johnson using his public office to advance the business interests of his then lover Jennifer Arcuri, Owen Paterson taking money from Randox – who later won two fat contracts for Covid testing, worth a combined total of almost £480m, neither of which were advertised or open to competition – or ministers’ fondness for using WhatsApp or private emails, conveniently evading scrutiny. But there is a curious paradox here. All this is so much more serious than the bonking stories of a generation ago, more serious than Hamilton and Aitken trousering a few grand or a night in the Ritz and then lying about it – Maugham says 90s sleaze is “quite sweet” by comparison; “it’s Famous Five does corruption” – and yet it struggles to break through. Perhaps much of it is too complicated to follow, too abstract. Perhaps, perversely, the sums of money are too large: maybe it’s easier to grasp the image of a Harrods envelope bulging with cash than it is to picture billions siphoned away via the VIP lane. It’s noticeable that it has been some of Johnson’s lesser, but more concrete, actions that have reached the front pages: the wallpaper and the holidays, rather than the institutionalised corruption and the dismantling of our democratic scaffolding. Even last month’s row about Geoffrey Cox, whose lucrative legal practice saw him basing himself in the Caribbean, far away from his constituents in Devon, is an example of a kind of misdirection. Maugham says this was a case of “taking the piss”, rather than corruption, and yet it attracted more public outrage than Paterson’s work for Randox – as if the location of MPs’ extra-mural work was the problem, rather than the suspicion of influence-peddling. Somehow we get distracted, our gaze focusing on the wrong place. But it’s not just a failure of public attention. “Sleaze” caught fire in the 1990s in part because it was not only left to the Mirror and the Guardian. The Tory papers ran with it too, drawn to stories that were just too juicy to resist, and convinced that Major and the Conservatives were washed up anyway. They have not yet definitively reached that conclusion about this government: the Tories have been in for a decade rather than a decade and a half, and Johnson has only been in Downing Street for two years. They have been, mostly, willing to give him a pass – although the leaked video of aides at No 10 giggling as they apparently recalled partying in defiance of Covid rules, and reports that several such parties happened in the prime minister’s residence, have pushed that patience to its limits. That matters because, in Britain’s media ecosystem, if the rightwing papers don’t cover a story, the broadcasters tend to steer clear of it, too. There’s one last factor: shame. Sleaze became a subject of national concern in the 1990s in part because the prime minister regarded it that way. Attacks on the integrity of the Tory party got under John Major’s skin because he experienced them as attacks on his own integrity, which he valued. Currie recalls that Margaret Thatcher was so fastidious that when ministers met to talk politics, the PM insisted they chip in a few pounds from their own pockets to pay for the sandwiches. Boris Johnson is made of different stuff. (So, although he was better at disguising it, was David Cameron. Having warned in 2010 that “the far-too-cosy relationship between politics, government, business and money” was “the next big scandal waiting to happen”, the former PM took that cosiness to a new level: chummily texting ex-colleagues, including chancellor Rishi Sunak, as he hawked the services of Greensill Capital, the bank that collapsed into administration earlier this year, depriving Cameron of the $70m payout he had reportedly hoped for.) Of Johnson, Currie says he has “no moral fibre whatsoever”. Even the Tories’ candidate in the North Shropshire byelection, held to find a successor for Paterson, when asked four times whether he regarded the prime minister as a man of “honesty and integrity”, could not say yes. So of course the outrage will not come from Downing Street, because the threat comes from Downing Street. The outrage will have to come from the public, the voters – and it begins by calling this menace to our democratic life by its name. Don’t call it sleaze. Call it corruption.Consecutive wet years have boosted breeding colonies of waterbirds in eastern Australia but not enough yet to increase total bird numbers, according to the latest edition of one of the world’s largest and longest nature surveys. Researchers on the annual survey, now in its 39th year, flew 38,360km – or almost enough to circumnavigate the globe – to track the abundance in more than 2,000 wetlands of about 50 bird species, from Queensland down to Victoria. Even though parts of inland Queensland registered record rains and many rivers have lately been in flood, rainfall has been patchy, with areas such as north-western Victoria still relatively dry. Years of severe drought as well as large-scale water diversions for irrigation have also taken their toll. “The sort of core resource of birds that can breed when there’s a good flood is declining, so their capacity to bounce back is getting less and less,” said Richard Kingsford, director of the University of NSW’s Centre for Ecosystem Science, who took part in his 36th consecutive survey. The monitoring counted 95,306 birds, a drop from 2020 and the third lowest tally in the almost four decades of tracking. The researchers, though, did observe increases in breeding of birds such as the Australian white ibis and straw-necked ibis. With more water around, it is also likely that birds range beyond the surveyed bands. Large flows are also making their way towards the Lake Eyre basin in central Australia, and more breeding will be triggered by that water, Kingsford said. Waterbirds are important barometers of river health, with the abundance of various species indicating the availability of vegetation, invertebrates and fish. “[They] provide you with a story about what’s going on in the rivers,” he said. When water flows into wetland systems, it improves water quality for human communities downstream but also supports native fish, frogs and river red gums “that all depend on these sort of floods coming down the system”, Kingsford said. A NSW upper house review report released on Wednesday warned that a decade of reforms under the $13bn Murray-Darling Basin Plan could be undermined if the government proceeded with plans to licence more harvesting of water on flood plains. Kingsford said water diversions for cotton, nuts and other crops had interrupted flows and made it harder to trigger natural bird breeding events. The Tallywalka wetlands in central NSW, for instance, remained dry when surveyed in October even though big rivers in the region were already high. The survey provided some good news, showing the return of more magpie geese. Numbers were smashed by poisoning for rabbits in the past, and the loss of habitat. The internationally important Macquarie Marshes also had moderate levels of water augmented by environmental flows supplied by the NSW and federal government. This water is supporting considerable numbers and diversity of waterbirds. However, the researchers counted just 57 Australasian shovelers, compared with thousands in the early years of the survey. Similarly, they observed just 105 freckled ducks, compared with more than 10,000 in previous good years. Researchers also counted 6,528 pink-eared ducks versus a dozen previous years when numbers were closer to 50,000, the report said. “One of the real advantages with having these long-term datasets that are collected in the same way every year and have been for some time, is you do [track] natural floods and droughts ,” Kingsford said. “You can start to tease out what the human impact is on these river systems.”It is an unprecedented treasure trove of the UK’s literary heritage, from a letter in which Jane Austen anticipates the end of a love affair, to a handwritten manuscript of Emily Brontë’s poems that was once believed lost. Now the Honresfield library has been saved for the nation after a charity raised more than £15m in just five months to acquire it. Half the amount was donated by Sir Leonard Blavatnik, with a further £4m from the National Heritage Memorial Fund (NHMF). The remainder was raised through donations from organisations including the TS Eliot and the Foyle foundations, another £2.5m from museums and libraries, and “thousands” of individual donations, which raised just under £150,000 from people around the world. Assembled towards the end of the 19th century by the Rochdale mill owner William Law, the Honresfeld library has been almost entirely inaccessible for the last 80 years. It was put up for auction at Sotheby’s earlier this year, to the horror of literary institutions up and down the country, who feared that precious manuscripts by the Brontës, Austen, Walter Scott and Robert Burns could fall into private hands. Led by the charity Friends of the National Libraries (FNL), an “unprecedented” consortium of libraries and museums came together to save the collection – which includes more than 500 manuscripts, first editions and letters – for the nation. The vendors and Sotheby’s agreed to postpone the sale while the funds were raised. Blavatnik, Britain’s richest man, match-funded the sum raised by FNL and the consortium institutions, which included the Bodleian, the British Library and the National Library of Scotland as well as Abbotsford, the home of Walter Scott in Melrose, Jane Austen’s House in Chawton and the Brontë Parsonage Museum in Haworth. The FNL thanked him for his “exceptional munificence”, and said that “in recognition of his great generosity the collection will henceforth be known as the Blavatnik Honresfield library”. Blavatnik’s donation is the largest ever given by an individual to the UK for a literary treasure, while the £4m given by the NHMF is the largest it has ever awarded for the acquisition of literary manuscripts. The FNL raised £15.3m in total, of which the purchase price is £15m, and the rest a combination of VAT and fees. “There has been unprecedented public interest in this collection of manuscripts and books hidden for almost a century. Rescuing it has seemed a little like opening an Egyptian tomb to see for the first time ancient texts and treasures which are now saved in perpetuity for students, scholars and book-lovers,” said Geordie Greig, chairman of the FNL and former editor of the Daily Mail. “The generosity of all the donors has been incredible in saving this unique library.” As well as a humorous letter from Austen to her sister Cassandra, in which she writes, on the eve of a ball, that “at length the day is come on which I am to flirt my last with Tom Lefroy, and when you receive this it will be over. My tears flow at the melancholy idea,” the collection contains an early volume of poems by Robert Burns in his own hand, and the complete working manuscript of Sir Walter Scott’s novel Rob Roy. Seven of Charlotte Brontë’s famous “little books” also feature, but the FNL said the “absolute jewel” of the Brontë collection is Emily Brontë’s notebook of 31 poems, believed by many scholars to have been lost, and including annotations in Charlotte’s hand. Sotheby’s specialist Dr Gabriel Heaton said the collection was “like no other that has come to market in recent decades. We were amazed and delighted at the incredible ambition of the FNL’s plan to acquire the whole library, and they deserve every credit for bringing their campaign to a successful conclusion. Their success is a testament to what can be achieved by the collaboration of public institutions and private collectors.” The manuscripts and books will now be donated by the FNL to institutions around the UK. “We are delighted that the library is to remain in the UK and as the property of the nation with many of the books and manuscripts returning to their birthplaces for all to see and enjoy,” said the family in a statement. Roly Keating, chief executive of the British Library, said the collaboration between institutions to bring about the purchase was “remarkable and unprecedented”. Giles Ingram, chief executive of the Abbotsford Trust, added: “To think that manuscripts written by Walter Scott in his own hand, will be returning to his homeland, many to his own home, is a triumph.”It’s nearly a decade since Matthew Bourne’s Nutcracker! was last seen on stage and the show, originated in 1992, is one of Bourne’s most kitsch, cartoonish and colourful (that colour is mainly pink). This spruced-up revival, however, proves that his take on the Christmas classic is not merely froth. The success of the Nutcracker as an enduring Christmas ballet is thanks to its festive theme and endlessly tuneful Tchaikovsky score – the narrative is famously “meh”. But in Bourne’s revamps he always brings character and story to the fore; his scenarios may not be realistic but they do have logic. Instead of the plushly decorated, upper class setting we often see, Bourne’s Clara (Cordelia Braithwaite) lives in a monochrome orphanage presided over by a tyrannical matron (the brilliant Daisy May Kemp) and Dr Dross (Danny Reubens, dressed in the mode of Herr Flick from ’Allo ’Allo). It’s somewhere you might actually want to escape from, which is what this fantasy is all about. The Nutcracker can also be read as a story of sexual awakening and first love, and that’s what drives Bourne’s version. When Clara’s Nutcracker doll is made flesh at the stroke of midnight, he turns into a pure hunk (Harrison Dowzell, with the right dose of knowingness), and takes her on a journey to Sweetieland. But Clara has competition from Princess Sugar – Ashley Shaw playing a Mean Girl deliciously in love with herself – who steals Clara’s man. All the earlier characters appear in Clara’s fantasy reincarnated as sweets: a gaggle of Wag-type marshmallow girls, some flamenco-dancing Liquorice Allsorts, laddish gobstoppers. It’s a pink, chewy, fizzy world of pleasure and desire, bodies twisting and thrusting with sensuous thrill. It’s all somehow very innocent while being orally fixated: they enter Sweetieland through a giant mouth, there are dance moves that mime stuffing cake (gracefully) into their gobs, plus a lot of licking. Anthony Ward’s designs use warped perspective and vivid colours, somewhere between a graphic novel and an acid trip. There’s a hint of the Grease dream scene, Beauty School Dropout, all clouds and dishy angels and walnut whip hair. Bourne gets around the potentially racist nature of some of the Nutcracker’s “national” dances by reinventing entirely the Arabian dance for the slinky and seductive Knickerbocker Glory (Jonathon Luke Baker), in smoking jacket and whipped cream hairdo with cherry on top. His flirtations are both creepy and comic and all credit to Braithwaite, who throughout the show is constantly alive to the characters around her, and here is laughing, awkward and startled all at the same time. Bourne’s choreographic style is a pick’n’mix: a bit of ballet, a bit of folky footwork, mime, quirky social dances and exaggerated shapes of his own making, with all sorts of witty references. Retro skaters recall wintry ballet Les Patineurs (although apparently the inspiration was skating film star Sonja Henie), and the orphans form a tableaux Petipa and Ivanov (Nutcracker’s original choreographers) could be proud of. Monique Jonas sparkles as one of the Allsorts and Dominic North is a standout as Fritz, Dr Dross’s obnoxiously spoiled son, who’s transformed into the gluttonous and somewhat saucy Prince Bon Bon, showing that you have to be a talented physical comedian to excel in Bourne’s shows (or certainly in this one). But everyone is engaged and full of energy in this very enjoyable confection. • Matthew Bourne’s Nutcracker! is at Sadler’s Wells, London, until 30 January, then touring.A judge has called for a ban on parties in the armed forces involving excessive drinking after a Royal Navy sailor was jailed for raping a female colleague following a party at a hotel. The judge said a pattern of criminal behaviour seemed to be emerging and asked military chiefs to consider finding a way of clamping down on drink-fuelled parties that end with colleagues bunking down together. AB William Stewart, 26, was jailed for eight and a half years after being found guilty of raping the woman following her birthday party. The pair were among a group of sailors who had been out drinking before returning to a hotel in the north-east of England to continue the celebrations in a conference room. Some clothes were removed and the victim poured prosecco over colleagues and herself, the court martial at Bulford military court in Wiltshire heard. She then went with three of the group, including Stewart, to a hotel room, and fell asleep. She woke to find him sexually assaulting her. Judge Advocate Robert Hill raised concerns about the number of similar incidents and suggested action needed to be taken. He said: “We wish to make this general observation. There seems to be a pattern of behaviour of drinking to excess in each other’s company, ending up in each other’s cabins and choosing to crash in the beds they are in. “This is the second case in a matter of weeks of the behavioural trend I have described. It would be appropriate to consider whether any ban should be strictly enforced.” Wg Cmdr Michael Saunders, prosecuting, said: “They all had a significant amount to drink. [The victim] was given a bottle of prosecco, as it was her birthday.” Videos showed her pouring the drink over herself and on to some men with their tops off on the floor, including Stewart. Giving evidence, she told the court: “We were celebrating that [her birthday] and a couple of people were promoted, so we were celebrating that, too. “We were all having drinks and everybody was having a good time. We were all in the conference room, and we ordered pizza. ‘Naked mess!’ was shouted. It was just tops off.” She said she fell asleep in someone’s room and woke when Stewart, whom she hardly knew, assaulted her. “He basically did what he wanted and I hoped it would be over,” she said. “I remember praying the lad next to me would wake up. It felt like a lifetime.” Reading her victim impact statement to the court, the woman said she had flashbacks of the attack and it had brought her to “the point of collapse both emotionally and physically”. In August, AB Mitieli Vakalaca was jailed for four years for trying to rape a colleague after he had been drinking heavily. She told court she had suffered anxiety and had been the target of gossip since the attack. In October, LS Sam Avery was jailed for five years for raping a colleague who had agreed to let him sleep in her room after a night out. A Royal Navy spokesperson said: “Personnel are educated regularly on the dangers of alcohol misuse and the code of social conduct alongside a consent training package currently being rolled out. A new team has been established to help leaders address unacceptable behaviour by identifying trends and concerns across the service.”Sir David King, one of the UK’s leading scientific figures, has intervened in the row over fossil fuel sponsorship at the Science Museum, calling for the institution to end any deals with big oil corporations unless the companies meet strict environmental criteria. The UK’s former chief scientific adviser said fossil fuel companies should have to prove they were serious about winding down their oil and gas operations before being awarded high-profile deals with prestigious scientific institutions. “You need to lay down your conditions before giving credit to them in the Science Museum,” King said. “One of those conditions should be a commitment to no further investment in oil discovery and no further investment in [oil and gas] infrastructure – that is a relatively simple thing and would have a very significant impact.” King’s comments will add pressure to the Science Museum, which has faced several resignations and growing protests over its relationship with Shell and a recently announced deal with the renewables company Adani Green Energy, part of the Adani Group, which has major holdings in coal. Last month the Guardian revealed how two scientists had refused to allow their work to be featured by the museum, with dozens more coming out in support a few days later. Earlier this month indigenous leaders on the frontline of the climate crisis called on the museum to cancel its deal with Adani Green Energy because of the destructive impact of coal exploration being carried out by Adani Group. King’s intervention came as the row between scientists boycotting the museum and senior management intensified. On Wednesday the group of academics and public figures backing the boycott wrote to the museum criticising its response to their concerns and reiterating their demands. The letter concluded: “We hope you are now willing to engage with your critics in a genuine and meaningful way; not just scientists but the Indigenous communities and young people who have raised deeply held concerns and been brushed off.” King said he would not personally join the boycott of the museum as the institution was “too important in our research and outreach agenda in the UK”. But he said that although boycotts and divestment campaigns were often a “blunt tool” they did serve an important function in the fight against climate breakdown. “If this sort of action puts pressure on them to change then I think it is worthwhile … the bottom line is the attention being paid to oil and gas companies is absolutely right and I do support the move to divest from oil and gas companies.” A spokesperson for the Science Museum defended its stance, saying it reached “millions with the sponsorship it receives”. They said engaging people with humanity’s greatest challenge – the fight against devastating climate change – was a major priority, adding: “Energy companies involved with fossil fuels are causing climate change but they also have the skills, money and geographical reach to be a big part of some of the solutions. “Where a company is showing a willingness to change, our trustees believe it is valid to continue to engage, while urging these companies to show more leadership in accelerating the shift to renewables instead of fossil fuels.” Sir Ian Blatchford, the chief executive of the Science Museum, had previously said: “Adani Green Energy already has one of the world’s largest renewable portfolios and plans to invest $20bn in clean energy over the next 10 years.” But King said that by continuing to associate with fossil fuel companies on the present terms, the Science Museum risked giving credibility to their extraction plans which – as they stand – would drive up emissions with devastating consequences for the climate. “We have to wake up these companies, who have lots of expertise, to where the real opportunities of the future are and, if these campaigns help do that, I do support them.”Van drivers will be required to get new international operating licences if they want to travel back and forth to the EU from May next year, the government has announced. The additional red tape will come into force next year alongside a series of further checks at Dover and other ports that were delayed three times in 2021 because of lack of preparation for Brexit in Great Britain. According to updates on the gov.uk website, anyone driving a van, a light commercial vehicle or any car towing a trailer will be required to have a “goods vehicle operator licence” to enter the EU, Iceland, Norway, Liechtenstein or Switzerland from May. The licence will cost van drivers up to £1,100, a significant burden for solo operators, industry leaders said. Drivers will have to fork out £257 in an application fee and a further £401 for the licence. Another £401 “continuation fee” will be payable every five years to retain the licence, according to gov.uk. The rules will hit small traders such as couriers or importers of wine or vintage and antique goods, the Road Haulage Association said. Rod McKenzie, the managing director of policy and public affairs at the RHA, said: “This is just more bureaucracy. It’s been flagged for some time but could be a problem for the one-man bands or small operators who are simply too busy running their business day to day to have noticed this.” Drivers will also need to assign a staff member or themselves as “transport manager” – a named individual to ensure the driver follows industry regulations and tax payments in the EU after Brexit. The person will either have to demonstrate they have managed fleets of vehicles for at least 10 years or will have to complete a course to qualify for a transport manager qualification. A slew of other rules in the UK will hit hauliers of all sizes from 1 January when EU exporters need to register for a goods vehicle movement service (GVMS) as full customs controls will apply to all goods moving in both directions between the EU and Great Britain. Hauliers who do not have the paperwork will not be allowed to board a ferry or shuttle. The new checks on EU imports have been delayed three times but will be phased in over 2022. David Frost, the Brexit minister, announced they would continue to be delayed for importers from Ireland. From 1 January exporters of agrifoods from the EU will also have to notify authorities in advance in Great Britain of their exports with physical checks on fresh food, products of animal origin, and plants including cut flowers from the Netherlands from July. A new site at Bastion Point in Dover has just been agreed for these sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) checks. A second border control post is being added to the existing HMRC facility in Sevington in Ashford to deal with SPS checks on plants and wood products, high-risk foods not of animal origin, horses and livestock. A third site in Kent is being identified, the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs said. McKenzie said: “Brexit was challenging initially for hauliers with loads delayed and lots of frustration but as ever with logistics, people have found their way. The big challenge for 2022 is how ready our EU counterparts will be for entry into GB.”Meeting Julia Donaldson and Axel Scheffler is a little like meeting the royal family. To learn anything about them is to be bombarded with an avalanche of statistics. In this country alone, a Julia Donaldson book sells every 11 seconds. In 2014 it was reported that 40p in every pound spent on children’s picture books went on a Donaldson title. And her work with Scheffler has taken on a rabid life outside of literature, too. Go to the woods and you’re likely to discover a Gruffalo trail. Chessington World of Adventures theme park is essentially a Donaldson/Scheffler temple, brimming with themed rides and marauding characters. And, let’s not forget, they are also the reigning king and queen of Christmas Day. Starting with The Gruffalo in 2009, one of their books has been sumptuously animated and proudly placed in every BBC One Christmas schedule. This year, Superworm – about an earthworm superhero captured by a wizard lizard – has received the treatment, narrated by none other than Olivia Colman and with Matt Smith as the titular creepy crawly. In grand Donaldson/Scheffler tradition the animation is bright and tactile, and the storyline has been augmented with a rich seam of festive melancholy. On a Christmas day dripping with repeats, this will not only go down as the BBC’s stand-out offering, but is also their ninth Christmas special. If you’re counting, Morecambe and Wise only managed eight. I meet the pair in a hotel room strewn with half-eaten biscuits. Before meeting them, my preconceived idea was that Donaldson would be the optimist and Scheffler the pessimist; her text is bouncy and tight, while his illustrations are often suffused with a Germanic darkness. In person, however, there’s a quiet glee to Scheffler’s pessimism, a twinkle in his eye that gives away how much he loves playing the Eeyore. Donaldson, meanwhile, is more protective of her work. “Julia gets more input than me,” Scheffler says of the animated specials. “They show us work in progress maybe twice or three times. We can give our comments”, he shrugs, “But I don’t have many”. “I usually have comments about the language”, adds Donaldson. “They sometimes have too much action in between two lines of a couplet. I say ‘Can’t you put that couplet together?’ That really paid off this time. They paid more attention than usual.” This is Donaldson and Scheffler’s 28th year working together, since the publication of A Squash and a Squeeze in 1993. Famously, though, their work is not collaborative. Donaldson submits her text to the publisher, Scheffler illustrates it and they each give the other free rein. The policy works, but isn’t without its bristles; Donaldson is on record in wishing the witch in Room on the Broom was younger, while Superworm presented plenty of problems for Scheffler. On his website, Scheffler admits he hates drawing earwigs so much that he tried (unsuccessfully) to make Donaldson change her text. Plus, let’s not forget, the main character is a worm, which in all fairness probably isn’t an illustrator’s dream. “It was a bit of a challenge”, nods Scheffler, “Because there were no arms, no legs, no nose. Very limited material to put any expression on a worm”. Donaldson seems slightly affronted. In an interview a decade ago, Donaldson referred to Scheffler as “my main illustrator”. But their workrates have changed in the ensuing years. Although Scheffler still illustrates a Julia Donaldson book every couple of years, Donaldson now writes books with a whole range of other illustrators. I wonder if Scheffler felt hurt when she first went with someone else. “No, it’s fine”, he replies. “I mean, I can’t do all her texts, obviously”. “And Axel had worked with authors before we met”, adds Donaldson. Nevertheless, Donaldson now works with so many illustrators – 19 in total – that she has had to compose mnemonics to keep track of them all. “I’ve got ‘A Lady Died, Never Raids A Sex Shop’, so that’s Axel, Lydia Monks, David Roberts, Nick Sharratt, Rebecca Cole, and so on and so on”, she says. “And there’s another one, ‘Every June Someone Very Clever Like You Has To Pick Curly Kale’, and that’s all the others”. She stops and takes a breath. “But Axel is definitely at the top,” she adds. Scheffler once claimed in an interview that he would be a very happy early retiree. “Where did you read that?” he splutters, “The dark web?”. So it isn’t true? “I mean, sometimes I think about it,” he admits. “But I probably won’t. Raymond Briggs and Quentin Blake and Judith Kerr all worked into their 90s. I think we just have to carry on. Sometimes I think it’s tedious, and too much of a routine. But I probably wouldn’t be a happy retiree.” Still, though, the success Donaldson and Scheffler have enjoyed is unimaginable. They are now a brand unto themselves, and a team of people work around the clock to find new ways to keep their circulation in tip-top shape. Their work is endlessly recycled into lift-the-flap books and outdoor activity books and sticker books. Is it hard for them to focus on creating new work? “I don’t even count those spin-offs any more, because it’s a sort of big machinery”, shrugs Scheffler. “I don’t have to do anything other than look at them and approve.” “My husband calls it salami slicing”, adds Donaldson. “But I keep a limit. It might not seem like it, but my agent and I are quite strict about it. I feel quite protective of the books I have written. Like, say our Acorn Woods books, I actually wrote those. But the spin-offs, I’m sure they’re right, but they claim they’re good for maintaining interest. And some of them are rather nice.” “Yeah”, agrees Scheffler. “They do them really well. They’re not rubbish.” Donaldson and Scheffler wear their success surprisingly lightly. Donaldson lives right on the high street of her village in Sussex, and Scheffler is all ratty jumper and unbrushed hair. Do they ever become overwhelmed by all they’ve accomplished? “It makes you completely dizzy when you think about all the people reading our books in the world,” says Scheffler. “I think that’s a nice feeling, because it’s not like we’re doing something bad”, adds Donaldson. “It’s nice to feel you’re doing something worthwhile”. “It’s slightly ambivalent”, admits Scheffler. “Sometimes I sort of feel like I can never get out of this, as co-creator of the Gruffalo. It feels slightly claustrophobic”. It’s telling that this is the first time in our interview Scheffler has said the word ‘Gruffalo’ out loud, having previously only referred to it as ‘The monster book’ and ‘The G word’. Rumour has it that, somewhere on his desk, is a picture of the Gruffalo in a noose. “But we do signings and have people thanking us. I’ve experienced that a lot, and of course that makes you feel you’ve done something special.” “Especially when people say, ‘Oh, my autistic child loves such and such a book”, says Donaldson. “But I’m sure there are other ones whose autistic child didn’t like our books, so his parents have read him some other books”. “Yes,” nods Scheffler. “We don’t usually meet the people who hate our books.” We have no idea what the year ahead will hold, but we can be fairly sure they’ll be back next Christmas, for their 10th special in a row. Take that, Eric and Ernie. • Superworm is on Christmas Day at 2.30pm on BBC One.Germany’s new chancellor faced pressure from fellow leaders at his first EU summit to include the future of Nord Stream 2 as part of the “massive price” to be paid in the event of a Russian invasion of Ukraine. Arriving in Brussels, Olaf Scholz, who replaced Angela Merkel last week, said his government was committed to protecting Europe’s borders, as Nato warned that the number of Russian troops being mobilised by the Kremlin was continuing to grow. “The inviolability of borders is one of the very important foundations of peace in Europe, and we will all do everything together to ensure that this inviolability actually remains intact,” Scholz told reporters. Hours later, Germany’s energy regulator said it would not make a decision on certifying Nord Stream 2, a gas pipeline connecting Russia to Germany and bypassing Ukraine, until at least the second half of 2022. But there was growing clamour from some EU leaders for a stronger message on the controversial pipeline from the government in Berlin, including its possible termination as a project in the event of further military escalation. The EU’s 27 heads of state and government warned in an end-of-summit communique of “massive and severe costs, including restrictive measures” should Russia invade Ukraine. But officials and leaders have refused to flesh out the potential repercussions in public. Ursula von der Leyen, the European Commission president, told the leaders she had a package of measures prepared, but did not elaborate further. Latvia’s prime minister, Arturs Krišjānis Kariņš, said: “It would be important that we could also decide that Nord Stream 2 is on the table, that if there is heightened military activity this project would be turned off.” Kariņš added that the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, was using the pipeline as “a sort of blackmail against the European Union, stating falsely that if we want to have more gas, we must open up to Nord Stream 2”. EU leaders were asked to leave their phones outside the room in which they were meeting in the Europa building in Brussels as discussions began on the issue on Thursday evening. Putin has mobilised as many as 175,000 troops on Ukraine’s northern, eastern, and southern borders, with the Kremlin blaming “provocative” Nato drills near the border for making the military buildup necessary. The Russian leader has demanded that Nato withdraw a 2008 pledge to admit Ukraine and Georgia as members of the military alliance as part of his price for de-escalation. As the EU summit was being held in one part of Brussels, at the Nato headquarters four miles north, Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, was meeting the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg. Following their discussions, Stoltenberg insisted that Ukraine’s potential membership was a matter for the alliance and Kyiv rather than the Kremlin. He said: “We discussed Russia’s substantial military buildup in and around Ukraine, with tens of thousands of combat-ready troops, tanks, artillery, armoured units, drones, electronic warfare systems. We see no sign that this buildup is stopping or slowing down. On the contrary, it continues.” Stoltenberg added: “Nato’s support for Ukraine is not a threat to Russia. Ukraine has the right to choose its own security arrangements. This is a fundamental principle of European security. And the decision on whether Ukraine can join Nato will be taken by Ukraine and 30 Nato allies alone.” The Kremlin said it had submitted draft documents outlining security arrangements it wants to negotiate with the US and its allies. Putin’s spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, said a senior Russian envoy stood ready to immediately depart for talks in a neutral country on the proposal. Meanwhile, Lithuania’s president, Gitanas Nausėda, was expected to seek EU support at the summit after China imposed economic sanctions on its businesses in response to Taiwan opening a representative office in Vilnius. Lithuania’s diplomatic delegation to China also left the country on Wednesday due to alleged “intimidation”. China’s foreign ministry said on Thursday that concerns over the safety of Lithuanian diplomats in China were groundless.The Bank of England is making a habit of pulling surprises. In November, financial markets were taken aback when Threadneedle Street kept interest rates on hold at 0.1%. This time they were caught on the hop by the decision to raise them to 0.25%. It’s not hard to see why traders in the City have been left scratching their heads given that the explanation for doing nothing in November – uncertainty about the real state of the economy – seems to apply just as much to today’s circumstances. Last month the big imponderable was how the labour market had stood up to the end of the government’s furlough scheme; this time it was the impact of the Omicron variant. So what explains a change of stance that resulted in only one member of the nine-strong monetary policy committee voting for the status quo on interest rates? Firstly, since the MPC deliberated in November there have been two sets of labour market figures, neither of which have shown much impact from the end of the furlough scheme. The number of people on payrolls has continued to rise; job vacancies are running at record levels. Secondly, the Bank has become spooked by rising inflation. Since the start of the year, Threadneedle Street has consistently underestimated price pressures and is now anticipating a peak of 6%, three times the official 2% target. Last month it was pencilling in 5%, and while price pressures are expected to diminish from the spring onwards, the MPC has decided it can delay action no longer. The MPC took its decision in full knowledge of the spread of Omicron, which it said had the potential to lead to “a very high number of infections over a very short period”. What’s more, it accepted the new variant of coronavirus would weigh on the economy in the short term. But for now the Bank seems to be assuming that the impact of Omicron will be to lead to still higher inflation, while having only a modest and temporary impact on output. That’s because tougher restrictions on socialising shift spending patterns away from face-to-face services and towards goods, where supply-chain bottlenecks have been responsible for a surge in prices. The Bank does not have to hit the government’s 2% target at all times. It can tolerate a significant overshoot (or undershoot) if it believes precipitate action would cause damage to the economy. On this occasion it has decided the threat of inflation becoming embedded is greater than the risk to growth. That judgment will come under intense scrutiny in the coming weeks, and if things get really bad the Bank will come under pressure to bring rates down again. In the meantime, the rate rise has made clear that the Bank sees its main task to be hitting the inflation target. With the Bank currently anticipating that borrowing costs will need to rise further next year, the onus is now on Rishi Sunak to support the economy through what looks likely being a testing few months.The rising wave of Omicron infections could lead to daily hospitalisations from Covid exceeding the peak of last winter, when more than 4,500 people in the UK were admitted on a single day, England’s chief medical officer has said. The staggering speed at which Omicron is spreading means large numbers of vulnerable people may need hospital care over a very short space of time, Prof Chris Whitty told MPs on Thursday, with daily admissions potentially peaking above that seen last winter at the start of the vaccine programme. On Thursday, the UK set another grim record for the Covid epidemic with 88,376 new cases reported, a 31.4% rise on the week. The number of confirmed Omicron cases rose to 11,708, up 1,691 on Wednesday. The latest figures from the UK Health Security Agency show the doubling rate for Omicron is less than two days in all regions of England apart from the south-west. Cases are doubling every one-and-a-half days in London where 73.5% of Covid cases are now expected to be Omicron. The highest number of Covid hospitalisations in a day in the UK was 4,583 on 12 January, when the Alpha variant – first spotted in Kent – was dominant. Omicron is now the dominant variant in London and is expected to become the most common in England within days or weeks. “Even if it is milder, because it is concentrated over a short period of time you could end up with a higher number than that going into hospital on a single day. That is entirely possible,” Whitty told the health and social care committee. “The whole point about this is it’s going to be really concentrated in a very short period of time, very possibly.” Dr Susan Hopkins, the chief medical adviser for the UK Health Security Agency, said the UK was experiencing two Covid epidemics, with cases of Delta largely flat and Omicron doubling every two days. She said the R number – the number of people an infected person typically passes the virus on to – for Omicron was estimated at between three and five. Whitty said many people failed to appreciate that the NHS was likely to face a sudden influx of Covid patients at a time when it would be struggling for staff because of infections and illness. The broader economy was also at risk as the variant swept across the country, he added. “The numbers in hospital over a short period could be very high indeed. This will be happening at a time when a very significant number of staff are going to be off ill, isolating or caring. So you’re going to have both a reduction in supply and an increase in demand in the health service over a very short time period, and that really is the reason why we’re all taking this extremely seriously,” Whitty said. “One risk that is going to happen irrespective is, because of the steepness of this, even if this ended up in a situation where boosters do hold this to a large degree for a lots of people … a lot of people will simultaneously fall ill and be unwell, isolating or caring for others at the same time across the whole economy.” Covid cases are rising most steeply among those aged 20-29, followed by people in their 30s, although children aged five to nine, and 10- 19-year-olds still have the highest rates of infection, according to the UKHSA’s Covid surveillance report released on Thursday. On 12 December, 67.9% of the UK population had received at least one dose of vaccine and 62.2% had received two shots. More than 80% of the over-70s have received a booster. Some early reports from South Africa raised concerns that the Omicron variant might be slightly more severe than Delta in children, but Whitty said this was not being seen in the UK and the assumption was that it was still far more serious for older people than those who were young and healthy. Before the vaccination programme in the Alpha wave, more than a fifth of people over the age of 65 who caught Covid were hospitalised. This fell to 6% as the vaccine rollout protected the oldest and most vulnerable people. Whitty said at worst the UK may go back to the hospital admission rate seen in January, but a booster may protect more people against severe disease from Omicron than two shots did against severe disease caused by Delta. He urged people to get vaccinated or boosted as soon as they became eligible and emphasised that vaccine coverage among pregnant women was still “depressingly low”. Almost all pregnant women with Covid in hospital and intensive care are unvaccinated. “Significant numbers of women have come to serious harm as a result of this,” he said, blaming “myths” about vaccine safety in the group for the low uptake. “What is true is that Covid and pregnancy is a dangerous combination and we absolutely should be encouraging everybody who is pregnant to get vaccinated.” The most difficult decision now, Whitty said, was how to balance family visits to people in care homes with safety. “What we don’t want is a situation where over the Christmas period people are left completely alone, but nor do we want to have outbreaks we can avoid. We’re trying to navigate a route between those two very clear needs. That is probably the most difficult decision at this point,” he said. Early estimates from South Africa have suggested that Omicron may cause milder disease than previous waves of Covid. That would be expected, since people catching Omicron, which was discovered only last month, have more immunity to Covid because of previous infection or vaccination. Hopkins said the UKHSA would be able to assess Omicron severity and vaccine protection in Britain once about 250 people had been hospitalised with the variant. “The earliest we will have reliable data is the week between Christmas and New Year, and probably early January,” she told MPs.Police in Akron, Ohio, are hunting brazen thieves who have stolen an entire 58ft-long bridge. The pedestrian bridge used to span the Cuyahoga River in a park in the city, but had been removed as part of a wetlands restoration project and stored in a nearby field. Unfortunately, while there, it caught the eye of someone who first stole its deck boards and then came back for the rest of the structure, leaving police baffled as to why anyone would steal an entire bridge – and what they would do with it. “It could be used for a variety of different things, to include as simple as landscaping or they could use it for some other engineering project, some other large scale project,” police officer Lt Mike Miller told a local TV station. Police have appealed to the local community for help.With great regularity across several decades of men’s Ashes cricket, England’s tours to Australia have seemingly been cursed by luck. There was Simon Jones and his knee, Steve Harmison and his yips, Chris Silverwood and his playing career. Coin tosses lost when they hurt most, won when they would have been better avoided. Coming to Australia to win was hard enough, but the dark hand of fate would still see fit to intervene. For a couple of hours on Thursday morning Adelaide time, fate settled on a different target. That was when the news came through that the Australia captain, Pat Cummins, though fit, was ruled out of the imminent Test match after being identified as a close contact of a positive Covid-19 case. Through those pre-match warm-ups, through the early anticipation, some English minds would have wondered if this was a series turning point, the new version of Glenn McGrath rolling an ankle at Edgbaston in 2005. Cummins had been out for dinner in Adelaide on Wednesday evening, seated near a recent arrival from Sydney who during his meal received a text message saying he had tested positive for the virus. This was because South Australian rules require interstate travellers to be tested on arrival, but not to await their results in quarantine. Cummins was accordingly deemed a close contact and now has to stay in isolation for seven days pending negative tests. While plenty of other places have grown jaded or complacent about the virus, South Australia has so far avoided most of its impact. In the past two days, the entire state recorded 25 and 24 new official cases respectively. Having recently opened their borders, local authorities are trying to keep those numbers to a slow climb while still allowing interstate movement and commerce. Cummins has been caught in the compromise. The Australia captain did not do anything risky: Cricket Australia has been flexible with players this season, allowing latitude for socialising after so many biosecure events. CA’s chief executive, Nick Hockley, did suggest they would revisit rules to ask players to only eat outside at restaurants: the bowlers Mitchell Starc and Nathan Lyon did just that at the same venue as Cummins, and so avoided being sent to quarantine themselves. Yet for all the dislocation of losing their captain on the morning of a match, Australia not only weathered the storm but prospered. CA got what the organisation wanted when recently installing Steve Smith as vice-captain: a chance for him to lead the team once again after his 2018 sacking during the sandpaper affair, without weathering the criticism of giving him the leadership outright. Smith won the toss, and with it an all-important chance to bat first. England began a day and a night of toil. For all the talk of the pink Kookaburra cricket ball that can offer swing, it travelled through the air as straight as a billiard cue. Across the opening hours of a blamelessly dry and sunny afternoon, CricViz ball-tracking data detected the least first-day swing of any Test in Australia for seven years. Stuart Broad and Jimmy Anderson got some balls to move off the seam but they passed harmlessly far from the edge of the bat, coming from a length too short just like when the same bowlers opened proceedings at this venue in 2017. So the wheel of luck briskly turned. Australia had been extremely unfortunate to have Cummins ruled out, but the instability of that removal was not compounded. Australia were already missing Josh Hazlewood with a side strain, meaning the premier pair of fast bowlers had suddenly vanished. Jhye Richardson and Michael Neser are quality replacements, but Richardson played his two Tests nearly three years ago and Neser is on debut. Had they been the ones offered no assistance by conditions on the first day, the chance to put them under pressure could well have been taken even by England’s suspect batting. Instead the task of steadying the side fell to those best qualified to do it with the bat: David Warner, Marnus Labuschagne and Smith. The former pair proceeded slowly through the first two sessions, but only in the face of bowling that was steady rather than suffocating. Jos Buttler bookended the day with dropped catches from Labuschagne, aside from which only a few false shots were drawn. For much of the journey it seemed the Australians were less concerned with the runs they could score on day one and more with making sure England would be bowling on day two, with a forecast of 37C before it drops to civilised numbers later in the week. They were also happy to watch England’s over rate drag out, leaving the visitors scrambling to fit in nine overs with a new ball under floodlights after the 80th over. The fifth of those precious overs brought the spurned edge from Labuschagne; the potential 10th of those precious overs was lost. By stubbornness and attrition, Australia turned a bad situation firmly to their advantage. They will resume on the second day on 221 for two, with plenty of time in hand. If good enough with the bat, they may be able to choose to bowl in the evening session. When they do bowl, their inexperienced replacements will be backed by runs. Into the bargain, Cummins gets a rest in the series without the palaver that would have accompanied it had the captain been rested. There are days to go, but so far Australia’s big stroke of bad luck has not done much harm.France has banned all non-essential travel from the UK, starting on Friday night. We explain what it means if you have planned to visit over the festive period. What’s happening? All tourist travel from the UK to France is off until further notice. The ban takes effect at 11pm UK time on Friday 17 December or midnight in Paris. All tourism-based travel for UK citizens, including visits to family and friends in France, is off – for now at least. French citizens, partners and children are still allowed to travel to France for visits. What does this mean for my Christmas ski trip? Christmas and new year ski holiday plans have been thrown into disarray, and operators have been left scrambling to find alternative trips for British skiers who had hoped to visit the slopes in the next two weeks. The coming weeks are traditionally some of the busiest of the season. One outcome could be that trips are switched to other Alpine destinations, if there are flights and hotel rooms available – a big if. Right now, it looks as if a great many trips will be cancelled. Crystal Ski, one of the biggest providers, says: “We’re aware that the French government has today announced a ban on UK travellers entering France. We’ll be in contact with customers shortly.” Nick Morgan, the managing director of Le Ski, which has been operating chalets in the French Alps for 40 years, says guests should wait for a phone call to discuss their options. “This is being done strictly in date of departure order,” he says. If I can’t travel will I get a refund? Those with package tours – who bought flights and accommodation together – are protected by Atol, meaning you will get a full refund when the tour operator is forced to cancel. As happened previously, tour firms may ask customers to defer their booking but you are under no obligation to do so. Those offered an alternative trip may be entitled to compensation if it is not of the same quality. Others may be asked for upgrade fees. What if I booked my own travel and accommodation? Those who booked their own trips will be relying on the provider’s terms and conditions. Most people will have booked flexible tickets and face having to reschedule their trips. EasyJet is offering free switches to alternative flights up until two hours before departure. Eurostar said it would offer passengers forced to cancel a fee-free exchange or an e-voucher. Those with hotel bookings need to check their terms and hope that cancellation is allowed. Airbnb customers will be relying on their host’s chosen cancellation terms. Those cancelling at the very last minute will often lose most or all their booking cost. Those with non-refundable ferry tickets will probably have to accept vouchers to rebook the trip. However, Brittany Ferries said on Thursday: “We’re encouraging customers to change their bookings to a later date if they can, but we’ll refund those who’d prefer not to.” Will my travel insurance pay up? A handful of insurers introduced Covid cover this year, and if you bought one of those policies you should check its terms. Most of the cheaper travel policies will not cover cancellations as a result of these last-minute changes. Could this be the end of some travel firms? Charles Owen, the director of SBIT, a group of more than 200 British tour companies, has called the news “devastating for the UK ski industry”. “After 21 months of being closed due to the pandemic, this is yet another hammer blow to the industry. The UK government urgently needs to engage with industry leaders and introduce support measures immediately.” Abta’s chief executive, Mark Tanzer, says the temporary ban on most travel from the UK will come as a “hammer blow” to the winter travel industry, which was already under extreme pressure. “Travel businesses have reported turnover at just 22% of pre-pandemic levels following two years of government-imposed restrictions and consumer confidence in overseas travel has been hit hard.”Baritone Peter Brathwaite is in his happy place: the rehearsal room. Just now he is working with the company, Little Bulb, that’s devising the Royal Opera House’s family Christmas show, Wolf Witch Giant Fairy. It is based on Little Red Riding Hood, but with other fairy stories ingeniously embedded. Like all the best shows about enchantment, the magic is also theatrical: it is the sorcery of an actor turning into a witch or a cat just by putting on a mask; it’s the alchemy of a multitalented cast slipping apparently effortlessly from singing to playing instruments to acting. Brathwaite is the frock-coated narrator. It is very different from working on an operatic classic. With Little Bulb, much of the show is being created in the room. “It’s really democratic,” he says. “Yesterday, we all stood around together, dissecting one of the songs, discussing all the various ways it could develop.” Covid-19 has made such moments even more precious; Brathwaite, like thousands of other freelancers in the arts, saw his livelihood collapse as the pandemic took hold last year. His last performances before the first lockdown were of Songs of Arrival, a show he put together about the music of Jewish immigrants arriving in 1940s Manchester. Brathwaite grew up in the city’s Cheetham Hill, went to a majority Jewish primary school, and says he feels strong solidarity with “people who are likely to have been othered in their lives. My street was full of people from all over the world, and that has really influenced my desire to tell stories from all perspectives.” Then, on Good Friday 2020, grounded at home in Bedfordshire, where his husband is a deputy head teacher, he decided to take up the “Getty challenge”. The Los Angeles museum was asking members of the public to recreate famous works of art using whatever they could find around the house. Brathwaite styled himself as an 18th-century portrait of an anonymous Black servant, then posted the picture to Instagram. At the start, he says, “I did it to take my mind off things. I like dressing up, and I thought: ‘This is a bit like an opera rehearsal and involves a bit of research and it’s quite fun looking for images.’” For the next 50 days he continued, each time posing as a different Black subject of a portrait from the medieval period right up to Barack Obama in Kehinde Wiley’s presidential commission. As he went on, the captions began to swell with fascinating research, whether about the history of the Black Venetian gondoliers in Carpaccio’s Miracle of the Relic of the True Cross on the Rialto Bridge (c1494), or Alice Neel’s 1950s portrait of civil rights activist Harold Cruse. Sometimes the recreations gently probed racist modes of representation; sometimes they celebrated the all-but forgotten individual. He called the project Rediscovering Black Portraiture. It developed a keen following, and the results are now not only the subject of an exhibition at King’s College London, but soon to be made into a book published by Getty itself. Not bad for a lockdown diversion; but clearly there was, from the start, serious intent. “I became more and more determined to tell as many stories as possible,” he says, “I feel I learned a lot about how to develop a language that means that we can have these conversations. The playfulness of the photographs is disarming.” Talking to Brathwaite, who is 38, is to encounter someone with a fierce sense of social responsibility, a conviction that in classical music “we can tell stories as a force for change and good”. His mother came to the UK from Barbados at 20 and worked as a nurse. He was a chorister at St Ann’s church in Manchester, got a music bursary to Bury grammar school, and studied philosophy and fine art at Newcastle University before receiving a scholarship at the Royal College of Music. In a series of essays for Radio 3, he has recounted how, during that time, he discovered voices such as that of Leontyne Price, the first internationally recognised African American soprano – now 94 – to become a worldwide star. He likens her voice to a Mark Rothko painting. Her sense of purpose also inspired him. Going to music college, he says, was all about acquiring skills – voice, acting, movement, languages – “but also working out, by the time I got to the end: what do I actually want to say by doing this?” Brathwaite often finds himself the only Black artist on stage. The memory of working with Chineke!, the majority Black and ethnically diverse orchestra, “brings a smile to my face – that feeling of standing in front of the orchestra and turning around and thinking: ‘Yeah, all right, it can look like this.’” He is clear that the time for talking about the lack of diversity on British opera stages, as well as behind the scenes, is over; it’s time to get things done. “I feel like the conversations are happening, but we need to do it. That’s why sometimes I just think, well: ‘I’ll do it myself.’” At the moment, he tells me, he is reading a lot of Edward Kamau Brathwaite, the Barbadian poet and intellectual to whom he is distantly related; he can trace his family tree back to the 18th-century white Braithwaite or Brathwaite family, who were prominent sugar plantation owners and enslavers. This is partly because he is researching a possible show of Barbadian folk songs; but he is also, he says, struck by Kamau Brathwaite’s writing on griots, the bards and keepers of oral history in west African cultures. It was the audiences of these bards, wrote Kamau Brathwaite, who completed the community of the performance, creating “a continuum where meaning truly resides”. That is the impetus behind devising his own work, whether that’s his show Effigies of Wickedness! about the music denounced as “degenerate” by the Nazis, or the new folk song project. “By devising these things, I can take it into my own hands to employ a team that is representative, and tell the stories of our shared history, Hopefully audiences will feel that they are involved in this as well.” He wants to say things that “people might not think they needed to hear, or might not think they wanted to hear, because they haven’t heard them before”. In the meantime, he’s back in the Royal Opera House’s Linbury theatre, ready to bewitch a new generation with Wolf Witch Giant Fairy. “I hope seeing Little Bulb in action makes audiences realise that so much is possible,” he says. “There are so many possible worlds available to us through art.” Wolf Witch Giant Fairy is at the Royal Opera House: Linbury theatre, London, to 3 January.Nine people died in a jet crash on Wednesday in the Dominican Republic, including acclaimed Puerto Rican music producer Flow La Movie. The private jet, which carried seven passengers and two crew members, took off from La Isabela international airport in El Higüero and was headed towards Orlando, Florida. However, the pilots quickly declared an emergency and attempted to divert the flight to the nearby Las Américas international airport, crashing the plane in an attempted emergency landing. The 38-year old music producer, along with his 31-year old partner, Debbie Von Marie Jiménez García, and their four-year old son were among the victims. According to Helidosa Aviation Group, which owned the aircraft, it was not immediately clear what prompted the pilots to scrap the flight. “For Helidosa, this accident causes us great pain and sorrow. We stand in solidarity with the affected families that, along with us, are going through a difficult time,” the company said in a statement. Videos that circulated on social media showed the alleged crash site where emergency rescue teams scrambled to put out a fire and plumes of black smoke. The Puerto Rican producer, whose full name is José Angel Hernandez, helped produce hit Latin tracks including Te Boté and AM which became Billboard chart-toppers. With over 10 years of industry experience, Flow also launched his own indie record label and management agency. Latin musicians mourned Flow’s death on social media, with Colombian singer J Balvin writing: “José Ángel, thanks for your good vibes always. Rest in peace.” Spanish artist Juan Magan wrote: “What a tragedy! A man and his family conquering the world, it wasn’t their turn to go. RIP Flow.” Puerto Rican singer and songwriter Don Omar also paid tribute, writing: “Sorry for your loss and that of your family. Thank you for the opportunity to collaborate. Fly high, see you later.” Helidosa Aviation identified the other victims as six relatives of Flow, including Keilyan Hernandez, Yeilianys Jeishlimar Melendez Jimenez and Jesiel Yabdiel Silva.Whether it’s the cheery musings of the worker hammering in the nails to crucify Jesus, a bleak paean to the glories of heroin or the cautionary tale of a young thumb-sucker whose thumbs are snipped off by a tailor with a giant pair of scissors, the Tiger Lillies can be relied on to find the twisted and macabre side to any story and tell it with gruesome relish. So what, then, would they make of Dickens’ Christmas Carol? Turns out that the trio who’ve made a career hymning those who live in the shadows are stumped when faced with an actual ghost story. The feel is Victorian music hall meets Jack the Ripper. A simple set is filled with candles, a cloth-covered table suggests an altar or a seance. Adrian Stout (double bass) and Budi Butenop (percussion) are in top hats and cloaks, while Martyn Jacques (vocals, accordion) is half-undertaker half-zombie, face white but for black eyes, a distorted grimace slashed across his mouth. But this, it turns out, is as scary as it gets. The Tiger Lillies’ Christmas Carol: A Victorian Gutter is billed as a song cycle. The barest bones of Dickens’ story are told by Jacques, narrating, and Stout – from his double bass – speaks Scrooge’s few words, swapping top hat for nightcap. At the drums, Butenop is occasionally called on to be Tiny Tim or Bob Cratchit, and the four ghosts do appear – as ragged limbless puppets that hover behind the trio – but so much of the story is omitted that even if you thought you could recite Dickens’ tale in your sleep, you might find yourself confused. Nor do the songs advance or illuminate the narrative. There are no darkly comic thoughts from characters who lurk at the underbelly of Victorian London, we hear little from Scrooge and nothing from those he mistreats. Instead, the more pacey tracks are all the same queasy waltz with Jacques keening about “poverteeee”, most of the rest of the lyrics indistinguishable. The slower tracks, with Jacques at the grand piano, fare better, but – as far as it’s possible to make out – still offer only generalised laments about regret, greed or “poverteeee”. In 2021, with a corrupt and uncaring elite in charge, child poverty soaring and as a new variant of Covid-19 runs riot, to make no sly connection between Dickens’ London and our own felt like missing an open goal. Meanwhile a bizarre and misjudged hymn to the terrors of tuberculosis, with fake coughing and spluttering, had me making sure my mask was firmly on. Stout, with the saw, theremin and the jaw harp, adds atmosphere and brings much needed extra aural interest, but none of the songs in this 80-minute set are distinctive, and with various fumbled lines the evening felt unfocused and under-rehearsed. Things on that side at least might improve, but if you want an acerbic take on Dickens’s story, try Blackadder’s Christmas Carol instead. • At Southbank Centre, London, until 30 December.It is the crucial season for theatres when families, schools and panto-lovers traditionally crowd into festive shows and fill venues’ coffers for the year ahead. But this winter, amid rising Covid case numbers and the spread of the Omicron variant, bookings are down and performances are being cancelled at the last minute – and at an alarming rate – due to Covid infections among cast and crew. Theatres have been left “in crisis mode”, “on a knife edge” and “terrified” of what the next weeks will bring. The producer Kenny Wax, whose hits include the musical Six and the Goes Wrong series of comedies, told the Guardian that “the industry is probably in its most precarious position”, even after almost two years of uncertainty. On Wednesday, Sir Nicholas Hytner, artistic director of the Bridge theatre in London, predicted on BBC Newsnight: “the three weeks of the year on which all live arts and entertainment businesses rely … will be a write-off”. Sarah Brigham, who runs Derby theatre, said that cast illnesses have left artistic directors around the country asking themselves with dread: “When am I going to have to walk on stage with a script?” Natalie Ibu, artistic director of Northern Stage in Newcastle, said: “What we don’t need is more uncertainty and mixed messages [from government] – that just feels like March 2020 all over again. We’ve come too far to find ourselves stuck in Groundhog Day.” Northern Stage’s production of The Sorcerer’s Apprentice became, on Thursday, one of the latest shows to cancel performances due to Covid cases despite having a range of measures in place to keep the company safe. Ibu said it was “hugely disappointing” and that they hoped to restart performances from 28 December. Cancellations have hit stages and shows of all sizes – from small arts centres to our grandest cultural institutions, local pantos to West End musicals including Cabaret and Hamilton – but with the same loss of vital revenue. Of similar importance is the loss of audience confidence at a time of great uncertainty and mixed messaging when Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer for England, has urged people not to “mix with people you don’t have to” but Boris Johnson has declared people should not cancel Christmas parties. Ibu said that an enormous amount of work and financial support had gone into reopening theatres and rebuilding audience confidence. “What we need now is clarity to enable us to use that investment in the best way we can for our community.” Brigham added that “clear messaging and role-modelling from leadership would be really helpful. It takes us back to March 2020 when we weren’t told to close down but audiences were told not to come to us.” Certainty and reassurance for audiences and businesses were paramount, she added, not just through strong public health messaging but also strong economic measures. The playwright Mark Ravenhill, now co-artistic director of the King’s Head theatre in London, told the Guardian earlier this week that the next few months “could be the most perilous of all” for theatres. “If this turns out to be a period where theatres are technically allowed to open, but very few people want to go to them, that would be a big financial challenge.” While many theatregoers have returned to West End shows with enthusiasm, said Wax, there was much greater audience confidence on Broadway where “everyone wears masks in the theatres. It’s the law and they respect it. Theatre owners don’t allow you to take food or drink to your seats so you can’t use the excuse of ‘I’m drinking’ to have lifted or lowered your mask. It has to remain in place.” Mask-wearing in England’s theatres, left up to individual venues to enforce to their best ability for months, has only just become mandatory rather than recommended practice (excluding exemptions). Whether that will reassure apprehensive theatregoers to make their Christmas trips has yet to be seen. Vaccine status and ID, required for theatre attendance in other European countries, are still not a legal requirement to enter most theatres in England and Scotland; Covid passports are required for theatres in Wales and Northern Ireland. Entire productions around the country have been postponed in recent weeks, such as the Brighton Centre’s Aladdin panto starring Anita Dobson, now pushed back a year due to the uncertainty and risk surrounding the Omicron variant. Coventry’s Belgrade theatre announced on 8 December that members of its Beauty and the Beast company had tested positive for Covid, which meant live performances of the show would be cancelled until 18 December – keeping seats empty for a large stretch of its run. Concern about Omicron has led to people cancelling or moving their bookings, said Brigham. So far just one performance of Derby theatre’s Treasure Island production has been cancelled, after a cast member had a positive lateral flow test, which was followed up with a negative PCR. But the doubt cast over the festive period, which is “when we welcome most people through our doors”, is like a knife edge, Brigham added. Wax said that one of his West End shows was cancelled on Wednesday “through a combination of positive cases in the company, an actor who reacted badly to his booster and everyone else in the company having to get PCRs”. His company’s other shows “are hanging on by their fingertips” he added. “Our daily sales are significantly down. Thankfully we have very well sold houses between now and the end of the holiday season, but we are terrified of what January and February will bring.” Ibu said that the financial support Northern Stage has received during the pandemic has allowed them to mitigate risk and plan for worst-case scenarios and the current climate. “But there’s only so long that money can last.” The government’s furlough scheme, cultural recovery fund (CRF) and reduction in VAT had been vital for theatres during the pandemic, observed Wax. “Probably the most straightforward gift from the treasury would be an extension to the [reduced] VAT rate.” Hytner told the BBC that theatres “are in crisis mode” at the moment. “There was a partnership last year with government which involved a huge investment to enable us to recover … we now surely don’t want to get into a situation where the government’s investment last year is wasted because the sectors it has supported collapse in the new year. The mechanisms exist from last year to target support at these thriving industries, all of whom exist on minute margins. We need to see short-term finance, we need to see loans, VAT and business rates looked at again.” Brigham said that while the furlough scheme and CRF had protected many organisations, independent artists and companies had been left vulnerable as had some of theatre’s vast freelance workforce. “Thinking about the sector as a whole is important,” she said, calling for measures to protect the livelihoods of freelancers as well as the organisations that are grappling with a loss in revenue and a rise in utility bills and inflation. Both Wax and Brigham said that the problem of Covid-related absences among theatre crews was exacerbated by a shortage of stage managers and technicians to take their place as so many people have left the industry in the last two years. “Theatre has an important role to play as we navigate our way through the personal and global trauma of the last two years,” said Ibu, who hopes Northern Stage’s 2022 season will provide “a place to find refuge in coming together to imagine our way through the messy world we live in right now”.In the last six days, more than 650 people have cancelled their bookings at one of my restaurants. If that’s happening to us – busy restaurants with a chef who has something of a public profile – then imagine what’s happening to your local pub, coffee shop and the small independent restaurant around the corner. As soon as the government announced that people should work from home if they could, I began to lose sleep. For everyone in the hospitality business, it is looking like a bleak Christmas. I spoke to a fellow chef yesterday who has a Michelin star, whose restaurant has lost 50% of its lunch trade for the next week and a half pretty much overnight. A two-Michelin-starred chef I know has had to close his restaurant between now and Christmas because a number of his staff have tested positive for Covid. This isn’t just about the top-end restaurants though, it’s throughout the entire industry – at the coffee shop in Marlow where I go, the owner told me that it was worryingly quiet. Many hospitality businesses take 20-25% of their yearly revenue in the December to January period. If up to a quarter of your revenue disappears, or is cut in half, that’s the difference between profit-making and huge loss-making, which in turn will become closure. In hospitality the margins are very small. The moment those percentages start getting chipped away or destroyed – a 50% of loss of lunch revenue is a massive drop in revenue – you’re in trouble. You still have the same staff costs, the same rent and rates, the same costs for IT – they don’t disappear just because you have fewer customers. In fact, some costs, such as utility bills, are rising. The loans that the industry took on to see businesses through the early pandemic were massive, and have to be paid back. Nor is this just about the people who work in my restaurants, or the 2.4 million people who work in hospitality: there is a massive supply chain that includes farming, agriculture and fisheries. Those producers will also be hit. This comes on top of Brexit – and I don’t believe there is a single positive of Brexit for the hospitality industry. I completely understand that public health is the most important thing, and the last thing people want to do is catch coronavirus and self-isolate when they’ve been looking forward to Christmas. I’m not blaming people for the cancellations. But when there is guidance to stay at home – but not mandates – there has to be some form of support for the industries affected. Hospitality feels it has been hung out to dry. There is mixed messaging – if you have to put a mask on to go into a shop but you can go next door to the pub or the restaurant and don’t have to wear one: that’s very confusing for customers and businesses. The scandals about politicians’ illicit Christmas parties have also increased public distrust of any measures the government does put in place. At the moment, my businesses are OK; my restaurants are not throwing away food, but the revenue loss is worrying. For example, 650 people having cancelled equates in that particular restaurant to about £65,000 in revenue, which is huge. And the cancellations are still coming. A restaurant that should be operating at 90-100% over Christmas is now down to 50%. That’s not a good position for any business, and this is in all likelihood just the start of it. The next two or three years will be a huge uphill struggle to get on to an even keel. There will be many operators who will decide the last few years have been enough: there’s too much debt, this is too heavy a burden to carry, and there is no light at the end of the tunnel. The last lockdown demonstrated the importance of restaurants. People could still buy food and alcohol, but what so many found they missed was social connection, noise, energy levels. Whether it’s a small local pub or coffee shop, or a celebratory occasion in a major, three-Michelin-star restaurant – these places are the beating hearts of our communities, an important part of the fabric of society. And they might not be there in the New Year. Tom Kerridge is the chef-patron of the Hand and Flowers in Marlow – the only pub in the UK to be awarded two Michelin starsIran and the UN inspector have reached an agreement on the imminent reinstallation of cameras at the Karaj nuclear facility, a move that is seen as indispensable to keeping alive the broader nuclear talks and the lifting of US sanctions on Tehran. Those negotiations appear to be hanging by a thread judging by a string of negative comments from European diplomats when they discussed the progress of the talks at the UN security council on Tuesday. The old cameras at Karaj had been taken away by Iran for investigation after what was presumed by Tehran to have been an Israeli attack on the facility in June. Suspicions were raised by Iran that the cameras had been hacked by Israel, which has not confirmed attacking the facility. The nuclear inspectorate of the International Atomic Energy Agency said the cameras, to be installed in the coming days, would replace those that were removed earlier this year. It described the agreement as “an important development for the IAEA’s verification and monitoring activities in Iran”. Rafael Grossi, the IAEA director general, said: “It will enable us to resume necessary continuity of knowledge at this facility. I sincerely hope that we can continue our constructive discussions to also address and resolve all outstanding safeguards issues in Iran.” Under the new agreement, the agency will reinstall cameras to replace those removed from the workshop at Karaj and will perform other related technical activities before the end of December on a date agreed between the agency and Iran. Russia was particularly insistent that Iran reach a new agreement with the IAEA. In a bid to reassure Iran that the cameras cannot be used by saboteurs, the IAEA “will also make available a sample camera and related technical information to Iran for analysis by its relevant security and judiciary officials, in the presence of the agency inspectors, on 19 December”. The agreement struck on Wednesday has led to some criticism in conservative circles in Iran, with some describing it as an unnecessary concession, but pro-government figures said the deal removed any excuse from the west not to negotiate on the broader agenda in Vienna. UN, US and European envoys said the talks were rapidly reaching the end of the road and would not allow Iran to stymie the negotiations.Most youngsters chosen to receive a good citizen award would probably have welcomed the recognition and dutifully attended the ceremony and photocall with the local mayor. But members of Young Friends of the Earth in the south Wales town of Pontypridd, who have been campaigning for changes to address the climate emergency, weren’t having any of it. They turned down the award from Rhondda Cynon Taf county borough council (RCT) on the basis that the local authority needed to do much more to tackle the very real environmental issues faced in their area, which was devastated by flooding last year. “We felt RCT wasn’t doing enough about climate change,” said one of the members, Alice Hanks-Doyle, 13. “It would have been hypocritical of us to accept the award. The council says they are planning stuff to help but if a fire is burning, you don’t say: ‘I plan to do this tomorrow.’ You don’t sit in the flames, you sort it out. They are sitting in the flames. “The floods were horrible. I look out of the window and think in 10 years I may be next to the beach. The sea levels are rising, flooding is more frequent and people brush it under the carpet. I go outside after school and the air doesn’t feel fresh. Can I have fresh air please? Not an award.” The group, which has a core of about eight members, was also savvy enough to know that it might get more publicity for its cause if it turned down the award. They viewed a YouTube clip of the moment in the film Brassed Off when band leader Danny turns down a prize to draw attention to the plight of ravaged mining communities and explains: “Us winning this trophy won’t mean bugger all to most people. But us refusing it … then it becomes news.” Dan Wright, 12, said: “If we had accepted the award, we might have got in the local paper. More people now will know what we’ve done. Perhaps they’ll join us on a march or do their own research on the climate. When I first heard about the award I felt excited but then thought they were trying to greenwash themselves.” The council wrote to the group explaining that the good citizen awards were presented to “a small number” of people. A time and place was given for them to pick up their certificate and have their photos taken by the council’s photographer. The children wrote back politely thanking the council but said they were not impressed at what RCT was doing to tackle the climate emergency. They flagged up that roads were still being built, suggested many more trees could be planted and expressed concern that pension funds have been invested in businesses that profit from fossil fuels. The children concluded: “We did not start protesting to get awards, but because the people in positions of power were not acting. Accepting would be saying that we think RCT council is doing enough to protect our future – and it scares us that you are not.” Andrew Morgan, the leader of the council, wrote back explaining the council had committed to being net zero by 2030. He set out a long list of measures that were being taken, explaining why it was still necessary to build some roads and how the council had worked hard to invest pension funds in more environmentally friendly ways. He also said they were exploring how trees and peat bogs could be used to capture and store carbon. An RCT council spokesperson said: “The council was disappointed to hear that Young Friends of the Earth, Pontypridd felt that they were unable to accept the mayor’s good citizen award. The award was granted in recognition of the hard work that they undertake, as they help to raise awareness and put climate change at the forefront of people’s minds. “The council understands that they are passionate about making a change and it indeed shares this passion and has recently launched its “Think Climate RCT’ campaign to support its commitment to Climate Change in RCT.” Another FoE campaigner, Rowan Moon, 10, was not swayed. He said he still felt traumatised by the floods. “It could happen again. We have to prepare.” Asked what he thought of RCT’s response, he echoed Greta Thunberg’s dismissal of global leaders’ promises: “Blah, blah, blah.”Flying into Heathrow is likely to cost passengers more from January, after the UK regulator approved a 37% hike in landing charges at the country’s busiest airport. The Civil Aviation Authority has approved an interim rise from £22 to £30.19 a passenger. But the move has failed to appease either airlines – which have condemned the increase – or the airport, which was calling for even higher charges ranging from £32 to £43 to help recoup losses caused by the coronavirus pandemic. Heathrow’s demands had already caused contention among the airline industry. Willie Walsh, a former chief executive of British Airway’s owner, IAG, who now leads the global airline body Iata, accused the airport of “gouging” its customers. On Thursday, Iata expressed its “disgust” with the announcement, with Walsh claiming at the CAA had “basically ordered consumers to pay over £700m to Heathrow for nothing in return”, and that only Heathrow’s shareholders would benefit. “It’s an outrageous result, ensuring that the economic hit everyone had to take from Covid-19 never applies to them.” He called on the UK government to intervene and “remind the CAA of its obligations” to consumers. The levy is likely to be directly passed on to travellers, as airlines also try to shore up finances after months of travel disruption caused by Covid restrictions. The CAA said the £30.19 fee reflected “the uncertainty of the recovery of passenger volumes at the airport from the pandemic, particularly following the emergence of new information about the omicron variant of Covid-19 since the end of the consultation period”. The increase will only apply for the first six months of 2022, with a decision on the fee that will apply for the next five years set to be come into force in the summer. Heathrow said it was “extremely disappointed in this interim decision from the CAA”, saying the increase had relied on rushed analysis that undershot its own budget by £173m. “This is even lower than we were able to achieve in 2020, when we served half as many passengers with only one runway and two terminals operating and the benefit of a government furlough scheme,” the airport said. “There are material and basic errors in many aspects of the CAA’s assessment. Uncorrected, this risks leaving Heathrow without sufficient cashflow to support investment in improving passenger service and resilience.” Heathrow said in July its total losses since the start of the pandemic had reached £2.9bn. Airlines also hit out at the decision, with the chief executive of IAG, Luis Gallego, claiming the increase in landing charges would give European rivals an edge against Heathrow at a time when the UK’s economic recovery relied an ability to compete on the global stage. Heathrow’s landing fees are already 44% more expensive than European competitions, he said, adding that 40% of passengers making connecting flights could easily do so from other European hubs. “After the worst crisis in aviation history we need to attract demand to stay competitive. Hiking charges will have the opposite effect,” he said. “Britain will become not more competitive, but less. A cost-efficient Heathrow would benefit UK consumers, businesses and trade. Global Britain needs a global and competitive hub.”Nicola Sturgeon has urged Scots to stay at home as she warned the new Omicron Covid variant was “currently running faster than even the fastest rollout of vaccines”, and likely to be the dominant variant in Scotland by Friday. In a strongly worded statement ahead of first minister’s questions on Thursday, Scotland’s first minister told MSPs: “If we don’t act now, what we have feared all along but so far avoided, the overwhelming of the NHS, could happen.” Appealing directly to the public, she went on: “Please reduce your contact with people from households other than your own as much as you possibly can. Please stay at home much more than you normally would and as much as is feasible.” Speaking in the Holyrood parliament, she said 5,951 coronavirus cases were reported on Wednesday, 45.4% of which were likely to be Omicron. Sturgeon also called for immediate talks with Boris Johnson to discuss putting in place a financial support package for businesses, as she dismissed an earlier Treasury announcement of advance funding for devolved administrations as “not enough”. “We don’t have time to waste on vaccination, but we don’t have time to waste on putting in place the protective measures that will help slow this down,” she said. “Lives again are at risk here, livelihoods are at risk and the NHS is at risk. Yes, the government’s got to speed up vaccination but all of us have to come together to do what is required to slow this down. And the UK government has to step up and provide the financial support that businesses need.” She added: “We must not sleepwalk into an emergency that for both health and business will be much greater as a result of inaction than it will be if we act firmly and strongly now.” Sturgeon said she wanted to “strongly underline” her advice on Tuesday that people should limit their indoor social mixing to no more than three households over the festive season, although family Christmas celebrations can still go ahead, adding that there was “no evidence” that Omicron was milder than other variants. New regulations requiring shops and hospitality venues to enforce physical distancing and reduce crowding in bars and shops come into force on Friday.Members of the Windrush generation had their human rights breached when the Home Office refused to grant them citizenship, the high court has ruled. Eunice Tumi and Vernon Vanriel were refused citizenship after being told by the home secretary they did not fulfil the residence requirement of having been in the UK on the date five years before they made the application for citizenship, the court heard. The only reason they could not fulfil this requirement was because the home secretary had unlawfully prevented them from coming back to the UK earlier, the court heard. They were only granted indefinite leave to remain after the the Windrush scandal, when it emerged that those who arrived in the UK from Caribbean countries from 1948 onwards, as well as their children, were wrongly targeted by the government’s “hostile environment” policies designed to deter illegal immigrants. Both were subsequently denied British citizenship when they applied for it under the Windrush scheme. But on Thursday, Mr Justice Bourne ruled that the home secretary had discretion about applying the five-year rule when considering citizenship applications. The ruling is likely to have a significant impact for other members of the Windrush generation in similar situations. Both claimants were initially locked out of returning to the UK after periods spent abroad – Vanriel spent time in Jamaica and Tumi, who is of Ghanaian heritage, spent time in Ghana and the US. Lawyers for the two successful claimants said the case showed the Home Office continued to act in breach of the human rights of Windrush victims by refusing to recognise them as British, even when the sole reason they were not British was the historical injustice committed by the department over the past decades. According to government data, 11,000 people have been refused citizenship following applications under the Windrush scheme. While not all will benefit from Thursday’s ruling many will now be able to reapply. The judge said those members of the Windrush generation who were locked out of British citizenship under the five-year rule are “perhaps in significant numbers”. Jeremy Bloom, of Duncan Lewis solicitors, who brought the case for Vanriel and Tumi, said: “This judgment is an absolute vindication for our clients who have shown amazing courage and determination to challenge the Home Office’s unlawful decisions. “Our clients were locked out of the UK for years by the Home Office through no fault of their own, then told that they did not qualify for British citizenship because they did not meet the residency requirements.” He added that the case showed the lessons of the Windrush scandal had not been learned. An order has been made by the high court that states that the Home Office acted unlawfully in refusing the citizenship applications of Tumi and Vanriel and that they should be redetermined within 42 days. Central London county court will look at the issue of whether both are entitled to damages as a result of the breach of their human rights. Vanriel, 66, a former boxer who had lived in London for 43 years having arrived as a six-year-old in 1962, was prevented from returning to the UK after a trip to Jamaica in 2005. He spent 13 years there destitute before the Windrush scandal broke and he was allowed to return to his family in Britain. His application for citizenship was refused in February this year on the grounds that he had been out of the country five years before his application was submitted – as a direct result of the Home Office’s errors. He welcomed the ruling. “Justice has been done,” he said, adding that the denial of citizenship had been a painful extension of his ordeal. “They said they wanted to right the wrongs done to the Windrush generation, but refusing to give me citizenship when I’ve lived here since I was six was a slap in the face. They weren’t righting the wrongs, they were making the wrongs more wrong.” He said he hoped the Home Office would be forced to reconsider its refusal of citizenship to many more people in his situation. “I hope this ruling opens the door for many, many more people like me to become British citizens,” he said. A Home Office spokesperson said: “The fact that Mr Vanriel and others were wrongly prevented from returning to the UK is appalling. No one should be prevented from obtaining their British citizenship because they have been failed by successive governments. “The current outdated law, regrettably, does not allow the five-year requirement to be waived. However, as the high court has now ruled that this can be done in exceptional circumstances, we will immediately consider the [two] cases covered by this judgment.” The Home Office said legislation was amended in the nationality and borders bill, which was passed in the House of Commons last week, correcting “outdated” nationality laws to allow people in similar circumstances to Vanriel to obtain British citizenship much more easily.What’s got red hair and six legs? Ben Stokes bowling at Marnus Labuschagne. OK, as a Christmas cracker joke it could do with some work. As a bowling strategy, however, it proved a lot more entertaining – and for England, provided the highlight of a day that could otherwise be described as frustrating, disappointing, and a missed opportunity. Australia were 25 for one when Stokes came on for his first spell, with half an hour left of the opening session. He made his intentions for Labuschagne clear the moment the No 3 appeared in his sights: one at the head, one at the chest. Stokes’s next over was faster but messier, with two no-balls and a bouncer tall enough to be called a wide. His third over was the one that clicked. There were a number of clues to what Stokes was intending: he had posted a midwicket, a mid-on, two men square of the wicket and a long leg. But the biggest clue was that every ball was aimed at Labuschagne’s body or bonce. The first was a climber that Labuschagne forced down off the splice. The second rose even faster, and he sliced it past Root at slip. He ducked the next and was caught on the back foot by the fourth, searching blindly for a ball that landed safely behind his back. The fifth cracked into his ribs at 86mph. There was more of the same served up after the interval, only by now the field placements were even more exaggerated. At one point, a camera looking across from the stumps deftly framed a short leg, square leg, and backward square leg, all telescoping away from the lens like a mise en abyme. Unfortunately, when the gloved edge came it went to none of these carefully positioned leg theorists, but flew behind to Jos Buttler, who dropped a catch far easier than the flying-squirrel affair with which he had dismissed Marcus Harris earlier in the day. If taken, Australia would have been 62 for two. Joe Root was so committed to the bit that at one point he stuffed a box down his trousers and set himself up at silly mid-off. Perhaps this plan had been formulating in the captain’s mind since his talismanic all-rounder biffed him on the helmet in the practice nets two days ago. Maybe Stokes’s turn of pace that day even contributed to the decision to leave Mark Wood on ice. Too difficult to tell: trying to follow the selection logic of the Root-Silverwood axis can be a painful pursuit in that it suggests a level of tortured overthinking reminiscent of Wallace Shawn’s Vizzini choosing between potentially poisoned wine goblets in The Princess Bride. Was leaving Stuart Broad out at the Gabba the double bluff, or the triple bluff? The battle of wits has begun: it ends when we find out who is right and who is dead. Anyway, back to Stokes, the man who’s bringing Bodyline back. He put six men on the legside to David Warner and came in round the wicket – until Warner had enough, and decided to put the ball where the fielders weren’t. Out went the Test textbook, in came the one-day manual: the batter leaned back and carved an outrageous inside-out drive over cover for four. Two balls later he was pulling to the boundary for his 50. Still, even when he wasn’t bowling, it felt like Stokes was everywhere, just like the good old days. He nearly caught Labuschagne twice himself. First the ball roared past him at leg slip off his captain’s bowling – as if Root was trying to prove that Stokes wasn’t the only one who could make the ball rear – and later, in the gloaming, a forced drive off Anderson dropped agonisingly short of him at mid-off. In fact, for a while after the supper interval the ball seemed to be chasing him around the field, although the opposite was, of course, the case. This was classic Stokes, all effort all the time, no thought spared or allowance given for the knee injury he carried over from Brisbane. Whenever he stopped the ball on the boundary, he’d usually chased it halfway across the field first. He came back on for his final spell just as the sun was dipping behind the trees. Warner and Labuschagne had decided to take him on, and his first seven deliveries yielded three boundaries and 13 runs. Warner had just split the two fielders on the boundary square of the wicket, and Root had placed another man in the gap. There was only one fielder, Broad, standing forward of square on the offside – and yet, just five runs off his century, Warner slapped Stokes’s next ball into his hands. England had been waiting all day for the magic hour, the twilight realm when the skies turn as pink as the ball and the shadows multiply under the floodlights. They had toiled all day in the sun, in the strong belief that the dusk would be theirs. In the end, it was only Stokes who delivered on its promise.Hello, and Happy Thursday, For some year-end reporting, I’ve been talking with folks about how 2021 exploded as the year American democracy came under siege. “It’s unlike anything we’ve ever seen,” David Becker, an election administration expert and the executive director of the Center for Election Innovation and Research, told me. For our last Fight to Vote newsletter of the year (don’t worry – we’ll be back in January), I wanted to highlight the most dangerous threats to America’s electoral system. Efforts to inject partisanship into under-the-radar election jobs Each state in the US oversees its own elections. And within each state different counties, and in some places even smaller townships and municipalities, are responsible for running those elections. At each level, there are under-the-radar officials, appointed in some cases and elected in others, who are responsible for enforcing the rules. These are positions that many people have never heard of – their job isn’t to be political, but rather to ensure that the person with the most votes is seated as the winner of the election. Over the last year, however, there’s been an effort to weaponize these offices. One of the first signs came a few months ago in Michigan. The Detroit News reported Republican officials there were nominating people who embraced the idea that the 2020 election was stolen to positions on local boards of canvassers, which play a central role in certifying election results. In Georgia, Republicans have quietly exerted more influence over local election boards across the state, removing Black Democrats from their roles. In addition to certifying election results, those local boards approve polling place locations and consider challenges to voter eligibility. And in Pennsylvania, there’s concern that election deniers are seeking positions as judges of elections. These officials are essentially in charge of the polling place in their precinct. Attacks on election officials Over the last year, there’s been a surge in harassment against election officials, and many of them have left their jobs. Perhaps the most alarming example of this is happening in Wisconsin, where Republicans are launching an aggressive effort to oust Meagan Wolfe, the non-partisan administrator of the bipartisan body that oversees election in the state, from her role. Observers are deeply concerned. Running an election is an enormously complicated enterprise. Having deeply experienced people leave the field creates an opening for inexperienced, and potentially more partisan people, to fill that void. “Intimidating the professionals who run elections, saying elections are rigged orfraudulent, altering state laws to allow partisans, as opposed to professionals, the final say in who wins elections, will be a self-fulfilling prophecy,” Ben Ginsberg, a longtime prominent GOP elections lawyer, said this week. “No one will have faith in elections.” Campaigns for secretary of state At the top of the election bureaucracy in most states is a secretary of state, the chief election official. These secretaries can act alone to automatically mail out absentee ballot applications, for instance, or implement rules around ballot drop boxes. Overlooked for years, these officials wield an enormous amount of unilateral power. “There is no one person who has as much authority [in] protecting the will of the people as the secretary of state,” Jocelyn Benson, Michigan’s secretary of state, told me in an interview. “They can do enormous damage but they can also do enormous good.” Trump has endorsed candidates running for secretary of state in almost every swing state, including Michigan, Georgia, Arizona and Nevada. All the candidates he has endorsed have supported the idea that the election was stolen. Last year, secretaries of state stood as bulwarks against Trump’s efforts to undermine the election. Officials like Benson debunked some of Trump’s wildest claims. Brad Raffensperger, Georgia’s Republican secretary of state, refused to go along with Trump’s request to “find” more than 11,000 votes in Georgia and overturn the results. Lingering distrust in elections There is still a staggering number of people who remain unconvinced of the 2020 election results. A September CNN poll found 78% of Republicans do not believe Biden won. Trump’s baseless claims about the election have had an impact. And that’s deeply alarming – a functioning democracy depends on all voters, regardless of whether their candidate won or lost, accepting the results. Also worth watching … The Atlantic profiled Crystal Mason, the Texas woman sentenced to five years in prison for using a provisional ballot in 2016. Mason’s case, the profile points out, shows the devastating consequences of unfounded claims about fraud. BuzzFeed News has a great look at how election deniers are going door to door in some places across the country. Texas restarted an effort to remove non-citizens from its voting rolls, sparking concerns officials may be targeting eligible voters.The Ohio congressman Jim Jordan has been identified as the Republican who sent a message to Donald Trump’s chief of staff Mark Meadows the day before the deadly 6 January US Capitol riots outlining a plan to stop Joe Biden – the legitimate winner of the presidential election – from reaching the White House. The House select committee investigating the insurrection has been looking at numerous messages sent to Meadows on and around that day, many of which were from Trump supporters urging the then-president to call off a mob of his supporters as they ransacked the Capitol building. Meadows, whose role in events has become a central plank of the investigation, and who provided many of the messages to the committee, is facing possible contempt of Congress charges for withdrawing his cooperation. Jordan, a staunch Trump ally whom Republicans originally wanted to sit on the committee, forwarded a text message to Meadows on 5 January, one of the congressman’s aides has confirmed, containing details of the plot to block Biden. The message was sent to Jordan by Joseph Schmitz, a former US defense department inspector general who outlined a “draft proposal” to pressure vice-president Mike Pence to refuse to certify audited election returns on 6 January. A portion of the message was shown by Democratic committee member Adam Schiff on Tuesday. It read: “On January 6, 2021, Vice-President Mike Pence, as president of the Senate, should call out all electoral votes that he believes are unconstitutional as no electoral votes at all.” The plotters falsely believed Pence had the constitutional authority to reject the election results and allow rival slates of electors from Republicans in states that Biden won to decide the outcome. Pence refused to do so, and has since been castigated by Trump and his allies. Jordan was one of five Republicans rejected from serving on the committee by Nancy Pelosi, the House speaker, who instead appointed Trump critics Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger. Some commentators say the move “saved” the committee’s integrity. The panel has accelerated its inquiries in recent days and weeks, issuing dozens of subpoenas, interviewing more than 300 witnesses and reviewing more than 30,000 documents as it attempts to tie Trump to the events of 6 January. A clearer picture has emerged of the involvement of Trump loyalists, including senior Republican party officials such as Jordan, in the coup attempt, with questions swirling this week particularly over the role of Meadows. Trump’s former chief of staff is revealed to have received numerous messages on the day of the riot from Republican politicians, Fox News television personalities such as Sean Hannity and Laura Ingraham, and the president’s son Donald Trump Jr. The text from Trump Jr was succinct. “We need an Oval address. He has to lead now. It has gone too far and gotten out of hand. He’s got to condemn this shit asap.” Meadows replied: “I’m pushing it hard. I agree.” Schiff, a California Democrat who led the prosecution in the Senate at Trump’s first impeachment in January 2020, has argued that Meadows was at the heart of the pressure campaign on Pence, and voted for him to face contempt charges for his refusal to explain it. “You can see why this is so critical to ask Mr Meadows about,” Schiff said during the committee’s presentation on Tuesday. “About a lawmaker suggesting that the former vice-president simply throw out votes that he unilaterally deems unconstitutional in order to overturn a presidential election and subvert the will of the American people.” This article was amended on 16 December 2021 to correct an error in the headline.When forecasters go on strike, it’s because they know which way the wind is blowing. Unite members working for the National Institute of Economic and Social Research look set to vote to strike over a 2% pay offer, as figures released yesterday show inflation reaching 5.1%. How wise of them to belong to a union, and how wise to use that muscle in the face of further inflation rises. On the old RPI measure, inflation is 7.1%. It’s not caused by rising pay, which is running at below 4%, but by petrol prices, which have shot up by a third, the fastest on record, and supply shortages affecting everything else: the prices of apples and pears are up by 25%. This new cost of living crisis is causing “acute economic pain”, the Resolution Foundation said following Wednesday’s inflation announcement. It called on the Bank of England not to raise interest rates, with inflation being caused by global prices rather than domestic pay. But today that plea was ignored. In a country with rates of poverty that had already been rising before the pandemic, the pain that will be increasing over the course of this winter will hit a new high in April 2022, when the national insurance rise comes in, along with an expected lifting of the energy price cap that will impose a burden of £400 extra on the average household. The house price boom has sent rents up, with Citizens Advice finding there has been £300m extra in rent arrears since the start of the pandemic. Citizens Advice has sent up warning flares: one in 10 families, 3.2m households, face “financial crisis this winter”. Its advisers predict this many households will be unable to meet the cost of rent, food and basic bills, and hundreds of thousands more will live with just £50 a month leeway for everything else. As galloping Omicron is already laying waste some sectors – especially hospitality and transport – the Resolution Foundation is calling on the government to bring back furloughing to those sectors that are being shuttered. Though it was proportionally less generous than in some equivalent countries, the furlough scheme rescued jobs and livelihoods last time. Meanwhile sick pay in the UK is the lowest among countries with similar economies, and continues to pose huge dangers, deterring desperate and ill people from self-isolating. If this government intended to step in to protect those on low incomes from this cost of living tornado, it would have relented on the devastating cut of £20 a week in universal credit. When challenged on turning the screw on low earners, the government hopes most voters don’t count the noughts, so it boasts of a £500m one-off bung to councils to spend in a household support fund for vulnerable households. But that’s barely a 12th of the savings it has made by cutting universal credit. Official guidance says: “Those in need of support should contact their local council”, but Citizens Advice’s head of policy, Morgan Wild, says few people even know they are entitled to claim it. Nor is there a set means of distributing the money, nor data on who receives it. Wild says Citizens Advice offices report floods of people seeking vouchers for food banks who’ve never been near one before. Here’s another hidden cut: benefits are uprated every April, based on September’s inflation rate instead of using the most recent figure, so families on universal credit lose an extra £37 a month, and more by April, Wild calculates. The whole point of the torturous process of introducing universal credit, with its multiple computer failures and years spent failing its recipients, was to make it able to react quickly to changes of circumstances. That ought to make it easy to increase in line with inflation month by month: you can bet it responds far more quickly when it has to reduce what anyone is due. Citizens Advice sees a glimmer of hope in soaring inquiries on their website for information on how to resign from a job, as people search for something better. Trade union membership has risen in the last four years, mainly among teachers, but has fallen in the private sector. Union members earn more, but in hospitality, for example, only 4% belong to one. The TUC’s Find a Union website has had many more inquiries on joining, but with membership at 23.7%, it is only half of what it was at its peak in 1979, when unions strove to keep pay up with soaring inflation. They failed, but at least stopped pay falling catastrophically behind. Since then, attacks on unions, widespread privatisation and the impossibility of organising in union-phobic workplaces have coincided with the shocking growth of zero-hours contracts and insecure jobs, reversing generations of gains to working rights. Public sector pay review bodies are in the process of advising on this year’s pay: the Treasury warns them against recommending “inflationary” rises. Worse, it warns that any increases will come from existing budgets. It’s a form of blackmail to tell teachers or nurses that anything they get will be taken from their classroom or ward budgets. Here’s hoping there will be eruptions against this pay injustice. Let’s hope the growing vacancies mean people walk out of underpaid, insecure jobs in bad sectors that are already desperate for staff. But it’s hardest for the lowest-paid workers to move jobs because they do not have sufficient savings with which to cover unpaid weeks in between. Labour pledges to legislate to let unions recruit in every workplace, retrieving lost rights, with fair pay agreements across whole sectors. In recent weeks, that future seems a little closer. Looking at the economic pain forecast for the months ahead, that is just as well. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistRejoice! The new Sex and the City (SATC) reboot is not quite the depressing slog it appeared to be. Following two lackluster debut episodes, the third installment of And Just Like That finds our girls regaining their former strides. Carrie, spiraling from the discovery that her late husband just left his ex-wife $1m, is back to peak Carrie hijinx, unsuccessfully stalking Natasha only to barge in on her on the toilet. Charlotte stops crying, and an initially unbearable Miranda feels newly revitalized, with fans across the internet delighted to find out she might actually be queer! The latter remains unconfirmed, but what we do see is Miranda lingering at the afterparty of Che’s (Sara Ramirez) standup special, lavishing emphatic praise on to Carrie’s new boss. Seeking to quell Miranda’s hyper-enthusiasm, Che offers weed: “Do you mind if I shotgun you?” they ask, exhaling a stream of smoke in scintillating proximity to Miranda’s lips. As the scene unfolds in slow motion, guitar feedback drowns out all surrounding noise. It feels as though something profound in Miranda’s world has just changed. Or she’s high. In any case, this storyline is a welcome break from Miranda’s rut as an over-eager white ally, an irritating new development that plagued episodes one and two. The most assertive and self-actualized of SATC’s original quartet, she’s been rebooted as a specific type of obnoxious white woman, desperate for validation from her new Black Columbia law professor, Dr Nya Wallace (Karen Pittman). It’s the heavy-handed overcompensation of a show founded on four white, privileged, heterosexual women; atoning for SATC’s history of racial cluelessness, AJLT confronts issues of race head on, with Miranda on the receiving end of its newly woke sensibilities. (Truly, she’s the only character who could handle it.) In episode two, she name-drops How to Be an Anti-Racist as she needlessly rescues Nya from a non-altercation: “That’s very noble of you, if not a tad bit white savior complex,” the professor responds, in an exchange so cringe-inducing that I can never watch this episode again. Miranda Hobbes’ current struggles echo those of the early-aughts franchise, both being feminist icons of a past era. Ageing for either has not been a linear progression into maturity, but an inelegant process of trial and error, the awkward navigation of a landscape dotted with cultural landmines. For both character and show, the anticipation of heavy scrutiny results in painful overthinking, as Miranda later explains to Carrie: “I was just so worried about saying the wrong thing in this climate that I said all the wrong things.” The awkwardness of these scenes feel deliberate, while the setup feels ungainly. It’s been a full decade since the last SATC film (originator of the phrase “Lawrence of my labia”), ample time for these characters to have evolved offscreen, and yet we’re still watching them adjust to having Black and brown friends for the first time ever. Che and Nya provide respective foils for Carrie and Miranda, only younger, cooler and non-white. Implausible scenarios were invented for these friendships to occur: Miranda meets Nya pursuing a degree in human rights, and Carrie, an avatar for the original series’ ultra-vanilla, heteronormative views on sex (recall her disdain for Samantha’s habits; the episode of bisexuality-shaming, or a consistent preference for the missionary position) joins a podcast with the non-binary, half-Mexican, sexually progressive Che. (Charlotte’s new friendship with Lisa Todd Wexley, the queen bee of moms at her children’s school, actually seems perfectly reasonable, although their dynamic doesn’t come into play until episode four.) Reminiscent of feel-good movies like Green Book, this new-brown-friend formulation rides a fine line between tokenism and diversity. In the former, people of color exist strictly in service to the bad whites, shepherding them down a path to less racism, less homophobia. Where we find the original characters’ shortcomings, the new characters offer infinite patience: for Carrie’s prudishness, Che has encouraging, straightforward advice: “You better step your pussy up.” (Carrie never really steps her pussy up.) When Miranda actually threatens Che with physical violence, she’s disarmed by their calm, charismatic flirtation – the kind of survival skill that marginalized people develop out of necessity. There’s good evidence, however, that the series is headed for diversity, with fully formed histories, futures and ambitions that continue in the absence of their white friends. (Believe me. I’ve seen the fourth episode.) As for Miranda, the third episode offers viewers a sigh of relief; freed from the burdens of allegory and exposition, her character returns to the familiar rhythms of the SATC universe as the cool, level-headed voice of reason. Where both Carrie and Charlotte are essentially who they have always been, defined by their respective relationships to men, Miranda’s embarking on a new trajectory that embraces the signs and missteps of aging (which may also include alcoholism, a new queer love interest, or both). When Brady’s girlfriend Luisa accidentally comments on Miranda’s “ageing bones”, she recovers with an excellent point about the passage of time: “I’m ageing too,” she says. “That’s kind of part of living.”The owner of the Daily Mail will be delisted from the stock market after the controlling shareholder Lord Rothermere won over enough investors to back his bid to take the publisher private. An investment vehicle run by Jonathan Harmsworth, Viscount Rothermere, announced on Thursday that it had reached agreements to buy enough shares to control 56.7% of Daily Mail &amp; General Trust (DMGT) – clearing the 50% hurdle he required to win. Rothermere had until Thursday to gain the backing of enough other shareholders for his buyout offer. The successful deal means the company will exit the London Stock Exchange after 90 years. The Daily Mail was established in 1896 by Rothermere’s great grandfather. It listed on the stock market in 1932, and in the decades since has added a stable of other newspaper and magazine titles, including the Metro and the i alongside the Mail and the Mail on Sunday. The Daily Mail last year supplanted Rupert Murdoch’s Sun as the UK’s top-selling newspaper, a title the latter had held since 1978. However, Rothermere is thought to be focused on an increasingly digital future. The Daily Mail’s website, which has a more celebrity-oriented approach than its print equivalent, is one of the world’s most visited news websites. Rothermere made his first move in July, with a 251p per share offer. However, he increased the price to 270p per share at the start of the month, valuing the newspaper business at £885m including debt. The co-founder of DMGT’s largest independent shareholder, Lindsell Train, had on Wednesday indicated his support of the offer, despite the objections of some other large investors who argued Rothermere had valued the company too cheaply. Majedie Asset Management and JO Hambro Capital Management have previously opposed earlier offers but now face the prospect of either selling up or rejecting it, leaving them with a hard-to-sell minority interest in a private company. Under stock market rules Rothermere had to make the same offer to all shareholders when trying to gain majority control. Many equity fund managers are not allowed to hold illiquid stakes in private companies, which are also difficult to value.Pregnant women have been made a priority group for vaccination following research showing they are vulnerable to more serious illness and pregnancy complications if they are infected with Covid-19. The vaccines watchdog, the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI), announced on Thursday that pregnant women would be moved into priority group 6 alongside adults under the age of 65 who have long-term health conditions, and urged pregnant women to get first and second doses and booster jabs as soon as possible. Prof Wei Shen Lim, the chair of JCVI Covid-19 immunisation, said there was no evidence linking vaccination in pregnancy to risk of miscarriage, stillbirths, congenital abnormalities or birth complications. “Having a UK approved Covid-19 vaccine is safer than having Covid-19 itself,” he said. “Women who are pregnant are strongly encouraged to have a first, second or booster vaccine dose as appropriate in order to better protect yourself and your baby from any serious consequences from Covid-19.” Maternal health experts, who have repeatedly called for pregnant women to be prioritised, questioned whether the move would make a material difference to the ability of pregnant women to access vaccines. In a joint statement the Royal College of Midwives and the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists welcomed the recognition that pregnant women were an at-risk group, a move they had called for. But they called for access to vaccines for pregnant women to be improved, including by offering vaccination in all antenatal clinics. The JCVI’s decision was underpinned by research from the University of Oxford showing that women in the later stages of pregnancy and their babies were at increased risk if they became infected. The research found that 17 pregnant women died during the Delta wave of the pandemic – a 50% increase in maternal mortality compared with usual. It also found that of 1,436 pregnant women admitted to hospital during the Delta wave, 33% required respiratory support, about 2% had a stillbirth, 2% had pregnancy loss and about one in five had a preterm birth. Nearly 96% of these women were unvaccinated. Marian Knight, a professor of maternal and child population health at the University of Oxford and chief investigator of the study, said the data revealed that outcomes for pregnant women had got worse with successive waves of the pandemic. “However, it also shows the very strong protection that receiving a vaccination provides,” she said. “With several hundred thousand pregnant women across the world having received a vaccine, it is clear that vaccination in pregnancy is safe. As infections increase, pregnant women can be reassured that getting a vaccine is the best way to protect them and their babies.” Pregnant women are less likely than the general population to have been vaccinated. In August, when pregnant women had to wait until their age group became eligible, only 22% of women who gave birth in England had received a single dose, and 25% in Scotland and 18% in Wales. The proportion has increased since then, but pregnant women are still disproportionately less likely to be vaccinated, with the lowest rates seen in those from black and minority ethnic groups. The royal colleges are calling for the government to set new targets for increasing vaccination uptake in pregnancy. The JCVI said there was also concerning evidence that clinical staff had been hesitant to treat pregnant women, even when severely ill, with effective drugs such as dexamethasone due to unfounded concerns about the foetal risk. Gayatri Amirthalingam, from the UK Health Security Agency, said vaccines recommended for pregnant women had a good safety record. “I would urge all pregnant women to come forward and get their vaccine without delay,” she said. “This is the best way to protect you and your baby.” Joeli Brearley, the founder of the campaign group Pregnant Then Screwed, said the latest announcement was “too little too late”. “We have known for over a year that pregnant women are more vulnerable and we have repeatedly called on the government to prioritise this group of women,” she said. “Had they done this from the outset then many more pregnant women would be vaccinated. Instead, months later, they shove them in priority group 6 without any practical plan as to how they will access the jab or the booster.”England have promised to “fight hard” to turn the second Ashes Test in their favour after leaving the field at the end of the first day with memories still fresh of the inexplicable drop from Jos Buttler behind the stumps that reprieved Marnus Labuschagne. Having started the day dealing with the absence of their captain, Pat Cummins having been ordered to self-isolate as a close contact of a confirmed Covid case, Australia ended it in a position of strength on 221 for two at the Adelaide Oval. “Jos is going to hurt tonight but he’s going to have to get out of bed and come again and enjoy his day tomorrow, because that’s what Test cricket’s all about,” said Graham Thorpe, England’s assistant coach. “Anyone who drops a catch is always disappointed. He’s a human being – it’s a bit like being a goalkeeper, you keep magnificently throughout the day but if you drop a catch it gets highlighted. We’ll get round him and try to be philosophical about it as well, because I think you have to be. At the end of the day you’re playing a game of cricket.” Labuschagne, who was on 95 at the time and did not add to his score before the close, was also dropped by Buttler when he was on 21, albeit from a harder chance. “I don’t know how that happened,” Labuschagne said of the second drop. “A bit of disbelief, but my job is to make sure I capitalise on that tomorrow.” England’s will be to ensure he does not, with the second new ball just nine overs old and still offering some movement. “It’s very important that we’re able to get in and make some inroads tomorrow,” Thorpe said. “We’re going to have to roll our sleeves up and show some fight.” As expected Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad returned to the side, and with Jack Leach missing out England bowled 78 overs of right-arm seam, with only Joe Root’s off-spin providing a significant change. “I thought we picked the right team for this match and on another day we could have grazed the edge more and it could have been different,” Thorpe said. “They may all be right-arm bowlers but for me they’ve all got a slightly different style about them. We stuck at it well but we didn’t quite get the rub today – if we’d bowled poorly we’d have gone for a lot more. It’s not about feeling sorry for ourselves when we come in tomorrow, it’s about trying to do very similar things.” David Warner, whose participation in the match had been in doubt because of a rib injury, played with the aid of local anaesthetic and painkillers and made 95 – the second time in as many games he has been dismissed in the 90s, and precisely the same number of runs he scored in the entire series in England in 2019. “The last couple of days I was in a bit of pain, a bit of agony, not being able to pick up the kids, which is a bit tough,” he said. “It doesn’t feel great but I had a Test match to play and there’s a series on the line. The difference [since 2019] is that the length they’ve bowled here isn’t hitting the stumps. The length there is hitting the stumps in England, and that’s the difference.” Having won the toss and chosen to bat first, the absence of Cummins, who was in a restaurant on Wednesday night on an adjacent table to someone who has tested positive, has not yet been felt. “The rules for us are three players can be at a venue. We have to check in with each other to see what restaurants everyone’s going to,” Warner said. “You can’t help what happened with Patty, unfortunately he was in a spot where somebody had tested positive that day. He probably won’t be the last. It’s just being smart, isn’t it? Don’t go where you think restaurants are going to be jam-packed. Thankfully it’s a day-night game and we don’t have to worry about that now.”2020 VISION There’s only one more sleep until The Fiver’s festive awards! But who are we kidding? Let’s face facts, Christmas is already banjaxed, you only have to take one look at the prime minister’s glaikit boat to realise that. Having already got to the point where renowned socialist-state firebrand Elizabeth Alexandra Mary of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha has taken the advice of an “unelected Covid public health spokesperson” and shelved plans for a festive family get-together, we’re fast approaching a place where fun might have to be parked for an indefinite period in order to rein in this damn virus. Don’t shoot the messenger, but this could be 2020-21 all over again. A contagious disease which has killed millions and is once again ripping through the country isn’t exactly choice subject matter for The Fiver, given our struggles to raise so much as a sympathetic smile when presented with glaringly obvious comedic tap-ins at the best of times. But here we are. Thursday’s big match between Leicester and Spurs was called off earlier, the Saturday showdown between Manchester United and Brighton quickly following suit, and now further postponements are surely just a matter of time. In fact, has another just been made, right now, this minute? Might be worth you checking. Drastic action is probably the best course of drastic action here, and needless to say, nobody plans to take any yet. At least not until the horse has done one, making off with the stable door and both of the hinges, purely out of spite. Brentford boss Thomas Frank is the lone voice in the wilderness, calling for this weekend’s Premier League card to be postponed along with next week’s Milk Cup non-events. “It would give everyone a week at least to clean and do everything at the training ground so everything is fine and we break the chain at every club,” he reasoned, a verb The Fiver uses advisedly, given nobody listens to any these days. “We want to carry on but this way we can have Boxing Day going no problem, 100% sure of that.” A roadmap to save festive football right there. Expect the authorities to act on 27 December, then. The Fiver will return when football restarts in mid-February. See you! LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Scott Murray from 8pm GMT for hot Premier League MBM coverage of Liverpool 3-1 Newcastle, while Daniel Harris will be on hand for Wolfsburg 2-1 Chelsea in Women’s Big Cup. QUOTE OF THE DAY “It is such a big issue and no one else was talking about it. That made me sad, depressed even. I thought: ‘We have a mega-problem here and what am I doing? Playing football.’ That didn’t make sense to me” – Sampdoria and Norway’s Morten Thorsby on how reading Big Website inspired him to become a climate activist. FIVER LETTERS “As a callow youth I bunked off school to follow Ipswich to Camp Nou, ticketless. In the lobby of the Hotel Presidente, which I’d staked out, a smiling Bobby Robson handed me a ticket and I watched Johan Cruyff engineer Ipswich’s exit in some now-recalibrated cup. On Wednesday night a couple of hundred unfortunate souls travelled to Barrow to watch Ipswich’s latest cup exit, having had their costs covered by the kindly club. From Barça to Barrow, the gifting continues” – Lindsay Williams. “Mikel Arteta’s non-stop pointing, shouting and wild arm-flapping from the sidelines might have helped his team win against West Ham, so I wondered if his management style might be replicated at my place of work. It would mean my line-manager waving his arms at me as I tried to study some data, standing at my shoulder screaming at me as I typed up a report, and following me down to the mail room urging me to walk faster and hit the out-tray earlier. I’d soon want to kill him. But on the whole it would probably be better than the emails I get from my HR department” – Charles Antaki. “You said that it wouldn’t have been a surprise to see Marcelo Bielsa call up a radio station and demand his own head (yesterday’s Fiver). He would have had to have got his interpreter to do it, which would have led to some fun afterwards when the interpreter tried to explain to the Leeds chief suit that, ‘no, when I said “I” should be sacked, I meant him. What do you mean, too late now?’” – David Rowland. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Lindsay Williams. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Patrick Assoumou Eyi, a long-serving coach in Gabon, is facing claims he raped, groomed and exploited young players. One former player who was coached by Eyi said that the coach would lure alleged victims to his home, which he called the “Garden of Eden”. The FA has given Walsall defender Emmanuel Monthe a seven-game ban for making a homophobic comment to a Forest Green player while with Tranmere last season. Salernitana are in danger of being binned from Serie A after no acceptable offers were made in a forced sale of the club. It wasn’t pretty, but Arsenal are through to the Women’s Big Cup quarter-finals despite a 4-1 gubbing by Hoffenheim. “We had a five-minute period in the second half which [was] unacceptable,” fumed manager Jonas Eidevall. The Premier League points had to be shared by Crystal Palace and Southampton after a 2-2 draw, while Brighton are now 11 games without a win after losing 1-0 to Wolves. A 10-man Queen’s Celtic just about kept on the Pope’s Newc O’Rangers’ Scottish Premiership coattails after Anthony Ralston’s injury-time winner at Ross County. “They scored in the seventh minute of added-on time, I don’t know how that happened,” sniffed County’s Malky Mackay. “It felt at one point as if we were playing until they scored.” And Ipswich are close to appointing Kieran McKenna, Manchester United’s first-team coach, as their manager. STILL WANT MORE? The remarkable second coming of Anthony Modeste at Köln. By Andy Brassell. Gabriel Martinelli slowed down to speed up his menace for Arsenal, according to Nick Ames. Football, Welsh culture and identity. A new film from Copa90. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! ‘THIS TRAIN DON’T STOP CAMBORNE WEDNESDAYS’Boris Johnson joined No 10 staff for a party in Downing Street during the first lockdown in May last year, sources have alleged, raising questions about whether there was a culture of flouting the rules over a number of months. The prime minister spent about 15 minutes with staff at the alleged social gathering on 15 May 2020, telling one aide inside No 10 that they deserved a drink for “beating back” coronavirus, a joint investigation by the Guardian and Independent was told. Sources claimed about 20 staff drank wine and spirits and ate pizza following a press conference on that day, some in offices inside No 10 and others going into the garden. Some staff stayed drinking until late into the evening, they alleged. Rules at the time allowed only two people from different households to meet outside, at a distance of 2 metres. Earlier that evening, Matt Hancock, then health secretary, had urged people to “stay at home as much as is possible” and asked them to “please stick with the rules, keep an eye on your family and don’t take risks” during the period of good weather. The claims follow a string of reports about similar alleged events in Downing Street and elsewhere during the subsequent lockdown last Christmas, and suggests rules might have been broken over a series of months. The Metropolitan Police also announced they will contact two people who attended a Christmas party at Conservative Party HQ on 14 December 2020, when indoor socialising between households was banned. Around two dozen people were at the gathering, including Shaun Bailey, the Tories’ London mayoral candidate, and his campaign manager, Ben Mallet. Scotland Yard did not say who the people they wanted to speak to were, but that they were investigating “alleged breaches of the Health Protection (Coronavirus, Restrictions) Regulations”. The 15 May gathering, at which some aides allegedly stayed drinking until late in the evening, followed a Covid press conference at 5pm, led that day by Hancock. The sources said Hancock was also seen at the event, which was described as having a “celebratory” feel given the initial loosening of some restrictions and the good weather in London that day. While sources claimed both Johnson and Hancock were present for a short time when staff and aides were drinking, there is no suggestion they drank themselves, or stayed late. Asked about Johnson’s comment about “beating back” the virus, and his presence at the alleged party at which No 10 staff were drinking and socialising, his official spokesperson said: “In the summer months Downing Street staff regularly use the garden for some meetings. On 15 May 2020 the prime minister held a series of meetings throughout the afternoon, including briefly with the then health and care secretary and his team in the garden following a press conference. “The prime minister went to his residence shortly after 7pm. A small number of staff required to be in work remained in the Downing Street garden for part of the afternoon and evening.” A spokesperson for Hancock described the sources’ claims as “not true”. “After the press conference, which finished at approximately 5.53pm, Matt debriefed his own team, then went to the Downing Street garden to debrief the prime minister. He left Downing Street at 6.32pm and went back to the Department for Health and Social Care,” Hancock’s spokesperson said. At the press conference, where he was joined by Jenny Harries, at the time the deputy chief medical officer for England, Hancock delivered a message of caution. The opening statements noted that England remained in the second-highest level of Covid alert, four, with 10,700 people in hospital with the virus and 384 coronavirus deaths recorded that day. Hancock urged people to keep to the slight relaxation in lockdown. “This weekend, with the good weather and the new rules, I hope people can enjoy being outside but please stick with the rules, keep an eye on your family and don’t take risks,” he said. The claims are a further blow to Johnson, who is reeling from reports detailing a series of apparent lockdown-breaching parties last winter, and has been widely mocked for insisting no rules were broken. Among these was an alleged party on 18 December 2020, a time when all indoor social mixing in London was prohibited, involving wine and cheese and staff swapping “secret Santa” presents. Downing Street denied the event had happened, a stance undermined when video footage emerged of No 10 officials joking about the event four days later. Allegra Stratton, Johnson’s former press secretary, resigned as spokesperson for Cop26 in the ensuing furore. Johnson is also known to have attended an earlier event, on 27 November last year, believed to have been an impromptu leaving do for an aide, Cleo Watson.Jane Campion’s western The Power of the Dog emerged at the head of the pack in the nominations for the London Critics’ Circle film awards, followed by The Lost Daughter, the Maggie Gyllenhaal-directed adaptation of an Elena Ferrante novel, and Joanna Hogg’s autobiographical The Souvenir Part II. In total, The Power of the Dog received nine nominations, including film of the year, director and screenwriter of the year for Campion, and five acting nods (including two for its lead, Benedict Cumberbatch). That was three ahead of The Lost Daughter, which received six, including film of the year and two each for actors Olivia Colman and Jessie Buckley. The Souvenir Part II, the second of Joanna Hogg’s two-part account of an aspiring film-maker, was next in line with five (including film of the year and director of the year for Hogg) – just ahead of two other films that have prospered better elsewhere, Kenneth Branagh’s Belfast and Aleem Khan’s After Love, which both received four nominations. Belfast, a chronicle of Branagh’s childhood in 70s Northern Ireland, is currently vying for supremacy with The Power of the Dog for the Golden Globes and looks a sure bet for multiple Oscar nominations, while After Love, about a woman who discovers her husband’s secret life after his death, dominated the British film independent awards, where it won six. The winners, voted on by the 180 members of the film section of the Critics’ Circle, will be announced on 6 February. Full list of nominations Film of the year Belfast Drive My Car Dune Licorice Pizza The Lost Daughter Memoria The Power of the Dog The Souvenir Part II Titane West Side Story Foreign language film of the year Drive My Car The Hand of God Petite Maman Titane The Worst Person in the World Documentary of the year Flee Gunda The Most Beautiful Boy in the World Summer of Soul The Velvet Underground British/Irish film of the year After Love Belfast The Green Knight Limbo The Souvenir Part II Director of the year Jane Campion, The Power of the Dog Ryûsuke Hamaguchi, Drive My Car Joanna Hogg, The Souvenir Part II Céline Sciamma, Petite Maman Denis Villeneuve, Dune Screenwriter of the year Paul Thomas Anderson, Licorice Pizza Wes Anderson, The French Dispatch Jane Campion, The Power of the Dog Maggie Gyllenhaal, The Lost Daughter Ryûsuke Hamaguchi and Takamasa Oe, Drive My Car Actress of the year Olivia Colman, The Lost Daughter Penélope Cruz, Parallel Mothers Renate Reinsve, The Worst Person in the World Joanna Scanlan, After Love Kristen Stewart, Spencer Actor of the year Benedict Cumberbatch, The Power of the Dog Adam Driver, Annette Andrew Garfield, tick, tick... Boom! Oscar Isaac, The Card Counter Daniel Kaluuya, Judas and the Black Messiah Supporting actress of the year Jessie Buckley, The Lost Daughter Ariana DeBose, West Side Story Kirsten Dunst, The Power of the Dog Rita Moreno, West Side Story Ruth Negga, Passing Supporting actor of the year Richard Ayoade, The Souvenir Part II Ciarán Hinds, Belfast Jesse Plemons, The Power of the Dog Kodi Smit-McPhee, The Power of the Dog Jeffrey Wright, The French Dispatch British/Irish actress of the year (for body of work) Jessie Buckley, The Lost Daughter Olivia Colman, The Lost Daughter/Mothering Sunday/Ron’s Gone Wrong/The Mitchells vs The Machines/The Electrical Life of Louis Wain Ruth Negga, Passing/Poly Styrene: I Am a Cliché Joanna Scanlan, After Love Tilda Swinton, Memoria/The Souvenir Part II/The French Dispatch British/Irish actor of the year (for body of work) Riz Ahmed, Encounter Adeel Akhtar, Ali &amp; Ava/The Nest/The Electrical Life of Louis Wain/Everybody’s Talking About Jamie Benedict Cumberbatch, The Power of the Dog/The Electrical Life of Louis Wain/The Courier Andrew Garfield, tick, tick... Boom!/The Eyes of Tammy Faye/Mainstream Stephen Graham, Boiling Point/Venom: Let There Be Carnage Breakthrough British/Irish film-maker Prano Bailey-Bond, Censor Rebecca Hall, Passing Aleem Khan, After Love Marley Morrison, Sweetheart Ben Sharrock, Limbo Young British/Irish performer Max Harwood, Everybody’s Talking About Jamie Jude Hill, Belfast Emilia Jones, Coda Daniel Lamont, Nowhere Special Woody Norman, C’mon C’mon British/Irish short film Diseased and Disorderly Expensive Shit Know the Grass Play It Safe Precious Hair &amp; Beauty Technical achievement award Jenny Beavan, costumes (Cruella) Paul Lambert, Tristan Myles, Brian Connor and Gerd Nefzer, visual effects (Dune) Kenneth Ladekjær, animation (Flee) Adam Stockhausen, production design (The French Dispatch) Andrew Droz Palermo, cinematography (The Green Knight) Hélène Louvart, cinematography (The Invisible Life of Euridice Gusmão) Fabrizio Federico and Aline Hervé, film editing (Martin Eden) Olivier Schneider, stunts (No Time to Die) Jonny Greenwood, music (The Power of the Dog) Justin Peck, choreography (West Side Story)Downing Street has slapped down a Conservative MP who warned against the UK becoming a “public health socialist state”, after Chris Whitty suggested people cut down on pre-Christmas socialising. Speaking at a Downing Street press conference on Wednesday alongside the prime minister, England’s chief medical officer urged the public: “Don’t mix with people you don’t have to.” The comments intensified calls from the hospitality sector for financial aid to help them cope with plunging bookings. Joy Morrissey, the MP for Beaconsfield and a parliamentary aide to the justice secretary, Dominic Raab, tweeted on Friday morning: “Perhaps the covid unelected public health spokesperson should defer to what our ELECTED members of parliament and the prime minister have decided.” She added: “I know it’s difficult to remember but this is not how democracy works. This is not a public health socialist state.” Boris Johnson’s official spokesperson said the prime minister did not agree with the view expressed by Morrissey. “Professor Whitty is a hugely respected and trusted public servant, who provides independent, evidence-based advice,” he said. Morrissey replaced Dominic Grieve as Beaconsfield MP after the former attorney general was thrown out of the Conservative party for trying to block a no-deal Brexit. She took down the tweet after less than half an hour but subsequently posted a more moderate version of the same message, saying she was “increasingly concerned” about “public health pronouncements made in the media”. Labour called for Morrissey to apologise or be sacked from her role as Raab’s parliamentary private secretary. In a letter to Raab, the shadow justice secretary, Steve Reed, said: “It is vital, especially during this pandemic, that our leading scientists have the freedom to give public health advice to the public and to offer their expertise without fear of reprisal. As the Omicron variant spreads rapidly through Britain, there must not be any sign of the government censoring or intimidating our leading scientific experts.” Several other Conservative MPs have also reacted with anger to Whitty’s comments, which intensified calls from the hospitality sector for financial aid to help them cope with plunging bookings. Johnson suffered his largest ever rebellion over Covid restrictions on Tuesday, with 100 Conservative MPs voting against the government’s plans for Covid passes. In the House of Commons on Thursday, Steve Baker asked the Treasury minister John Glen: “What reassurance can he give me that when officials speak, particularly on podiums at press conferences, that they are staying within the bounds of the policy that ministers have decided?” During the same debate, over financial support for businesses hit by the Omicron wave, the former public health minister Steve Brine said: “At a stroke the chief medical officer changed government policy and put this country, certainly hospitality, into effective lockdown.” He claimed: “Advisers are now running the show.” Downing Street played down differences between Whitty and the prime minister’s stance, however. Johnson’s spokesperson said: “Both the prime minister and the [chief medical officer] were making the point that given the current infection rate, the prevalence of the variant, people should be cautious.”Cast your minds back to 15 May 2020. Matt Hancock, the then health secretary before he quit for breaking restrictions by having an affair, was giving a press conference where he said people should be “staying at home as much as is possible”. Social interaction was strictly limited to outdoors and one person at a time. It was the week when people were told they could meet one parent outside, in a socially distanced way, but not both of them together. The protracted lockdown had begun to have an effect on the R number, which was teetering just below 1, and ministers had signalled that curbs would begin to ease in the coming weeks. The government had shifted its slogan from “stay at home” to “stay alert”, and set out a hope that schools would begin to open up maybe in June, and perhaps even bars and restaurants by July. It was in this context that about 20 civil servants and aides gathered in Downing Street for what, one source claimed, was a “wine and pizza” party that went on late into the night. And instead of questioning whether this was a good idea, a witness alleges Johnson told one person attending, who had a drink in their hand, that they deserved a drink for “beating back” the virus. In one way it is no surprise, after claims have emerged of six other parties held by Tory aides or civil servants when restrictions were in force. But the disclosure of an alleged party held during the first lockdown raises questions about whether there was a culture of persistently flouting the rules that continued during the Christmas period of 2020. Since the Daily Mirror broke the first story of the apparent No 10 Christmas party in December 2020, and Johnson’s appearance at what has been claimed was a leaving do in November 2020, a steady stream of damaging details have emerged. There was the revelation that Jack Doyle, now the No 10 director of communications, handed out awards and that it was pre-planned with secret Santa gifts given out. Then there was the photo of Johnson presiding over a third event – a Christmas quiz over Zoom – where staff crowded around desks while answering questions in teams. The Department for Education admitted straight away to having held a Christmas party, acknowledging it was unwise, while the Treasury owned up to “impromptu drinks” consumed by staff around their desks. The Conservative party headquarters confirmed it launched an internal investigation after finding that Shaun Bailey, the London mayoral candidate, and members of his team had held a party in a basement during lockdown around Christmas last year. Bailey later resigned as chair of a London policing committee, after a photo of the merrymaking with a catered buffet was published. In contrast, No 10 has been evasive about the allegations as each one has emerged, repeatedly asserting that “all Covid rules were followed”. It was only forced into an inquiry by Simon Case, the cabinet secretary, after a video was leaked to ITV showing Allegra Stratton, Johnson’s former press secretary, laughing and joking about the Christmas party and suggesting it could be passed off as a business meeting. This appears to be No 10’s strategy still, when presented with the testimony of sources who say there was drinking and socialising in Downing Street on 15 May. Johnson and others were working outside, they say, with officials there late into the evening for business purposes. However, there was no on-record denial that a social gathering took place, nor any refutation of Johnson’s words that suggested he approved of the drinking in Downing Street that night, when the prime minister appeared to believe he was on the verge of victory against a virus that is threatening a deadly wave 19 months later. Downing Street is now exceptionally wary of bringing back limits on social contact – partly because many Tory MPs will not stand for it. But there will also now always be the suspicion that No 10’s own cavalier attitude to the lockdown rules will have made Johnson more reluctant to follow the science and public health advice that suggests tougher curbs are necessary. • This article was amended on 17 December 2021. Shaun Bailey resigned as chair of a London policing committee, but not from the committee itself, as an earlier version said.The Ohio chapter of the Council on American-Islamic Relations has fired one of its top leaders after discovering that he was covertly sharing information about the organization to a prominent anti-Muslim group. The organization announced that its longtime executive and legal director, Romin Iqnal, had admitted to leaking information to the Investigative Project on Terrorism, a Washington DC-based non-profit group that according to the Islamophobia Network, uses “unsubstantiated threats that portray Muslims as dangerous to accrue funding”. Its founder, Steve Emerson, a journalist and self-proclaimed expert on Islamic and Middle East terrorist groups has, according to the Islamophobia Network, a reputation “for fabricating evidence to substantiate his ravings about Muslim extremism”. In an analysis by the Georgetown University– based Bridge Initiative, which studies Islamophobia, Emerson was described as having “a history of promoting falsified information and conspiracy theories about Islam and Muslims”. Emerson has previously made false claims that there are “no-go zones” in the United Kingdom and that the Oklahoma City bombing was carried out by an Arab because it had a so-called “Middle Eastern trait”. He has also said that American Muslim civil rights organizations are “infiltrating” Congress and the media. CAIR described Iqbal’s actions as a “betrayal and violation of trust [that] was planned and purposeful, taking place over a period of years”. Iqbal has been found to have secretly recorded CAIR network meetings, strategic plans and private emails over the years and passed confidential information regarding CAIR’s national advocacy work to IPT. The findings, which came from an investigation launched by a third-party forensic expert retained by CAIR’s national headquarters, also revealed that Emerson was “cursing, threatening and otherwise mistreating his staff for failing to produce enough Islamophobic content”. According to CAIR’s executive director Nihad Awad, the evidence also indicated that IPT “had spent years trying to infiltrate and spy upon prominent mosques and Muslim American organizations using ‘moles’,” among them the Ohio chapter of CAIR. Further investigation in the wake of Iqbal’s termination discovered purchases from ammunition and gun retailers made in recent weeks using a CAIR-Ohio credit card that Iqbal administered. In addition, the Ohio chapter staff also found a “suspicious package” mailed to the CAIR-Ohio Columbus office which contained AR-15 rifle parts. The organization has shared the information with local police and the FBI, which is investigating the matter. “Sadly, this hate group’s attempt to spy upon on mosques and Muslim organizations was not surprising. Civil rights advocates have been targeted by infiltrators for decades,” Awad said. “Despite these attempts to harm us, we are undeterred,” the organization said. In 2010, Iqbal, then a staff attorney for CAIR-Ohio, “warned people to be on the lookout for agents provocateurs seeking to incite and entrap Muslims into criminal activity” during a CAIR-sponsored event on government surveillance.The US is returning 200 antiquities, including an ancient Roman sculpture that almost ended up in the possession of Kim Kardashian West, that were stolen and smuggled out of Italy. The variety of Roman, Etruscan and Greek artefacts, valued at $10m (£7.5m), had been looted since at least the early 1980s before being smuggled out and sold to private collectors, museums or auction houses. Half were found at New York’s Fordham Museum of Greek, Etruscan, and Roman Art as part of an investigation led by the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus Vance. A white marble head of the Roman emperor Settimio Severo that had been stolen in 1984 from a museum in Italy’s southern Campania region was found in June 2020 just as it was about to be put up for auction at Christie’s in New York. Other artefacts include a 7th century BC ceramic vessel called Pithos with Ulysses, and a 4th century BC terracotta image of a goddess known as A Head of Maiden. Kardashian unwittingly became caught up in the investigation this year after the US government named her in a civil forfeiture claim for an ancient Roman statue, originally looted from Italy, that was confiscated at Los Angeles port in 2016. The statue, known as the Fragment of Myron’s Samian Athena, was bought by the reality TV star from a Belgian art dealer and was part of a shipment in her name that contained 40 antiques. She was not accused of any wrongdoing. The vast majority of the stolen artefacts are believed to be connected to Edoardo Almagià, an Italian antiques dealer who lived in New York until 2003. Almagià was investigated in Italy for smuggling and selling stolen artefacts, but he will not face criminal charges since the statute of limitations for the crime has expired. “He is free and living in Rome,” said General Roberto Riccardi, the chief of Italy’s cultural heritage protection squad. “Lots of time has passed and so the crime is no longer pursuable.” Almagià was investigated for decades by Italy and the US, with Italian authorities alleging his business contributed to “one of the biggest lootings of Italian cultural heritage”. According to the news channel TGCom24, he has defended himself, saying: “There are thousands if art objects travelling the world without documents and in the past it was always like this,” adding that “only now have the Italian and American regulations become stricter”. Almagià said the money spent on the investigation could have been spent “repairing Italian museums rather than on persecuting traders”. One hundred and sixty of the artefacts will travel back to Rome on Thursday with Riccardi, while 40 others will go on display in an exhibition at the Italian consulate in New York until March. Italy’s cultural heritage protection squad was established in 1969 and has since retrieved more than 3m stolen artefacts. The team recently recovered more than 2,000 relics looted from Taranto, in Puglia, which ended up in Germany, Belgium, the Netherlands and Switzerland. “The thefts create incalculable damage to our heritage and culture,” said Riccardi. “Firstly, a community loses an object of its heritage. Secondly, a whole mine of information for archaeologists disappears when an artefact is removed from its context.”On Wednesday, 15 December 2021 the world became a dimmer place. bell hooks, the brilliant, trailblazing author, cultural critic, feminist, poet and professor, died of an undisclosed illness. The news was first announced by her niece. I learned of it while scrolling social media. Before I could even digest what I had read, my phone exploded with texts from other Black women. I didn’t need to read them to know what they would state – I knew my sisters were hurting. We lost someone who transformed our thinking and gave us the language to challenge systems of oppression and the unique ways they harm Black women. In her book Ain’t I a Woman? Black Women and Feminism, bell hooks brilliantly explores racism, feminism, class and patriarchy – or institutionalized sexism, as she called it. The book opens with a chapter tracing contemporary imagery of Black women in America back to the brutality of slavery. The book holds no punches; bell hooks explains how the suffrage movement excluded Black women and the ways that the civil rights movement didn’t always address the distinct needs of Black women. Like bell hooks herself, the work is complex and thought-provoking. Aint I a Woman? was the first bell hooks book I read. I was in my final semester of graduate school at the time. At 23, I considered myself to be socially conscious. Prior to engaging with her work, I would wax poetic about injustice and the ways that systemic racism effectively launched weapons of mass destruction in my community. I would tell you that the “war on drugs” was nothing short of a war on Black men, and how the prison-industrial complex was another form of slavery. While the data indicates that there is a disproportionate number of Black men incarcerated, I failed to consider how these same systems of oppression also harmed Black women specifically. I did not have the range or language to even consider the ways in which race, class, and gender intersect and how this should frame my work and thinking around criminal justice reform. The more I studied her work the more I realized how much of my formal education left me with gaping holes in my thinking. It was bell hooks who helped me understand that even when we talk about our collective freedom from racism this must also include fighting against sexism. Any fight against oppression that doesn’t include contending with sexism is not freedom at all – for Black women it’s merely an unspoken agreement to devalue an entire aspect of our personhood. This revelation started a radical transformation in me. I began to love my community differently. I developed a love for my community that wasn’t afraid to interrogate any narrative or practice that failed Black women. Because, as hooks’s work demonstrates, love without analysis is merely appreciation. She planted a seed that I’m still watering with her work. bell hooks’s work shaped generations of Black women. Candice Marie Benbow, an essayist and the author of the forthcoming book Red Lip Theology, shared how bell hooks impacted her life. “bell hooks taught me that there is powerful specificity in my Black womanhood,” she told me. “That our lives require critical engagement and generous care. She loved us. When few loved Black women, she loved us well. She laid the blueprint so many of us are trying to follow. She was my teacher. I never met her but she taught me as well as she loved me. And, whenever I read her or listened to her, I felt it.” Even without meeting her, bell was our instructor. She brilliantly theorized about radical love, healing and community in a way that caused us to consider unimaginable possibilities. Rhonda Nicole Tankerson, a singer-songwriter and digital marketing consultant, told me that she met bell through words. “bell hooks came later (in my 20s), as I began to explore Black feminists thought and scholarship. Her writings on love have been especially important in challenging my own understandings and expectations when it comes to seeking and experiencing it, romantically and otherwise. She made me dream of possibilities that I never knew could exist.” bell hooks’s legacy consists of possibilities and reimagining love. This is especially true for Dr Jenn M Jackson, a writer and professor. “Her legacy, amongst other things, shows us that our work must be rooted in a deep love for our people and an unwavering commitment to holding grace for ourselves as we struggle,” they told me. There is no single Black woman, cultural critic, feminist, poet, or professor among us that can carry bell hooks’s legacy alone. Nor can we heal from this loss alone. Fortunately, we don’t have to. She has already given us the blueprint for both. When we hurt over her death we will heal together as she taught us: “Rarely, if ever, are any of us healed in isolation. Healing is an act of communion.” For the great many of us whose writing is informed by her work, we will continue to use our words to fearlessly contend with white supremacy while never letting patriarchy off the hook. This is a collective action and we are all needed. Because as bell hooks taught us, “No Black woman writer in this culture can write ‘too much’. Indeed, no woman writer can write ‘too much’ … No woman has ever written enough.” Shanita Hubbard is an adjunct professor of sociology and the author of the forthcoming book Ride or Die: A Feminist Manifesto For The Well-Being of Black WomenGovernment-aligned forces in western Tigray have systematically detained thousands of ethnic Tigrayan people, while torturing and killing many in a campaign of violence, according to a report by two major rights groups that further reveals the scale of abuses in war-hit Ethiopia. In the past few weeks, the report says, Tigrayans in the Amhara region identified by local police and ethnic militia forces called Fano have been routinely rounded up in house-to-house raids. Adults and teenagers over 15 have been detained in overcrowded prisons where scores are tortured and face starvation, it adds. Women and younger children have been expelled from the three western Tigrayan towns targeted, while many have been killed and tortured, according to witnesses and survivors interviewed in the joint report by Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch. The atrocities reported in the towns of Humera, Adebai and Rawyan shine additional light on widespread abuses and alleged crimes against humanity reported in the region since war broke out in November 2020 when Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed launched a military offensive against the Tigray People’s Liberation Front, which had previously ruled Ethiopia for 28 years. The nature of the atrocities has only gradually emerged this year, partly a result of a communications blackout in Tigray by Ethiopia’s government as well as widely condemned restrictions on aid agencies, rights groups and observers. In November and December, interviews with 25 witnesses, survivors and relatives of victims revealed widespread abuses by Amhara militias and regional security forces against Tigrayan civilians in western Tigray, which has been occupied by Amhara authorities and where some of the most horrific atrocities in the war have occurred. Witnesses reported trucks filled with Tigrayans during roundups, in part corroborated by satellite imagery captured by researchers from Amnesty and HRW. In some incidents, witnesses said residents who fled were gunned down or attacked by operatives wielding machetes and axes. “They started shooting whoever was in range running,” said a 34-year-old farmer from Adebai, who fled to a nearby field after an attack by Fano members. “When the people tried to escape … [the Fano] attacked them with machetes and axes so no one could escape,” he said, describing seeing several dead bodies after his escape. “Everywhere you turned, there would be five, 10 bodies,” he said. Many of the bodies remained unburied, so that “the whole town smelled and was filled with dead bodies”, said another man who escaped attack. Other witnesses reported roundups in the town of Rawyan on 20 November. One man who was abducted from a school told researchers that forces rounded up all the Tigrayans at the school and put them on waiting trucks. “Militia were beating the youth, 17- and 18-year-olds, searching for money and collecting their possessions. The [administrators] gave instructions – who can be released, and who can stay,” he said. Atrocities have been committed by all parties in the conflict, including Tigrayan-led forces, since fighting began. The most recent abuses appear to have taken place around the same time that Tigrayan-led forces secured a number of battlefield victories, prompting Prime Minister Abiy, who won the Nobel peace prize in 2019, to join the conflict himself. Fears in recent weeks of a rebel march on Addis Ababa prompted countries including the UK to urge their citizens to leave Ethiopia as soon as possible, although Abiy’s government has said the city is secure. Regional Amhara security forces, ethnic militia groups such as Fano, and even troops from neighbouring Eritrea have fought alongside Ethiopia’s army. The conflict has blown open historical regional and ethnic faultlines in Africa’s second-most populous country. The government response has ranged from denials to coy admissions of the involvement of armed groups. Authorities initially denied Eritrean forces were in Ethiopia. The report also highlights the fate of thousands of Tigrayans estimated to be held in Amharan-run prisons and detention centres. A labourer arrested in July and held in a prison controlled by Amhara regional police escaped in mid-November and described being kept in a 3-by-4-metre room with up to 200 people. He described routine torture by Fanos against groups of detainees, by beating their hands, heads, chests and genitals using sticks or the butt or muzzle of a rifle. “They used electric wires and for the ages from 12 to 30, they hit us on the soles of our feet,” he said. The others that are older, they lay them down on their stomachs and hit them from their necks to their feet.” Earlier this month, the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs said 1.2 million people had been displaced from western Tigray since the beginning of the conflict, with more than 10,000 Tigrayans displaced between 25 November and 1 December. The fighting has displaced more than 2 million people across Tigray and driven hundreds of thousands into famine-like conditions.Germany’s new health minister, Karl Lauterbach, has warned that the country has insufficient vaccine doses to keep the population’s Covid defences up over the winter, especially with the predicted rise of the Omicron variant. Lauterbach said Germany was very low on stocks and was rationing its distribution of the German-developed BioNTech/Pfizer vaccine to vaccine centres and doctors’ practices across the country, to 1.2m doses next week, 800,000 the following week between Christmas and the new year, and another 1.2m the week after. “But this is far less than the amounts which doctors are asking for every week,” he said, adding that Germany was scraping the barrel of its reserves and could do with more than twice the amount it currently had. “The campaign has to roll … but there is literally no more than this there.” He rejected claims he was blaming his predecessors in the government of Angela Merkel for underordering supplies of the vaccine, and said the shortfall was due to the Covid situation suddenly worsening. A record 1.5m doses were administered on Wednesday, bringing to 70% the proportion of people now at least double vaccinated, and to almost 28% the proportion who have received a booster jab. The Delta variant makes up about 90% of German infections, but the more infectious Omicron has been detected in hundreds of cases and is expected to have spread widely by next month. Lauterbach, an epidemiologist who as the health spokesperson for the Social Democrats was an active and much relied upon commentator on the pandemic before taking over as health minister this month, said he was seeking “as an emergency” to buy millions of unused vaccine stocks from eastern European countries, including Bulgaria, Romania and Poland. His ministry has confirmed reports that it plans to spend €2.2bn on 80m BioNTech doses via official EU procurement channels, and to buy a further 12m doses directly, to ensure “that we can start the new year in a sensible manner”. In addition Moderna has agreed to deliver an extra 35m doses of its vaccine to Germany ahead of schedule. Several eastern European countries have vaccine stocks that are in danger of becoming out of date if they are not used, owing to vaccine hesitancy. The finance minister, Christian Lindner, said the funds to cover the costs had been released “so that the vaccine campaign can continue next year with higher intensity”. Lauterbach repeatedly stressed he was not claiming, as some media and opposition politicians had claimed, that his predecessor, Jens Spahn, had underordered vaccines and had not kept a proper inventory of stocks. The CDU has accused Lauterbach of using false data and creating or exaggerating an apparent problem in order to benefit from the relief that is likely to be triggered if sufficient stocks are obtained. Lauterbach instead praised Spahn’s efforts and saying the “massive increase in speed” of the Omicron variant together with efforts to dampen the Delta variant were behind his drive to “turbo boost” the vaccine campaign. He faced fierce scrutiny over the issue during his first press conference with Lothar Wieler, the head of the government’s disease control agency, the Robert Koch Institute (RKI), on Thursday afternoon. Press conferences with the health minister, previously Spahn, and Wieler, often held on a weekly basis, have been the main official source of communication on the pandemic since it began. Lauterbach said speaking to Sajid Javid, his British counterpart, that morning had increased his sense of urgency, “as in Britain the spread of Omicron is worse”. He said he was “working feverishly” to increase stocks and was basing his decisions on his own first-hand experience as a doctor who had administered vaccines while an MP before becoming health minister, knowing that more stocks had to be ordered than would be needed. Wieler urged Germans to limit their festive gatherings to a small circle so as not to make Christmas “a festival for the virus” and to help stop the “rollercoaster we’ve been on for two years”. The RKI registered 56,677 new infections on Thursday morning, about 14,000 less than a week ago, and 522 deaths over the previous 24 hours. The seven-day incidence rate per 100,000 people remains high has fallen to 340, from 422 a week ago, an improvement put down to an increase in restrictions. Many venues, non-essential shops and cultural events broadly speaking require visitors to show a digital vaccine certificate or proof that they have recovered from Covid-19, and proof of a negative lateral flow test. The measures have been tightened regionally according to how widespread the disease is in particular areas. The wearing of medical masks has been mandatory in public places since January. About 14% of German adults remain unvaccinated, leading to calls for a vaccine mandate in the new year. However, health officials have said any mandate would have to be accompanied by having sufficient vaccine stocks. Lauterbach said: “If the vaccine mandate comes, Germany will have enough vaccine.”The Morrison government is aiming to implement the first two recommendations of the landmark Jenkins review before parliament resumes in February, and amend legislation governing the employment of political staff before the election. The finance minister Simon Birmingham revealed his implementation timetable during an interview with Guardian Australia’s politics podcast. He said immediate priorities were setting up a leadership taskforce to oversee the changes, and preparing a public statement acknowledging traumatic experiences of bullying, sexual harassment and sexual assault in political offices ready to deliver after the summer break. In November, Australia’s sex discrimination commissioner, Kate Jenkins, recommended a significant overhaul of federal parliament’s toxic workplace culture after handing down her landmark report that found one in three staffers interviewed had been sexually harassed. The Jenkins inquiry into parliament’s workplace culture was triggered after former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins alleged she was raped after hours in a ministerial office in March 2019. Higgins’ allegations are the subject of separate criminal proceedings. The Jenkins review made 28 recommendations, and Thursday’s mid-year economic and fiscal outlook (Myefo) allocated $17.8m over four years to fund their implementation. Birmingham told Guardian Australia the government’s intention was to “take action” on all the proposals, beginning with the first two recommendations. “My expectation is, we will, by the time we bring the parliament back next year, be in a position where the leadership taskforce [Jenkins] recommended is up and running, and the type of statement she’s recommended be made by the parliament is able to be delivered upon,” the finance minister said. Birmingham said he also wanted to implement Jenkins’ proposed changes to the Members of Parliament (Staff) Act – which is the legislative instrument governing the employment arrangements of political staff. “Our ambition will be to bring that specific legislation forward before an election, assuming parliament comes back before an election – we can get that done as quickly as possible,” he said. Jenkins recommended political leaders deliver a public statement acknowledging “the impact of the misconduct on individuals and the lack of action taken in the past” and “outline the institutional leadership commitment to change, with shared accountability for progress”. Damning report A survey accompanying the review found toxic workplace experiences were common – 37% of respondents in parliamentary workplaces had personally experienced bullying and 33% of people had personally experienced sexual harassment, with 1% experiencing an actual or attempted sexual assault. It found 84% of people who experienced sexual harassment did not seek support or advice. The review found gender inequality in the political ecosystem was a key driver of bullying, sexual harassment and sexual assault within commonwealth parliamentary workplaces. It found that power imbalances and the misuse of power, was “one of the primary drivers of misconduct”. Jenkins’ second recommendation was the government establish a leadership taskforce, with oversight by the presiding officers, “chaired by an independent expert and supported by an implementation group” to ensure all the recommendations of the report were implemented. The sex discrimination commissioner also recommended a comprehensive review of the Members of Parliament (Staff) Act, and legislative changes ensuring there were fair termination processes for employees. As well as achieving those initial objectives, Birmingham said it would be crucial to institutionalise new training courses for parliamentarians and staff. The finance minister said the current educative and support services needed to be enhanced, and become “an embedded part of the induction process for new MPs and new offices established [post-election] so we don’t waste any time in terms of the life and culture of the next parliament”. He said he wanted to move as quickly as possible to implement the overhaul, and would work with Labor, the Greens and crossbenchers to do what was possible before the election. Birmingham said reform of the toxic workplace culture would need to be collaborative, “but everyone has said to me they want us to get on with it, and that was always our ambition”. As part of structural reforms, Jenkins recommended the establishment of a new office of parliamentarian staffing and culture to provide centralised human resources support, including policy development, training, advice, support and education. The review also recommended the creation of an independent parliamentary standards commission “to ensure that there are independent and consistent responses to reports and complaints of bullying, sexual harassment and sexual assault” in parliamentary workplaces. Birmingham said some of the structural changes would have to wait until after the election. “We are not going to waste any time though,” the minister said. “Our intention is to meet with the opposition, the Greens, the independents and agree on the shape of that organisation[s] and where that sits within the parliamentary departments and architecture – how it needs to be legislated … have that ready for introduction as early … into the new parliament as possible.” Former parliamentary staffers have urged the Morrison government and other political parties to quickly implement the recommendations, warning failure to implement change will trigger a fierce backlash from women at the ballot box.The first ever millipede with more than 1,000 legs been discovered in Western Australia. The species, which is the first “true” millipede, has 1,306 legs and was found up to 60 metres underground in a mining area in the Eastern Goldfields region of WA. Researchers have named the new species Eumillipes persephone, in reference to the Greek goddess of the underworld, Persephone. It breaks the previous record set by Illacme plenipes, which is found in central California and has up to 750 legs. A team of researchers discovered the millipede while conducting a subterranean environmental impact assessment. Dr Bruno Buzatto, a biologist at Bennelongia Environmental Consultants, described the find as “incredibly lucky”. “These animals were so unique,” Buzatto said. “As soon as I realised how long they were … I realised they had to be something completely different.” The species has a long, thread-like body comprising up to 330 segments, with short legs and a cone-shaped head. Like other animals that live in constant darkness, it is blind and pale. Dr Juanita Rodriguez, a research collaborator and CSIRO insect expert, said the new species had likely evolved its length for ease of movement underground. “The more length you have, the more strength to propel forward,” she said. The millipede’s more than 300 body segments would also give it greater force for movement in rocky areas such as small crevices, she said. In comparison, the Portuguese millipede – a common invasive species in Australia typically seen in high numbers after heavy rain – has around 25 segments, Rodriguez said. In 2013, a Portuguese millipede infestation was reportedly responsible for a train collision in Perth. In total, the team found eight Eumillipes persephone millipedes in three drill holes at depths between 15 and 60 metres. Rodriguez said it was surprising to discover the new species so far underground. While some millipedes live in caves, many are surface dwellers and break down organic matter such as leaf litter, she said. Little is known about the new species. “It’s a good bet that they eat fungi,” Buzatto said. Genetic analysis found that while Eumillipes persephone has physical similarities to the previous leg record holder in California, the two millipede species are only distantly related. There are more than 2,000 known species of millipede in Australia, Rodriguez said, adding that the true number of species may be as high as 4,000. “Few people realise … the large proportion of Australian biodiversity that is still undescribed, and therefore also the importance of taxonomists,” Buzatto said. “We essentially are driving species extinct probably quicker than we describe them.” Rodriguez and her colleagues at CSIRO are also studying chemicals produced by Australian millipedes. “We’re testing them to see if they have potential for being antimicrobials against the pathogens that have a lot of antimicrobial resistance.” Millipedes differ from centipedes in that they have two pairs of legs on most body segments, whereas centipedes only have one. Research into the new millipede was published in the peer-reviewed journal Scientific Reports. • This article was amended on 17 December 2021 to include the fact that the discovery of the Eumillipes persephone was initially made by a team of researchers while conducting a subterranean environmental impact assessment.Sydney theatres are rapidly revising their Covid safety plans for audiences, cast and crew as infections surge in New South Wales ahead of a forecast 25,000 cases a day by the end of January. As Covid rules are being relaxed, most major Sydney performing arts venues and companies have decided to go beyond the current public health orders and extended their requirement for all ticket holders to show vaccination certificates and wear masks throughout the performance (unless medically exempt). This extension was planned to end 31 December. It has now been extended to at least 31 January. Sydney producers are closely watching the news from London for some sense of what may eventuate. A number of West End theatre productions have been forced to reschedule and cancel shows as positive cases are identified among cast and crew. Affected shows so far include The Lion King, Hamilton, Come From Away and the Royal Shakespeare Company’s The Comedy of Errors. Many British regional theatres are facing having to cancel their lucrative seasonal panto performances. The Sydney festival is due to open on 6 January and has performances planned for venues including the Hordern Pavilion, the Seymour Centre, Sydney Opera House and Carriageworks. No one from Sydney festival was available to comment prior to deadline, but their website indicates they plan to follow NSW Health guidelines, plus mandatory masks. ‘It’s inevitable that Covid will enter’ Opera Australia, which has five operas including Turandot, Otello and La Bohème opening in the Sydney Opera House from 31 December, confirmed the company is “cautiously optimistic” about the summer season but is in urgent talks to prepare for a range of emergency scenarios. “It’s inevitable that Covid will enter the workforce,” said the new CEO of Opera Australia, Fiona Allan. “We are preparing for every possibility. What if we have positive cases in the orchestra and the wind section can’t go on? What if the tenors in the chorus can’t go on? What if crew members test positive and we can’t fly in the scenery?” Allan said the company was determined to go ahead with its summer season even if shows have to be presented in a stripped back, concert-style version. “Our number one priority is getting the show on stage,” Allan said. “It might not be the show in all its glory but it can be the best we can manage on the day. We are doing practical planning. For example, if we have no chorus and no orchestra, could we still go on with just the soloists? We are hoping our audiences would rather still come and see a show than have it cancelled because we weren’t able to put everyone on stage.” Opera Australia, which is the biggest employer in the arts sector, requires all performers, backstage crew and administration staff to undergo a rapid antigen test every 72 hours. This may be revised to a shorter interval in coming days. “Rapid tests are necessary for everyone’s safety but they are also a massive additional cost with a pack of five tests costing $50,” Allan said. “But it’s cheaper than cancelling the show. The tests are part of our risk management.” Any extra financial costs will be keenly felt by Opera Australia, which is already expecting a shortfall of 30% at the box office as international border restrictions eat into ticket sales. Suzanne Millar, co-artistic director of Sydney’s inner city Kings Cross Theatre, is anticipating 10 shows beginning rehearsals in January. She said she feels confident that audience protocols are in place, with masks and vaccination certificates, but the implications around the lack of notifications for actors are a “horrible unknown”. “The big concern is actors testing positive or being a close contact, then needing to isolate. We are advising all directors to have one person in the room who can go on at short notice with the book [script],” Millar said. “The rehearsal room is like a home, it’s an intimate space where actors might be standing closer to each other than in normal life. We are asking them to rehearse in masks and watch for symptoms.” Millar says the government may be underestimating the potential impact on the arts of a widespread outbreak if large case numbers cause a delay in testing results, and the end of the QR code check-in system in NSW means people are no longer notified if they have been at an exposure site. “It feels like it’s been handballed back to personal responsibility and for individual businesses to set their own rules. The numbers are frightening,” she said. One insider in the theatre industry said: “We never anticipated a cycle where we had to replace performers because they had to isolate or they tested positive. But we never thought we’d have astronomical numbers like this, either. This is all new. Without QR check-ins we won’t even know if we’ve been exposed.” Newcastle music festival cancelled after Omicron outbreak Rising Covid-19 stress is impacting the live performing arts sector beyond theatres. The 10-day Tamworth country music festival, which contributes $70m to the state’s economy, mostly from domestic tourists, is due to open on 14 January, just as the predicted Omicron wave is due to spike in NSW. Organisers are concerned it might face a snap public health order shutdown like the Lunar Electric music festival in Newcastle, which was cancelled on Thursday, two days out from the event. NSW Health issued a statement late Thursday afternoon saying “the ongoing spread of Covid-19 in the Newcastle area, where the majority of a record number of cases are the Omicron variant of concern, presents too great a risk for the festival to take place this weekend”. Evelyn Richardson, CEO of Live Performance Australia, said arts and entertainment organisations across Australian have no safety net from government and need a national insurance scheme to underwrite risk. “The sudden cancellation of the Newcastle music festival is the reality the sector faces,” she said. “Omicron is clearly more transmissible and potentially more disruptive with the ongoing risk to companies that anything can be shut down at any time. We need a federal and state co-contribution scheme to underwrite risk in the live performing arts and entertainment sector.” In November, the Victorian government announced a 12-month events insurance scheme to cover any business interruptions due to border closures or mandated density limits or sudden lockdowns. It does not cover the loss of a lead performer or headline act through Covid. NSW is yet to announce an insurance scheme. “As we look to 2022 and the next wave of Covid-19, the biggest thing we need is not so much stimulus, but we need to de-risk the investment environment we are all operating in and that’s where there is a role for government to underwrite through insurance for at least the next 12 to 18 months,” Richardson said.Experts are urging people to hold their Christmas gatherings outside during the day and to reduce invitees, while cases continue to surge in New South Wales and Victoria. As both states ease restrictions heading into the Christmas break, there are growing concerns the spreading Omicron variant may jeopardise family gatherings. Prof Peter Collignon, an infectious disease physician and microbiologist at the Australian National University said that aside from getting a booster shot, the best way to keep gatherings Covid-safe was to hold them outside. “I think you’d get some protection, especially for your older relatives, if you tried as much as possible to hold your gatherings outside,” he said. “It would depend on the weather admittedly, but have a barbecue outside. As long as you keep your distances, being outside could give you more protection than, say, doing a lot of rapid antigen tests. “Hopefully it’ll be a nice day on Christmas Day, it would make a lot of difference doing as much as you can outside rather than inside.” Prof Collingnon added that he’d advise to keep parties small and hold them during the day, to avoid high-risk, indoor settings with limited ventilation. “As much as possible, get your visiting done during the middle of the day, sitting on the back veranda and enjoying a barbecue, rather than a dinner at nine at night. “Your risk is proportionate to the number of people you interact with indoors, so if everyone halved that number, you would probably halve your individual risk. “The more events you’re indoors, in bars and pubs, those are the super-spreading events. The more you’re in those, the more it increases your risk. “Just be careful who you share your saliva with.” It comes as Victoria moved to ease more restrictions, with face masks no longer required at weddings, funerals, and other ceremonial settings, and vaccination mandates eased in most retail settings. Proof of vaccination will also no longer be necessary at real estate locations, places of worship, weddings, funerals and for under 18s. NSW eased restrictions earlier this week, including lifting density limits, and only requiring masks on public transport, at airports and on planes. The state reported a record 1,742 new cases on Thursday, with Victoria recording 1,622 in the same reporting period. There are now 122 confirmed cases of Omicron in NSW, with more expected to be confirmed in the coming days. Prof Collingnon urged people to get their booster shots as the best way to prevent infection from the new variant, and to be mindful of symptoms. “If you’re really worried about your elderly relatives, your number one question is have they been vaccinated? And number two: have you been vaccinated? And number three is if you’ve got any symptoms, don’t go.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning He said that while he didn’t advise people to take rapid-antigen tests as a one-off before heading out to parties, taking them “repeatedly” could make a difference, especially if there are multiple gatherings planned. “One of the problems with rapid antigen tests is if you’re asymptomatic, its ability to detect Covid is only about 50%. If you’ve got symptoms, its about 80-90%, but if you have symptoms you should be getting a PCR test. “If you’re doing them, you should do them a few hours beforehand, because you can be asymptomatic today and still in your incubation period and develop it tomorrow. But I’m not sure that’s going to be very practical. “But if you’re going to multiple high risk settings for prolonged periods with large amounts of people there is a place [for rapid antigen tests]. But you’d probably need to do it on a daily basis.”As flood waters move through New South Wales, farmers are finding their levees have been compromised by holes and burrows left by mice at the height of the mouse plague. Richard Heath, the executive director of the Australian Farm Institute, said the tunnels and nests created by mice are particularly problematic during wet weather. “If you’ve got levee banks breaking or earthworks formed to channel water in a particular way and they fail, then you can have really severe or damaging intense flooding because you’re basically channelling water where it’s not meant to go,” Heath said. Major rainfall events over the last few weeks across Australia’s east have caused multiple flood peaks, which continue to move through the Condamine-Balonne and border rivers in Queensland, and the Lachlan, Namoi and Barwon rivers in NSW. As flood waters approached Bedgerabong from the burst banks of the Lachlan River, wheat and canola farmer Scott Darcy was checking his boundary levee every day, ready to fill the holes left by mice. Darcy says he was lucky because the flood was so slow moving he was able to “get on top” of plugging the holes. He said the mice were “everywhere” when the levee bank was freshly pushed up in June. “Every orifice, every piece of machinery – around them or under them – you’d see 30 to 40.” The problem is often amplified by foxes following the mice, creating even bigger holes in the levee, Heath said. If landholders only discover the holes after flood waters have arrived, it can be too late. “To repair a levee bank properly you have to knock it down and rebuild it, so you have to wait until the water’s gone to be able to rebuild it,” Heath said. Heath said another legacy left by the mice is significant damage to farm machinery from wiring that has been chewed. “If it’s machinery only used occasionally, you only notice when you get it out.” Many farmers have also been plagued by mouse faces, with their grain rejected because of contamination. “You can drive a truck all the way from the inland paddocks down to the port and not realise you’re about to be rejected,” Xavier Martin, the vice-president of NSW Farmers, said in November. “There’s a big cost just for the transported grain to be returned back to the farm.” He said many mice survived through to September but “the torrential rain has given them a lot of swimming lessons”. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter Martin said prior to the wet weather there had been reports of mice getting stuck in harvesting equipment, but the October and November rain had caused a “massive” decline in numbers. Despite the damage to the flood levees, Heath said “overwhelmingly farmers would be looking at the positive aspect of flooding on mice – that it drowns them”. Steve Henry, a CSIRO researcher specialising in the impact of mice on the grain industry, said reports about mice emerged in spring last year but that after the harvest “things really kicked off”. Henry does not expect the plague will return this year as the flooding would have suppressed numbers. He said while adults would have been able to escape the water, any babies would have drowned. But Martin said the heavy rain and the inability of headers to cope with the mud meant there was a lot of food left behind for the mice. “Farmers are still going to have to monitor mice levels post harvest, otherwise populations could potentially explode into autumn again,” said Martin. Henry said farmers harvesting as much of the crop as the can will reduce the amount of food available for mice. “That in itself reduces their capacity to go on breeding throughout the summer.” Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the community“You’ve got bruxism,” said my GP, printing out some information for me from the internet. “No I don’t. How dare you!” She asked me if I knew what bruxism was and I confessed I didn’t, but doubted I would have an infection that sounded like a bacterial byproduct of bestiality. Bruxism, with its vaguely Germanic cadence, the first syllable shared with brutal and Brutus, the heavy X in the middle, its accusatory “ism” at the end … I didn’t know what it was, but it didn’t sound good. (Bruxism is actually a condition in which you grind your teeth.) I had seen my GP about jaw pain. This was February. A month of high stress – TV script deadlines, a collaborative philosophical novel that was failing to cohere, and snap lockdowns that snapped at my heels as I moved between Sydney and Melbourne. Frequently I’d wake up in the middle of the night feeling as if someone had punched me hard in the face. The pain drove me to strange fantasies – what would it be like to have no jaw?? Would I look OK? All day my face hurt. This was an alienating pain. People talked of headaches – but what of faceaches? I walked around clutching my jaw like a grotesque parody of Rodin’s The Thinker. Eventually I saw an osteopath. She put a pair of gloves on, reached in and put her hand deep into my mouth – grabbing the inside of my left cheek; a soft, wet, dark place familiar with food but not a gloved finger. It was the oral equivalent of a pap smear. Weirdly violating. “Aghgh, oorrrff, orrrfffff,” I said. By the time she took her hand out, my chin was covered in dribble. While I was distracted by the dribble, she held my face and plunged a needle into my jaw, a bullseye into the knot of tension. Now, there must be a German word for this sort of feeling – immense pain but also in the lancing of it a release. At the height of it you almost want your old pain back. You’d do anything for a swap – give me chronic for acute any day – but after the pain passed, I was sure I was cured. I felt great. I didn’t have bruxism! That GP was WRONG – I just had a tight jaw. I went home and threw out my bruxism information sheet. But for the rest of the year bruxism cast a long, gnashing shadow. It was on the rise. One Melbourne friend said that in 2020 during the city’s long lockdown she began grinding her teeth so badly they split! I ran into another friend whose stressful job in New York destroyed his teeth. As well as dental work, he was steered towards antidepressants. He quit his job and the grinding stopped. But it was the pandemic that really turned bruxism into a thing. The ABC interviewed dentists who “noticed a dramatic increase in teeth-grinding related problems. President of the Victorian branch of the Australian Dental Association, Jeremy Sternson, said 2021 had been the year of the cracked tooth. ‘Normally in a year you may see a handful of these patients, but we were seeing three or four of these a day,’ he said.” People were coming in with neck, jaw and face pain, or cracked teeth, with dentists blaming stress as the cause. The “stress of lockdowns would have played a part in the increase in tooth grinding”, said one dentist. I didn’t think much more about it until I went to the dentist in November for a check-up. “You have bruxism. We need to order an emergency prosthetic before your teeth disappear entirely. You are grinding them to dust,” said the dentist. No! Not bruxism!!! Another alternative treatment to a mouthguard was Botox to freeze my jaw in place. But obviously I needed to release stress somehow. It was creeping around my body in the middle of the night, grinding my teeth into oblivion while I was unconscious, desperately trying to achieve some sort of homeostasis. I had three more trips to see my dentist while my mould was made – essentially a mouthguard that wouldn’t stop the grinding but would protect what was left of my teeth. This week I picked up the dreaded mouthguard. I tried it on but it felt like my mouth was wadded up with gum and when I talked my voice came out in a pronounced lisp. The dentist and his assistant laughed. “Will I have to wear this forever? Until I die?” The dentist didn’t answer. I asked him again. “I don’t like thinking about death,” he replied. “What if I swallow it in the night and it kills me?” I lisped. As I left, my dentist gave me a parting gift, a sort of doggy bag – the plaster mould of my upper and lower teeth. They were grotesque, the dental equivalent of the Ned Kelly death mask taken after he was hanged. With no mouth, gums and jaw to animate my teeth, they seemed to mock me from their plastic bag. They clanked. Did my teeth really look so chalky and misshapen? I met a friend for dinner, and when I went to pay I felt the sharp outline of my teeth as I groped in my handbag for my phone. “Argghh!” I gasped. “My teeth!” The horror was existential. My teeth are still in there. They keep surprising me when I open my bag. “Hello,” they say. “We you.” Just as each night I am distressed anew at the prosthetic I must put in my mouth, each day I confront the original sin of my teeth when I glimpse into my bag. But what am I to do? Just throw them out? That seems worse somehow – disrespectful. And so I carry them with me. The ultimate memento mori, which because of associations I don’t really understand makes me think about death.The holiday season is all about spending time with family, then realising how stressful it is to spend time with family. Luckily, there is a cinematic smörgåsbord to escape into when the conversation (and wine) runs dry. Here are some of the best and most notable releases to watch before 2021 is out. The Worst Person in the World Fortunately, this is not a documentary about your ex; it is Norwegian director Joachim Trier’s sprawling, tragicomic meditation on a series of doomed relationships through all their ups and downs: awkward family get-togethers, house party meet-cutes and one very memorable acid trip. The woman at the centre of it all is Julie (Renate Reinsve), a twentysomething drifter who feels like a spiritual successor to Zooey Deschanel’s Smiths-loving, honey-eyed love interest in softboi manifesto (500) Days of Summer. Like that movie, The Worst Person in the World is also told through fragmented shards – a fusion of day-to-day vignettes and mundanities as well as more lyrical flights of fancy. Time (literally) stops in this film; its place atop multiple best-of lists this year is very well deserved. The Worst Person in the World is in cinemas Boxing Day Licorice Pizza When Walt Whitman said “I contain multitudes”, he could have been referring to Paul Thomas Anderson, a man of many hats – most of them very large and intricate. Licorice Pizza, which he has written and directed, is on the simpler side of things, at least by Anderson’s standards; more Punch-Drunk Love than Phantom Thread. Starring Alana Haim (of Haim fame), Cooper Hoffman (of Phillip Seymour fame) and Benny Safdie (of Safdie fame) – amid a veteran cast that also includes Sean Penn, Tom Waits, and Bradley Cooper – this is a star-making affair about two young lovers (Haim and Hoffman) in 1970s California. It’s an ode to its setting (the film, says Anderson, takes its name from a long-gone SoCal record chain), name-checking 70s icons as it drifts through old studio sets, gas stations and pinball arcades, capturing a freewheeling first love and a blissful, conked-out vision of Americana that now feels like a fever dream. Licorice Pizza is in cinemas Boxing Day Swan Song The title here is a double entendre: decked out in minty silks, a perfectly poised neckerchief and sunglasses the size of his ego, screen legend Udo Kier’s character graces Swan Song’s poster like a preening bird – though his glory days as a hairdresser are all but over. Now he’s been relegated – with some degree of indignity – to a small-town nursing home, though it’s not long before one final job lands in his (freshly ironed) lap: to do up a former friend’s hair for her funeral. So off he goes on a wild, unexpected journey across town, complete with all the necessary detours of a feature film. Kier’s not-so-secret weapon is his ability to pull the rug out from under us without so much as a flick of the wrist, transforming from high camp to hot tears in a split second. The physical pilgrimage is also an emotional one that traverses a long and winding lifetime of friends, enemies, lovers and regrets, including a barbed encounter with a rival stylist played by Jennifer Coolidge – who is, as usual, scene-stealing. Swan Song is in cinemas Boxing Day West Side Story The Broadway-musical-to-big-screen pipeline is, by now, well-established: this year alone has already given us dreamy dance numbers (In the Heights) and nightmarish age trickeries (Dear Evan Hansen). Sondheim’s famous musical is the latest to get the slicked-up treatment in this gargantuan-budget remake directed by Steven Spielberg. It’s a tale as old as time: the Jets v the Sharks, street gang antics, a star-crossed romance, “MARIIIIIIIA” belted at ear-splitting volume above twinkly, orchestral instrumentation. It’s glossy Hollywood fare that has enough tricks up its sleeve to distinguish itself from the much-lauded 1961 film version, and is, by all accounts, eminently watchable for newcomer Rachel Zegler’s performance as Maria alone. West Side Story is in cinemas Boxing Day The Tragedy of Macbeth Production company A24 has staked out its claim as the sultan of stylisation, and avid fans will recognise the format here well: vaguely mythical lore painted in auteurist brushstrokes, with chilly palettes and hushed whispers of something perilous around every corner. The Lighthouse is a prime example; so is this year’s Arthurian adaptation The Green Knight. The latest, a Shakespearean tale rendered in stark black and white (harking back to German expressionism in all its high contrast and sharp edges), stars Denzel Washington as the titular army general and Frances McDormand as his hand-washing wife. Director Joel Coen – striking out on his own from his regular collaborator brother Ethan – crafts a Macbeth that is noirish and austere, stripping back the source material to its barest, eeriest bones. The Tragedy of Macbeth is in cinemas Boxing Day The Matrix Resurrections A lot has changed has changed in the past two decades: house prices, the surveillance state, the connotations of the word redpilled. What hasn’t changed, apparently, is Keanu Reeves, who still looks shmick as ever – with rubber ducky in tow – in the trailer for The Matrix Resurrections, the long-awaited follow-up to the Wachowskis’ groundbreaking cyberpunk trilogy. This time round, Neo is back to his original identity as some dude named Thomas, and seeing … a therapist? Who prescribes him … blue pills?? To stop his visions of … The Matrix??? It’s all appropriately hammed up, and it’s filled with old favourites: Reeves (of course), Carrie-Anne Moss (reprising her role as Trinity), and giant trench coats and tiny sunglasses galore. The Matrix Resurrections is in cinemas Boxing Day Clifford the Big Red Dog Godzilla, Kong, Clifford: all the classic kaiju of cinema history will have graced our screens by year’s end. And what he lacks in fire-breathing frenzy or chest-thumping macho, Clifford makes up for in colour alone – an over-dyed tomato shade that turns the family-friendly pooch into a horrifying sight all the same. Towering over the wayward passersby and unassuming citizens of New York, this 25-foot beast licks, growls and otherwise terrorises his way through Manhattan, while also facilitating a somewhat wholesome coming-of-age story on the side as his school-age human companion defends him against crowds of detractors. Clifford is not quality cinema, but he is big – and that in itself is something to behold. Clifford the Big Red Dog is in cinemas 30 DecemberFor food and produce enthusiasts, a good independent grocer is probably one of the easiest ways to induce a sense of wide-eyed wonder. Shelves upon shelves of novel ingredients; the arresting perfume and colour of fresh fruit displays; more varieties of salumi, or seaweed, or kimchi, or artisanal crackers than you ever imagined possible. The most beloved indie grocers inspire passionate devotion in their customers, and for good reason – giant chain supermarkets are seldom able to accommodate individual requests, source or stock specialised ingredients or give customers tailored advice in the way that independent shops can. In Brisbane, the Standard Market Company’s three locations are well-loved, particularly the quality and variety of their in-house bakeries and delis, while in Greenslopes, besides the fresh produce, Rock ‘N’ Roll Marketplace earns its name with a Wurlitzer jukebox. The Re Store in Perth has a family history stretching back well over a century; its two locations, in Leederville and Northbridge, offer customers cheese and smallgoods cut to order, antipasto platters and fresh pasta on top of their grocery range. Tasmania’s Hill Street Grocer has a number of locations across the state; the company makes a point of sourcing as much of their produce as possible from Tasmanian suppliers, including game meats from Bruny Island. In Adelaide, Hanson Road’s Dai Phat Oriental Grocery comprises butchery, grocery and homewares sections; the butcher offers an impressive assortment of Vietnamese meats and meat products. More centrally, Little Tokyo stands out for its sake and handmade glass sakeware selections. With a “wall of prosciutto” and whole wheels of Parmigiano Reggiano, Melbourne’s Boccaccio Supa IGA is a culinary institution; it’s also home to Boccaccio Cellars, arguably its main drawcard – though the breadth of the deli’s offerings, including items such as cheese-stuffed figs, is surely up there too. A few minutes out from Darwin, NT Oriental Emporium is also something of an icon for the region. Its product range reflects the Northern Territory’s varied cultural and culinary landscape, with an expansive spice section, curry and laksa pastes, boba ice-creams and traditional Chinese medicines. If you’re looking to get lost in a multi-storey Korean wonderland, head to Komart in the Sydney suburb of North Strathfield. Marinated meats, an extensive array of liquor, a huge frozen section and even takeaway Korean fast food make the trip well worth your while. Ziggy’s Fresh in the Australian Capital Territory boasts fresh-cut flowers and champions seasonal produce, sharing recipes on their website; located in Fyshwick, the greengrocer is Canberra’s oldest. We want to know about your favourite indie supermarkets. Which one stocks that particular item that you can’t find anywhere else? Have you found a place that will go the extra mile to order things in just for you? Or perhaps it’s your grocer’s ethos and curatorial approach that has made you a returning customer. Tell us about the specialty shops and grocers that top your list either in the form above or the comments below.Vegan barbecue is still an oxymoron for many, but as greater numbers of Australians turn to flexitarian diets, if not fully vegetarian or vegan, the meatless summer barbie is upon us. I’ll admit, the idea of barbecue without a prime cut, or even a simple snag, is a compromise I’ve not yet made. But I love veggies, their versatility, how you can transform them with fire and coals, and I’ve increasingly favoured them as a predominant element of dishes, so now feels like the time to make the change to meatless, if only some of the time. Kit-wise, when doing a vegetarian barbecue, you may want to consider a model that has both a flat plate and a grill – it’ll make it easier to cook both faux meat and raw veggies. Tofu, meet marinade Suzy Spoon started her Vegetarian Butcher back in 2012, first as a stall at Sydney’s Marrickville markets, before making a bricks-and-mortar commitment of a shopfront in nearby Newtown. Spoon says there are many great brands of sausages and burger patties and different seitan and gluten-based products that you can “jazz up”, but getting started with a meatless barbecue is as simple as a pack of tofu and a good marinade. Slicing up your tofu a couple of centimetres or so thick and putting it on paper towel allows you to push out some of the water, then when you put it in the marinade, the tofu soaks it up. “You know, like that old Colgate ad: like liquid into the chalk,” laughs Spoon. For the time poor, it could be a case of a quick dip for the tofu and straight onto the grill, but longer is always better when it comes to a marinade. Spoon’s easy take is as simple as a measure of olive oil to a measure of soy sauce in a jar, shaken well into an emulsion. You could add a little bit of Dijon mustard, she says, using the marinade on tofu, mushrooms, eggplant or cauliflower. Picking your veggies You may grill asparagus, cauliflowers and the like whole, but skewers are a good way to prep in advance. At standing events, things on sticks are always a good move. Load them with veggies and then marinate them on the skewer. There’s a category of veg that we could term underrated or unexpected when it comes to the barbecue. If I say leeks, you may think tarts or soups, but barbecued they’re charred and crisp on the outer skin, smokey throughout and deliciously sweet and soft at their core. I’d also add the likes of baby cos lettuce and brussels sprouts to that list. The magic of mushrooms shouldn’t be forgotten, often used in vegan products to mimic “meatiness”. The portobello in its natural form was a faithful burger substitute for decades before the likes of the Impossible Burger hit our consciousness. Cooking faux meat Not all meatless products are created equally. Spoon’s products – available throughout Australia – are made with beans or legumes, like a polenta sausage made with yellow split pea and polenta, flavoured with sun-dried tomato and basil. “You don’t need to be vegan or vegetarian to eat that,” Spoon says. “You just need to like nice food. It’s a great sausage for flexitarians that just want to have something that’s not a piece of meat at their barbecue.” Alejandro Cancino was executive chef of Brisbane’s three-hatted Urbane restaurant before he founded Fenn Foods, the makers of Veef products. “We want to mimic meat,” he says. “Our pulled products are made with shiitake mushrooms, and the burger is made with soy and Australian pea protein.” While the product may mimic in look and taste, there are differences that should be considered, says Cancino, to get the best result from a plant-based patty or sausage. Eat it while hot, he says, as the texture changes as it cools. Further, plant-based meat products, compared with real meat patties and sausages, have a lesser fat content, meaning they release less oil, he says. So when you put them on the barbecue they tend to stick, and sausages may tear. Brushing them with a little oil will avoid that sticking. Get creative Finally, I’d implore home cooks to experiment. We’ve all got fridges, cupboards and pantries crammed with oils, condiments, herbs and spices that sit waiting for the recipe that never comes. It’s hardly technical advice, but have a play, and marinate to your own palate. If you taste as you go, it’s unlikely to be a disaster.Seth Meyers Seth Meyers tore into Fox News hosts on Wednesday evening for frantic text messages to White House chief of staff Mark Meadows during the 6 January attack on the Capitol. As revealed by the House select committee investigating the insurrection on Monday, hosts Laura Ingraham, Brian Kilmeade, and Sean Hannity each pleaded with Meadows to get Donald Trump to stop the attack – concern at odds with their public support of the riot. “Mark, the President needs to tell the people in the Capitol to go home,” Ingraham texted to Meadows. “This is hurting all of us. He is destroying his legacy.” “Please, get him on TV, destroying everything you have accomplished,” wrote Brian Kilmeade. “Were you all really shocked that people were violently storming the Capitol?” Meyers wondered. “You’re the ones who told them the election was stolen.” “The two-step these guys tried to pull off by telling their viewers there was fraud, then claiming we had to investigate that made-up fraud because their viewers believe there was fraud is honestly insulting to everyone’s intelligence,” he added. “That’s the logic of parents who tell their kids there’s a monster under their bed who will come out at night and eat them if they don’t brush their teeth, then complain that their children don’t want to go to bed.” “These people all knew how dangerous this situation was,” he continued, and their attempts to minimize, downplay, or dismiss the attack in the months since called to mind what Meyers called “the Constanza test”. To quote Seinfeld’s George Constanza: “It’s not a lie if you believe it.” “But they didn’t believe it,” Meyers said. “Their texts show they were lying and they knew they were lying.” Stephen Colbert “The more we learn about the insurrection on January 6th, the more it becomes clear that we have two political parties in this country: you have the Democratic party, and the anti-democratic party,” said Stephen Colbert on Wednesday. “Because only one of these parties cares whether you get a vote in an election.” The Late Show host pointed to the House vote this week to hold Meadows in criminal contempt of Congress after he reneged on a pledge to help the investigation into the attack. Only two Republicans voted in favor; “every other Republican, every other one, doesn’t want you to know what happened on January 6th,” said Colbert. “The Republican caucus is an accessory to this coup,” he added, with more evidence in the form of the text messages sent to Meadows. The day after the siege, for example, one unnamed Republican lawmaker texted: “Yesterday was a terrible day … We tried everything we could in our objection to the six states. I’m sorry nothing worked.” “Oh, so he regrets not being able to drown Lady Liberty in a bathtub,” Colbert remarked. “It’s like sending a sympathy card that says ‘my deepest condolences – that you lived. I was rooting for the tumor!’” Trevor Noah On the Daily Show, Trevor Noah took stock of pro sports leagues troubled by the Omicron variant. Since Monday, 65 NFL players have tested positive for Covid-19 (as of Wednesday night), the NHL postponed its ninth game, and the NBA’s Los Angeles Lakers cancelled a practice session. “You remember what happened last time, right?” Noah said. “One week we were all like, ‘huh, lots of NBA players getting Covid. And then the next week, we were all at home showering with our Amazon packages.” “There are so many [NBA] players who have Covid, that I actually feel bad for all the players who don’t have it,” he added. “That’s one hell of a way to find out that everyone on the team was hanging out without you.” But this could work out well for the fans, he joked, “because you know how deep down inside, when you’re at a game, you always hope secretly that the coaches are going to look up in the stands and be like, ‘hey, we need you to help us win this game?’” “Well now, everyone is so short on players that might actually happen.” Samantha Bee And on Full Frontal, Samantha Bee ripped Mark Meadows for refusing to help Congress with its investigation into the events of 6 January, even after providing the House committee with 9,000 pages of records. The materials included texts and emails encouraging investigations into voter fraud – “a phrase that’s basically the Republican safe-word”, Bee joked – and an unhinged PowerPoint presentation that outlined strategies for overturning the election. The 36-page presentation also included conspiracy theories that China and Venezuela had seized control over US voting infrastructure. “In other words, the kind of emails that shouldn’t even make it past a Gmail spam filter, let alone to the chief of staff,” Bee said. Meadows’s lawyer claimed he received the PowerPoint by email but did nothing with it, “which is the world war III version of claiming you ‘just didn’t see’ that invite to your in-laws’ third baby shower,” Bee said. “And while it’s nice that Meadows likely didn’t pass it on to the president, it’s still terrifying that Trump supporters were able to soft pitch a coup with a Microsoft Office document,” she added. “PowerPoint shouldn’t be the cause of America’s downfall! That’s the responsibility of Facetune.”Until a few days ago, I had a diary rammed with first nights. This week was non-stop theatre every night: a sprint finish to the festive down-tooling. Wednesday evening was supposed to be the press night for Hex, Rufus Norris’s musical retelling of Sleeping Beauty at the National Theatre. And then it wasn’t, due to Covid. Other official opening nights fell in what seemed like a horrible game of skittles, from Moulin Rouge to Force Majeure – some of the most hyped shows of the year. Suddenly, my sprint became a crawl. Then a glimmer of hope on Wednesday afternoon with a phone call from the Almeida theatre. Did I want to come to see their musical revival of Spring Awakening – based on Frank Wedekind’s 1891 play – two nights before press night? You know, just in case …? Everyone in the production had tested negative that day, explained the press officer, and it hit me then how the industry was once again forced to live by the day and the moment. I embraced the moment too, of course. A friend I was supposed to meet for dinner said she didn’t feel safe sitting in an auditorium that wasn’t socially distanced. Her words worried me enough to run to my nearest walk-in centre, which was operating with such military efficiency that I was boosted less than 30 minutes later and felt immediately safer, if only in spirit for now. I was pleased but also surprised to see the auditorium so full. I had received an email hours earlier with a reminder to wear a mask and take a lateral flow test. Stewards asked us to keep our masks on, in a very different tone to what I’d come to expect across venues. This was a polite but strenuous order and everyone, as far as I could see, obeyed. Alongside the undertow of a vague anxiety – perhaps nervousness mixed with a gritty resolve to keep congregating in this way – there was palpable relief as the doors shut and the lights dipped. All of us, with barely an empty seat between us, had made it in, just before the prospect of a more dreadful impending darkness across the industry. If this was the end of days – so soon? All over again? – we were going down to song and dance.It was with regret, Buckingham Palace announced, that the Queen was cancelling her annual pre-Christmas bash at Sandringham. Apparently she didn’t want to ruin anyone else’s plans for the big day, a sentence so meekly un-regal I had to read it twice to check it was the right way round. But at least someone seemingly remembers how to lead from the front. Her government, meanwhile, appears to have chosen this particular moment to abdicate. Boris Johnson shimmied out of doing the dirty work at this week’s pandemic press conference, fervently insisting that even though Covid-19 cases are now thought to be doubling slightly faster than every two days – which suggests they could be up eightfold by Christmas – his government wasn’t cancelling parties or closing hospitality. Instead it was left to Professor Chris Whitty, a man notably unconstrained by fear of mutinous backbenchers or self-serving anxieties about byelections in North Shropshire, to advise the nation not to go out and see people in the run-up to Christmas unless they really had to. And so overnight, Britain plunged into the form of Covid purgatory that everyone in business dreads the most: not an official lockdown, but something that to all intents and purposes is going to feel like it, except without any of the guaranteed financial support. Phones will be ringing off the hook today in pubs and restaurants, theatres and gig venues, hairdressers and nail bars that were just gearing up for their busiest time of the year but will sadly now be dealing instead with panicking customers trying to cancel. The money is about to stop coming into businesses that were, in some cases, barely hanging on after a lousy two years of trading through a pandemic, and will have already spent a fortune buying in stock or booking acts ahead of what was meant to be a bumper Christmas. What happens next is a test of leadership not so much for Johnson – we probably all know the answer to that one by now – but for his palpably ambitious chancellor, Rishi Sunak. Sunak, who was in California for meetings with tech industry bosses when Whitty made his announcement, was due to call British hospitality businesses to “hear their concerns” on Thursday afternoon. But one suspects they’d rather hear his proposals for saving jobs, livelihoods and sanity in this fourth wave. The Treasury has had long enough to make contingency plans for the potential emergence of a new variant and business organisations were raising the alarm long before Whitty spoke up, aware that Omicron was spooking customers into cancelling their bookings. The arts sector has been sending up distress flares too, with a string of big West End shows shutting their doors due to Covid outbreaks among cast and crew, a financial disaster theatres can no longer insure themselves against and which is particularly tough on an industry where most staff are freelance. But the damage doesn’t end there. Anxious people will now finish their Christmas shopping online rather than on the high street, further punishing the train companies, cab drivers and coffee chains already hit by advice to work from home. Fashion retail is next: without a party to go to, who really needs a glittering new dress? Even gyms and the fitness industry, reliant on new year’s resolutions to drive members through its doors, now faces a bleak January. The already battered travel industry took its hit early when the return of quarantine and red lists frightened people off booking a holiday. In Scotland, where recent advice (not a legally binding rule) to limit socialising to three households came with a £100m package to support business, Nicola Sturgeon said openly that she knew it wasn’t enough, but that the devolved administrations can’t do more without help from Westminster. All are looking to Sunak, the man we’re told has long coveted the top job, to show he can act both decisively and presciently in a crisis. Bitter experience of the last three waves of Covid suggests it’s only a matter of time until the chancellor’s hand is forced. But when hospitality in particular makes so much of its annual profit in one tiny seasonal window, even a few days’ delay could make a difference for some. Nor is this the time for shortsighted scrimping and saving. Optimists may argue that this wave could turn out to be relatively short-lived, thanks to boosters, new treatments or something about the nature of Omicron itself –although Whitty explicitly cautioned against assuming it to be less severe than previous variants. But if so, frankly that’s all the more argument for temporary help to stop people going under. Why bear the awful human and economic scars for years to come of businesses going to the wall, for want of a few weeks’ emergency cash? The real magic of furlough has always been the long-term savings it offers, keeping people attached to jobs that could still be viable when the shadow of Covid lifts and giving consumers the confidence to keep spending on businesses that can still trade. But it should also be backed up with support for employees who will now need to shield, generous sick pay arrangements to encourage infected people to isolate, and forbearance on loans that some businesses are still trying to pay off from the last wave. Labour will obviously lead the charge for Sunak to act – the shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, was demanding to know where the business support package was within minutes of Wednesday’s press conference finishing – but since many Tory MPs don’t want small businesses in their constituencies going bust either, the chancellor would be wise to expect cross-party pressure for a bailout. Lockdown sceptics itching to blame the longsuffering Whitty for precipitating a crisis should meanwhile recognise that people aren’t stupid; we will instinctively desert crowded places at the height of a raging pandemic, without necessarily waiting to be told. This moment was always coming, once Omicron got a grip, and the only question now is who bears the economic brunt of it. It would be a false economy for the chancellor to hold back for a full lockdown when that may now be closer than anyone likes to think. If Whitty’s evident worst fears are confirmed, and the new variant turns out to be both gallopingly contagious and not significantly milder than Delta, the NHS could be overwhelmed frighteningly fast by a combination of surging cases and surging numbers of staff off sick or isolating. No prime minister could simply sit on his hands at that obviously terrifying point. But equally, no chancellor will be forgiven for doing so now. Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnistBoris and Carrie Johnson have announced the name of their daughter, Romy Iris Charlotte Johnson. Carrie Johnson, posting on Instagram, said Romy was picked after her aunt Rosemary, Iris after the Greek word for rainbow, and Charlotte after the prime minister’s late mother. She has previously described her daughter as a “rainbow baby”: a term to describe a child born after a miscarriage. The 33-year-old has spoken of having a miscarriage earlier in the year. The prime minister revealed the first name of his seventh – or possibly eighth – child to reporters while on a visit to a Covid vaccination centre in Kent. The couple announced Romy’s birth on 9 December. She is the second child of the prime minister with his third wife, following the birth of their son, Wilfred, in April 2020. Johnson, 57, has four children with his former wife, the barrister Marina Wheeler, and one – Stephanie – with the art consultant Helen Macintyre, with whom he had an affair while he was mayor of London in 2009. The prime minister had previously denied being Stephanie’s father but in 2013 the court of appeal ruled it was in the public interest for the details of his extramarital affair to be known. In an interview with NBC in September last year, Johnson said he had six children. But during the 2013 court ruling, the three judges suggested there may be a second child from an extramarital affair, making eight children in total. No details are known about the alleged second child. The prime minister did not take an extended period of leave after Romy’s birth as he battles a string of political scandals as well as the spread of the Omicron Covid variant.Tens of thousands of former Islamic State members held in detention in north-east Syria need to be put on trial or repatriated and deradicalised, a security thinktank has said. Researchers at the Royal United Services Institute (Rusi) argue that the current situation, in which 30,000 adults and 40,000 children from more than 60 countries are being held in camps and jails by Syrian Kurdish forces, cannot endure and requires a new global taskforce to resolve. “The current international response is one of containment, but this is not sustainable,” write Sabin Khan and Imogen Parsons. “As well as denying justice to those who have suffered abuses, there is a growing security threat,” they say, because local forces cannot “securely hold these people indefinitely”. They propose creating a “hybrid court”, ideally based in the region – a half national, half international approach used in East Timor, Kosovo and Cambodia – to try those accused of participating in terrorist atrocities. Those found guilty should serve prison sentences “in their country of origin”. Children should be assessed and prioritised “for repatriation and support” in their countries of origin, where possible with their families, as part of a wider process led by a specially created UN- or Global Counterterrorism Forum-led taskforce. The report has been endorsed by Sir Mark Rowley, formerly Britain’s leading counter-terrorism police officer, who argued that many of those held needed to be put on trial “to remove the sense of impunity for atrocities” and “incarcerate many of those who threaten future security”. An estimated 70,000 IS followers have been held by the Syrian Kurds in jails and camps since the defeat of the former caliphate in 2019, including 2,000 fighters from outside Syria and Iraq as well as 27,500 foreign children. They include about 1,000 men, women and children who came over from the UK and EU, the best known of whom is Shamima Begum, who fled east London to join IS aged 15 in 2015 and had three children, who all died, before she was captured. Begum, who is trying to get her British citizenship reinstated, said in a TV interview in September that she was willing to stand trial in the UK and face down allegations that she was engaged in terrorist acts. “I know I did nothing in IS but be a mother and a wife,” Begum said. Most countries, including Britain, France and other European nations, have refused to allow the repatriation of the vast majority of former IS fighters and followers, believing it is more popular politically to let them remain in Syria. The report authors argue the deadlock needs to be broken. “Failure to act would not only be a repeat of the mistakes made prior to 9/11 and subsequent terrorist attacks, but there would be generational consequences for global peace, security and prosperity,” Khan and Parsons write. It is not known exactly how many people originating from Britain are held in Syria. Many, like Begum, have had their citizenship removed. It is estimated that 15 women and 35 children from the UK are held in either al-Roj or the larger al-Hawl camp. Others endorsing the report include the crossbench peer Alex Carlile, a former independent reviewer of terrorism legislation, who said “concerted international, multilateral action is the correct way to empty the holding camps”. Another backer, Suzanne Raine, a former head of the UK’s Joint Terrorism Analysis Centre, said: “A stalemate which includes impunity for perpetrators should be unacceptable.”In the presence of so much handwritten material by the Brontës, Austen, Scott and Burns, you find yourself imagining that the authors have just popped out of the room. “Manuscripts,” says Prof Kathryn Sutherland, as she leafs through an exercise book filled by Emily Brontë with poems, “are sticky with their writers’ presence.” It is partly the extraordinary condition of the material that creates this impression of closeness . The Honresfield library, now saved for the nation, was amassed by a Rochdale mill owner, William Law, at the end of the 19th century and the items have been kept pristine (and almost inaccessible) by his family ever since. The characters of the authors leap out of the ink, the paper. Here are two letters to her sister, Cassandra, by Jane Austen, written almost two decades apart. The first – in which she states “that the tears flow as I write the melancholy idea” that she will never dance with her beau, Tom Lefroy, again – was written when she was just 20. In this, the first surviving letter of hers, the handwriting is neat, she fills out the page to the end (no paper wasted) and each line is spaced precisely, as if for efficient comprehension. By the age of 38, when she is writing about the reception of “P&amp;P” as she refers to her most famous novel, the hand is more compressed, tighter, less youthful. Her signature has been snipped out of this letter – lost to an early autograph hunter. The manuscript of Sir Walter Scott’s novel Rob Roy explains and exemplifies, in a mere glance, the author’s productivity. Words fly across the page, seemingly written in immense bouts of non-stop work, in a fluent legal hand – a style of cursive he had learned while training as a young man in the legal profession, designed to allow you to write as fast as possible. This was the first and only draft. There are almost no corrections, just the occasional word or sentence mildly revised. Robert Burns’s youthful commonplace book, by contrast – filled with early poems, self-critiques and philosophical observations when he was aged between 23 and 25 – is boldly written in a flamboyant hand, the ascenders of his Ds twisting around themselves in great, curlicued flourishes, “full of a sense of flair and confidence,” says Sutherland. The tiny storybooks made by Charlotte Brontë to narrate the adventures of her toy-soldier hero Lord Charles Wellesley are, needless to say, spellbinding. The miniature pages are hand-folded, and one can see how they were cut to size by scissors held in small hands. The covers were made from paper packaging from the local pharmacy, stamped clearly with: “Purified Epsom Salts, sold by J West, chemist and druggist, Keighley” – the Yorkshire town being about four miles from Haworth village, where the Brontës lived. Among the other Brontë items is a “diary paper” written by Emily on her 23rd birthday, 30 July 1841, “to be opened when Anne is 25 years old or my next birthday if all be well”. It begins: “It is Friday evening – near 9 o’clock – wild rainy weather.” In the top left-hand corner of the paper she has sketched herself sitting writing at her desk; in the top righthand corner she’s drawn herself looking out of the window at that wild weather. With a few strokes of her nib, the characterful images bring us into the room with her. An exercise book full of fair copies of 31 of her poems retains the habit of tiny writing, and there is a brilliant page where, at the end of her poem that begins: “How beauteous the Earth is still / To thee – how full of happiness,” her sister Charlotte has added, firmly: “Never was better stuff penned.” In the presence of this triumphant sisterly certainty, who would want to argue?The biggest album launch of 2021 began with a social media statement tacitly assuring fans that nothing had changed. Adele was once more in a state of heartbreak – “a maze of absolute mess and inner turmoil … consumed by my own grief” – and that the contents of her album 30 would reflect that, as mired in romantic misery as its predecessors, 25 and 21. It was the musical equivalent, she said, of a friend who comes over “with a bottle of wine and a takeaway” to discuss the disastrous state of your love life. The second-biggest album launch of 2021 was preceded by its creators proudly announcing they had written it “absolutely trend-blind”. Abba had traversed a considerable musical distance over the course of their original career, buffeted by the shifting musical trends of the 70s and early 80s – from the clompy Europop of their debut album to the sophisticated, chilly electronics of The Visitors, by way of glam and sleek disco – but Voyage would offer them preserved in amber, exactly as they were in the late 70s, unspoiled by any musical trends from the 40 years since their split. Elsewhere, Ed Sheeran’s fourth solo album = was not built to startle fans or cause detractors to reconsider their position – whatever you already thought of him, positive or negative, you could find evidence to support your view – and Lana Del Rey released not one but two albums that, like every Lana Del Rey album, consisted of variations on the same theme. More morose, glacial ballads, more ne’er-do-well boyfriends who “never give nothing back”, more ruminations on the dark side of fame, more musical evidence of her love of Mazzy Star, more lyrical assurances that its author is a bad girl. You could construct an argument that she has honed her aesthetic over the last decade, but she’s certainly not dramatically overhauled it. And then there was Drake’s Certified Lover Boy, as one critic put it, “an 86-minute omnibus of all things Drake”. The listener confronted with its stew of self-pity, braggadocio, passive-aggression and solipsism could have complained that we had been here before, many times, over the course of Drake’s career, but there didn’t seem to be many dissatisfied customers: the album broke first-day streaming records on both Apple Music and Spotify. There was a time when artists who wilfully repeated themselves were the subject of mockery – think of all the jokes aimed Status Quo’s way in the late 70s and 80s, and the snarky comparisons to Status Quo lobbed at Oasis once Britpop’s shine wore off – or when continually doing the same thing was a sure-fire way to truncate your career. You didn’t have to be David Bowie or Prince, constantly reinventing yourself in such dramatic style that you were bound to shed at least a few puzzled fans along the way, but if you simply dealt in more of the same, audiences would realise your limitations had been reached and move on to something else. In 2021, however, it frequently felt as if the best way to maintain one’s place at the pinnacle of pop was by doing exactly what audiences expected them to. Certainly, one of the factors in the relatively muted response to another of 2021’s hotly anticipated albums, Billie Eilish’s Happier Than Ever, seemed to be that it shifted from the blueprint established on its predecessors: the hoodie-clad teenage goth who made them replaced by a blonde vamp posing for Vogue in an Alexander McQueen corset; the trap-influenced bangers that had populated 2019’s multi-platinum When We All Fall Asleep Where Do We Go? were now mostly absent. Moreover, you got the feeling that Eilish had done it deliberately, keen to calm down the hysteria that, judging by the album’s lyrics, had made her life a misery. She had realised that, in the current climate, just altering her approach slightly – it was hardly a completely confounding, who-is-this? reinvention – would do the trick. Meanwhile, Lorde’s also highly anticipated third album Solar Power – another retreat from stardom and angst, this time into benign sun-worshipping pop and homespun wisdom – sank without trace. Why has the predictable become a preference? One theory is that it’s linked to the turbulence of modern times. In a year that began with the storming of the Capitol and ended with the Omicron variant, the wider world provided more than enough shocks: perhaps what people want from pop music is reassurance and comfort rather than startling novelty. Another is that it has something to do with the oft-mentioned desire for a kind of putative “authenticity” in pop music. We are always hearing about how important it is for 21st-century artists to appear #relatable, something that is certainly central to the success of Adele andSheeran, as well as Drake’s whole I’m-a-multi-millionaire-playa-but-I’m-sad-too shtick and Lana Del Rey’s dogged, angry insistence that she is not inhabiting a Ziggy Stardust-ish character, but writing about herself. How #relatable can an artist be if they keep changing all the time, if the music you #related to suddenly becomes different? Or perhaps it has more to do with the shifts in the way we consume music. Before the internet, pop existed in a relatively small, heavily curated space, bounded by radio, whatever TV shows featured it and the music press: comparatively few artists broke into it, so audiences expected those that did to keep things fresh by regularly altering their approach. Now the opposite is true. We live in a madly diverse, globalised media climate. The sheer availability and abundance of music is overwhelming: 60,000 new tracks are added to Spotify alone every day, and the number of sources from which we can access music at the touch of a button (TikTok, Bandcamp) is constantly expanding. The stylistic and generic boundaries and striking, short-circuiting shifts in taste that once informed pop music’s progress – the rise of punk, or electronic pop, the dramatic flowering of hip-hop, the arrival of acid house – increasingly seem like a thing of the past. The chaotic recombinations of hyperpop or the thrilling propulsion of drill show that there is still innovation at pop’s fringes. But in a crowded, confusing market, in which music fans act as their own curators, cherrypicking from a vast variety of sources, it is more important than it once was for big artists to maintain an immediately recognisable sonic brand. If that is the case, then this isn’t a trend or an example of failing inspiration – it’s the way things are, and are likely to stay. If you want to get to the top of pop, you will have minimal room for manoeuvre if you want to stay there.Britain’s already flagging recovery has been dealt a fresh blow by the arrival of the Omicron Covid variant and is in its weakest state since the country was in full lockdown last winter, a report has shown. Adding to pressure on the government to come to the aid of sectors especially hard hit by the pandemic, the monthly flash estimate of activity highlighted the economic damage caused by the new variant in December. A tightening of restrictions under the government’s “plan B” and a more cautious approach by consumers combined to push the economy close to stalling, with the service sector particularly affected. The closely watched report compiled by IHS Markit and the Chartered Institute of Procurement &amp; Supply (Cips) provided an early guide to how the economy has been performing in recent weeks, and added to concerns that the UK faces a period of weak growth and rising inflation. The release of the December composite purchasing managers’ index (PMI) came shortly before the Bank of England stunned the financial markets by raising interest rates for the first time in more than three years. Despite acknowledging the risks posed by Omicron, the Bank’s nine-member monetary policy committee decided it could not ignore inflation of more than 5% and raised the official cost of borrowing from 0.1% to 0.25%. Britain’s economy rebounded rapidly in the spring and early summer from last winter’s lockdown but the pace of recovery has slowed in recent months, and in October – the last month for which official growth figures are available – it expanded by just 0.1%. According to IHS Markit/Cips, the measure for economic output on the PMI fell from 57.6 in November to 53.2 in December. A figure above 50 suggests the economy is growing rather than contracting. There was a slight pickup in manufacturing, where inflationary pressure abated, only partly compensating for the damage caused to the service sector by Omicron. Adam Hoyes, a UK economist at Capital Economics, said: “The fall in the composite PMI in December doesn’t come as much of a surprise given the recent rise in cases of the Omicron variant … But it was much bigger than expected, and shows that caution among businesses and consumers is starting to weigh on activity, particularly in the services sector.” Separate figures from the Office for National Statistics also showed a slowdown in activity under way, with an increasing number of businesses pessimistic about being able to survive the winter. In its weekly digest of the latest available information, the ONS said there had been a fall in credit and debit card usage, a small decline in high street footfall and a drop in the number of seated diners in restaurants to the lowest level since lockdown restrictions were first eased in May. Meanwhile, 7% of businesses said they had low or no confidence that they would be able to stay open in the next three months, up from 4% in October. The ONS said because the government’s plan B restrictions only came into force on Monday, they would have had only a limited impact on the latest week’s figures. Chris Williamson, the chief business economist at IHS Markit, said: “With Covid-19 infections set to rise further in coming weeks due to the spread of the Omicron variant, and more restrictions being introduced, the pace of economic growth looks likely to continue to weaken as we head into 2022. “The bigger uncertainty will be on how rising infection rates both at home and abroad might cause further supply and labour shortages, and whether this means the easing of inflationary pressures seen in December proves frustratingly short-lived.”Some obituary notices open with the grand achievements of a life well-lived, or the tender details of a person’s passing with loved ones at their side. The death in El Paso, Texas, of Renay Mandel Corren, however, was marked in somewhat more unorthodox fashion. “The bawdy, fertile, redheaded matriarch of a sprawling Jewish-Mexican-Redneck American family has kicked it,” it read. According to the family’s obituary published in the Fayetteville Observer, Corren, who died on Saturday at the age of 84, will be mourned “in the many glamorous locales she went bankrupt”. They include her birthplace of McKeesport, Pennsylvania, “where she first fell in love with ham, and atheism”; Kill Devil Hills, North Carolina, “where Renay’s dreams, credit rating and marriage are all buried”; and Miami, Florida, “where Renay’s parents, uncles, aunts, and eternal hopes of all Miami Dolphins fans everywhere, are all buried pretty deep”. The remarkable – and hilarious – 1,000-word obituary was written by Corren’s son Andy, and quickly went viral after it was published on Wednesday. The tribute to a mother known fondly to her family as “Rosie” is a partly tongue-in-cheek account of a long and eventful life, liberally sprinkled with anecdotes and encounters, some of which Mr Corren admits might not even be true. But the banter represents a loving tribute to a lady they still can’t quite believe has actually died. “Renay has been toying with death for decades, but always beating it and running off in her silver Chevy Nova,” the obituary states. “Covid couldn’t kill Renay. Neither could pneumonia twice, infections, blood clots, bad feet, breast cancer twice, two mastectomies, two recessions, multiple bankruptcies, marriage to a philandering Sergeant Major, divorce in the 70s, six kids, one cesarean, a few abortions from the Quietly Famous Abortionist of Spring Lake, NC or an affair with Larry King in the 60s.” It also lists her many talents: “She played cards like a shark, bowled and played cribbage like a pro, and laughed with the boys until the wee hours, long after the last pin dropped.” “Renay didn’t cook, she didn’t clean, and she was lousy with money, too. Here’s what Renay was great at: dyeing her red roots, weekly manicures, dirty jokes, pier fishing, rolling joints and buying dirty magazines.” She lived her final days “under the care, compassion, checking accounts and, evidently, unlimited patience of her favorite son and daughter-in-law, Michael and Lourdes Corren, of [the] world-famous cow sanctuary El Paso.” Among the numerous family members she leaves behind, including children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren, is her “favorite son”, namely “the gay one who writes catty obituaries in his spare time, Andy Corren, of – obviously – New York City.” The obituary concludes with details of a planned funeral service in May next year, “a very disrespectful and totally non-denominational memorial … most likely at a bowling alley in Fayetteville.” Meanwhile, Mr Corren says he and his five siblings have given up on receiving an inheritance. “The family requests absolutely zero privacy or propriety, none whatsoever, and in fact encourages you to spend some government money today on a one-armed bandit, at the blackjack table or on a cheap cruise to find our inheritance,” he writes. “For Larry King’s sake: LAUGH. Bye, Mommy. We loved you to bits.”Sainsbury’s and five other European supermarkets have announced they will stop selling some or all beef products originating in Brazil because of concerns over links to deforestation in the Amazon rainforest and other ecologically important areas. Sainsbury’s, along with Lidl Netherlands and others, took action after research into “cattle laundering” involving the meat conglomerate JBS. According to the news organisation Repórter Brasil, the company allegedly indirectly sourced cattle from illegally deforested areas. A series of investigations by the Guardian and the Bureau of Investigative Journalism (BIJ) in recent years exposed deforestation linked to the Brazilian beef trade and highlighted the issue of cattle laundering, which occurs when animals raised on an illegally deforested plot of land are moved to a farm clear of deforestation to be fattened ahead of being trucked to an abattoir for slaughter and processing. The true origin of the cattle is often hidden, and critics say the problem is widespread in Brazil and allows livestock from “dirty” farms linked to deforestation to be mixed with cattle from “clean” farms. In the latest research, Repórter Brasil, working with the campaign group Mighty Earth, tracked deforestation-linked beef – including beef jerky, corned beef and fresh meat – from Brazil to European supermarket shelves. In the case of Sainsbury’s, researchers found corned beef on sale that was processed at a JBS slaughterhouse in Lins, São Paulo. The abattoir had reportedly received supplies of cattle from a farm that sources animals for fattening from remote farms that have been officially sanctioned – and embargoed – for illegal deforestation in the Amazon rainforest. Embargos are imposed for environmental violations, such as farmers or landowners cutting down trees illegally, and serve both as a punishment and protective measure to allow land to recover. In a statement to the Guardian, a spokesperson for Sainsbury’s said: “The link between cattle farming and the destruction of ecosystems like the Amazon, the Cerrado, and the Pantanal is a complex issue, which we take extremely seriously. We have taken a range of steps together with our suppliers and the wider industry to try to address this, but not enough progress has been made. “We are therefore committed to move our own brand corned beef sourcing away from Brazil to ensure Sainsbury’s corned beef product can be independently verified deforestation and conversion free in origin.” JBS, which sources cattle from the Amazon for its massive global beef market, has annual revenues of $50bn (£37.5bn) and slaughters almost 35,000 cattle a day in Brazil alone. Its beef exports to mainland Europe have increased by a fifth in recent years despite the Amazon emergency. In response to the investigation by Repórter Brasil, JBS told the Guardian it had “no tolerance for illegal deforestation, forced labour, misuse of indigenous lands, conservation units or violations of environmental embargos.” The company pointed out it had blocked more than 14,000 supplier farms “for failure to comply with our policies and standards and we will continue to take additional actions as warranted”. It said it had also invested in a new blockchain-enabled system, which would allow monitoring of indirect suppliers and “achieve a completely illegal deforestation-free supply chain by 2025”. JBS claims to have checked the suppliers mentioned by Repórter Brasil and found them to be in compliance with JBS procurement policies. In 2020, the Guardian, the BIJ and Repórter Brasil – for the first time – uncovered how JBS’s own trucks appeared to have transported cattle from a “dirty” ranch fined for deforestation to a supposedly “clean” ranch that in turn supplied JBS abattoirs. The BIJ also obtained livestock movement records which revealed that thousands of cattle had been trucked on the same route. JBS disputed the findings. But the revelations directly contradicted the company’s claims that it was unable to monitor the more distant parts of its beef supply chain. The company subsequently announced it would launch the “green platform”, which could monitor the whole supplier system, including the problematic “indirect supplier” Amazon farms it had not, up to that point, been able to monitor. The findings followed an earlier investigation that revealed the full extent of the UK’s involvement in deforestation in the Amazon. Nearly £1bn worth of beef supplied by JBS and other meat firms linked to deforestation had been directly imported to the UK in recent years, it was discovered. The Amazon is a crucial buffer in stabilising the regional and global climate. Preserving the world’s rainforests, many experts say, is essential if a climate emergency is to be averted. Yet between 1980 and 2005, deforestation levels reached 20,000 sq km a year. And international demand for beef is directly driving the problem: about 5,800 sq km of forest – an area four times the size of Greater London – is being felled annually in the Amazon and other areas of Brazil to be converted into pasture for cattle farming. “This is a watershed moment because several huge supermarkets across Europe are saying an emphatic ‘No!’ to Brazilian beef over deforestation concerns,” said Mighty Earth’s Europe director, Nico Muzi. “This is not a vague commitment or a nice announcement that looks good in a press release. These are a series of concrete commercial actions taken by some of the biggest supermarkets in Europe to stop buying and selling beef from a company and a country that have made too many promises and have delivered too few results.” “Christmas has come early for the forests in the Amazon, the Brazilian Cerrado savannahs and the Pantanal wetlands,” said Muzi.This live blog is now closing. For further updates on the coronavirus situation in the UK and around the world, please follow the global coronavirus live blog. This is an interesting point to bear in mind, given the record-breaking numbers of infections the UK has seen in the last two days. Prof Susan Michie, of Sage and Independent Sage, points out that the true number of cases is likely considerably higher as many people are taking lateral flow tests as opposed to PCRs. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, will be returning early from his trip to California to hold more talks with business chiefs in response to the Omicron crisis on Friday. Sunak and his team held talks with a range of hospitality and business organisations on Thursday. Sunak said: We understand that this is a concerning time for businesses. Myself and my wider team met with business representatives earlier today, listened to their concerns and will continue to work with industry leaders over the coming days. To keep safeguarding our economic recovery and the lives and livelihoods of the British people our priority is now to make sure everyone has the opportunity to get boosted now. Here is a quick recap of some of the main developments from today so far: Boris Johnson joined No 10 staff for a party in Downing Street during the first lockdown in May last year, sources have alleged, raising questions about whether there was a culture of flouting the rules over a number of months. The prime minister spent about 15 minutes with staff at the alleged social gathering on 15 May 2020, telling one aide inside No 10 that they deserved a drink for “beating back” coronavirus, a joint investigation by the Guardian and Independent was told. Sources claimed about 20 staff drank wine and spirits and ate pizza following a press conference on that day, some in offices inside No 10 and others going into the garden. Some staff stayed drinking until late into the evening, they alleged. Rules at the time allowed only two people from different households to meet outside, at a distance of 2 metres. Story here. The UK registered a record-breaking number of daily Covid cases for the second day in a row. Another 88,376 infections and 146 deaths were reported. The R value for Omicron is between 3 and 5 in the UK, and the variant is spreading rapidly - doubling in size every two days - according to the UKHSA. Nicola Sturgeon urged Scots to “stay at home” as she warned that the new Omicron variant is “currently running faster than even the fastest rollout of vaccines”, and likely to be the dominant variant across Scotland by Friday. In a strongly worded statement ahead of first minister’s questions on Thursday, Scotland’s first minister told MSPs: “If we don’t act now, what we have feared all along but so far avoided, the overwhelming of the NHS, could happen.” Appealing directly to the public, she went on: “Please reduce your contact with people from households other than your own as much as you possibly can. Please stay at home much more than you normally would and as much as is feasible.” Story here. The rising wave of Omicron infections could lead to daily hospitalisations from Covid exceeding the peak of last winter when more than 4,500 people in the UK were admitted on a single day, England’s chief medical officer said. The staggering speed at which Omicron is spreading means large numbers of vulnerable people may need hospital care over a very short space of time, Prof Chris Whitty told MPs on Thursday, with daily admissions potentially peaking above that seen last winter at the start of the vaccine programme. Story here. The JCVI made pregnant women a priority group for vaccination following research showing that they are vulnerable to more serious illness and pregnancy complications if they are infected with Covid-19. Pregnant women would be moved into priority group 6, alongside adults under the age of 65 years who have long-term health conditions and urged pregnant women to get booster and primary doses as soon as possible. The decision was underpinned by research from the University of Oxford, showing that pregnant women and their babies were at particular risk if they became infected. The research found that 17 pregnant women died during the Delta wave of the pandemic – a 50% increase in maternal mortality compared with usual. It also found that of 1,436 pregnant women admitted to hospital during the Delta wave, 33% required respiratory support, around 2% had a stillbirth, 2% had pregnancy loss and around one in five had a pre-term birth. Story here. The Queen cancelled her traditional pre-Christmas family party for the second year running, agreeing that it would be irresponsible to go ahead, with a source suggesting the party could put too many people’s Christmas arrangements at risk. Story here. Scores of schools and colleges across the UK are closing early for Christmas, in defiance of No 10, while others are preparing for further disruption and possible closures next year due to Omicron. Story here. Boris Johnson denied imposing ‘lockdown by stealth’ and resisted calls for extra business support. After medical advisers told people on Wednesday to deprioritise unnecessary social contact ahead of Christmas, Johnson tried to play down any suggestion rules were being imposed, and instead said it was up to people to decide how much risk they wanted to take they may end up catching Covid and forced to isolate over Christmas. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, has held several meetings with business and hospitality chiefs today amid concerns over the impact of Covid messaging. Polyvalent vaccines to cope with a wide range of Covid variants could be ready within 18 months as well as new antiviral drugs which should do the “heavy lifting” for the NHS, Prof Chris Whitty said. But in the meantime, each six months will be better than the last, he added. Boris Johnson joined No 10 staff for a party in Downing Street during the first lockdown in May last year, sources have alleged, raising questions about whether there was a culture of flouting the rules over a number of months. The prime minister spent about 15 minutes with staff at the alleged social gathering on 15 May 2020, telling one aide inside No 10 that they deserved a drink for “beating back” coronavirus, a joint investigation by the Guardian and Independent was told. Sources claimed about 20 staff drank wine and spirits and ate pizza following a press conference on that day, some in offices inside No 10 and others going into the garden. Some staff stayed drinking until late into the evening, they alleged. Rules at the time allowed only two people from different households to meet outside, at a distance of 2 metres. Earlier that evening, Matt Hancock, then health secretary, had urged people to “stay at home as much as is possible” and asked them to “please stick with the rules, keep an eye on your family and don’t take risks” during the period of good weather. The claims follow a string of reports about similar alleged events in Downing Street and elsewhere during the subsequent lockdown last Christmas, and suggests rules might have been broken over a series of months. Read the full story from Peter Walker and Rowena Mason here: Boris Johnson joined No 10 party during May 2020 lockdown, say sources The UK has registered another 88,376 Covid cases and 146 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest data from the government’s coronavirus dashboard. That compares to a previous record high of 78,610 infections reported, as well as 165 fatalities, in the 24 hours prior. A total of 315,001 people tested positive for Covid in England at least once in the week to 8 December, up 8.7% on the previous week, according to the latest Test and Trace figures. This is the highest number to test positive since the week to 13 January. Here is Heather Stewart’s story about Downing Street slapping down a Conservative MP who warned against the UK becoming a “public health socialist state”, after Prof Chris Whitty suggested people cut down on pre-Christmas socialising. Covid case rates for London and eastern England have risen to their highest level since early January, new figures show. A total of 702.8 new cases per 100,000 people were recorded in London in the week to 12 December. This is up sharply from 475.8 the previous week and is the highest rate for the capital since the week to 10 January. The rise has been driven by the rapid spread of the Omicron variant, with some boroughs in London currently experiencing the steepest increase in rates of any local authorities in the UK. Omicron has already become the dominant variant of the virus in the capital, but is now having an impact in other parts of the country. Eastern England’s rate stands at 616.5 cases per 100,000, up week-on-week from 563.2 and the highest since the week to 10 January. North-west England has recorded a small week-on-week rise, up from 412.2 to 430.0. All other regions have recorded a slight fall, however. The figures, from the UK Health Security Agency, show rates are currently highest among five to nine-year-olds, at 1,021.4 cases per 100,000 - down slightly week-on-week from 1,086.3. Rates have also dropped among 10 to 19-year-olds, from 922.6 to 846.7. But they have risen sharply for 20 to 29-year-olds, up from 390.2 to 625.9, and for 30 to 39-year-olds, from 595.3 to 734.5. For people aged 80 and over the rate continues to be low, at 69.5, broadly unchanged from 69.3. The rate of Covid-19 hospital admissions in England stood at 7.1 per 100,000 people in the week to 12 December, up from 6.7 the previous week. Admission rates continue to be highest among people aged 85 and over, at 33.9 per 100,000 - down slightly from 35.5. Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary for England, has responded to calls to tackle the school staffing crisis by asking former teachers to sign up with supply agencies. In recent weeks school leaders have complained of difficulties finding cover for absent or sick teachers, with supply teachers hard to find because many themselves have been hit by Covid or are working for the government’s national tutoring programme. In an end-of-term letter to head teachers, Zahawi confirmed that the Department for Education was “looking at what steps and measures we can put in place to boost supply capacity”. He continued: We will work with sector leaders and supply agencies over the coming days to offer advice to ex-teachers who want to provide support to schools and colleges. We will help them to register with supply agencies as the best way to boost the temporary workforce available to the sector. Senior DfE officials have already begun to discuss this with key stakeholders. From now, you can support this effort by using your own professional and personal networks to encourage others to sign up to offer temporary help. Labour was quick to deride Zahawi’s downbeat announcement as “a sticking plaster” over a much larger problem. Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said he welcomed anything that might help overcome the staff shortages, but added: This is all coming very late in the day for a situation which is already critical and has been so for some time, and the initiative will need to be well publicised, promoted and supported in order to have any degree of success. It is also important to emphasise that even then it is very unlikely to be enough to solve a problem at such a scale as this. Unions are calling for immediate support for workers in the hospitality and entertainment industries amid warnings of a jobs “crisis”, PA Media reports. The Omicron variant has caused a growing number of theatres and live events to cancel performances, alongside reports of a downturn in bookings, with pubs and restaurants facing similar problems. Sharon Graham, leader of the Unite union, said: The government must bring forward a package of support for hospitality workers today. The uncertainty the prime minister is causing is devastating - workers don’t know if they will even have a job to go to next week. This is an appalling position to put people in. Hospitality workers did not cause this crisis and they should not be the ones who pay for it. They still have rent to find and bills to pay but are seeing their incomes disappear before their eyes. They need help now. Bectu, the theatre workers union, has written to the chancellor, urging him to provide urgent support for the industry to prevent a “jobs crisis”. Head of Bectu, Philippa Childs, said: We now face a New Year theatre crisis with a lack of leadership from government, a rising wave of Omicron cases and an anxious public. This started as a public health crisis but it could quickly become a jobs crisis as well. With the recent tightening of Covid restrictions, there has been little commentary on the significant impact these will have on self-employed workers working in theatres and live events. Bectu is concerned that self-employed workers again appear to be at the back of the queue when it comes to planning for any further financial disruption to our everyday lives. We need to give business stability and the support for the creative industries to be open and trading safely, but we must also contemplate what happens if the government imposes restrictions that actually or effectively closes them. Transport Salaried Staffs Association general secretary, Manuel Cortes, said: The government must bring back furlough to protect jobs at Eurostar and elsewhere as we suffer the effects of Omicron. Measures to tackle the virus, such as travel restrictions, must come with financial support for businesses, including our travel trade, to prevent thousands of job losses. Eurostar has already suffered from plummeting passenger numbers since the start of the pandemic, but as our only green link to Europe it must be a strategic priority for government to sustain the route. The government has refused to provide anything other than furlough support since the beginning of the pandemic. Mick Lynch, general secretary of the Rail, Maritime and Transport union, said: Eurostar has taken an absolute hammering financially since the pandemic hit. We are calling on the government to recognise the importance of Eurostar to the future of UK transport infrastructure and to meet in tripartite talks with ministers, the company and the unions to ensure a safety net is in place to prevent any risk of the operation tipping over. With the loss of revenues over Christmas and into the New Year, the situation at Eurostar is deadly serious and the government cannot be allowed to just wash their hands and walk away. Nicola Sturgeon has urged Scots to “stay at home” as she warned that the new Omicron variant is “currently running faster than even the fastest rollout of vaccines”, and likely to be the dominant variant across Scotland by Friday. In a strongly worded statement ahead of first minister’s questions on Thursday, Scotland’s first minister told MSPs: If we don’t act now, what we have feared all along but so far avoided, the overwhelming of the NHS, could happen. Appealing directly to the public, she went on: Please reduce your contact with people from households other than your own as much as you possibly can. Please stay at home much more than you normally would and as much as is feasible. Here is the full report: Nicola Sturgeon urges Scots to ‘stay at home’ to curb Omicron Thousands of hospitality firms across the UK could go bust by January because of a “fear campaign” and a lack of financial support following the surge in the Omicron variant, the boss of a leading pub chain has warned. Young’s chief executive, Patrick Dardis, said a surge in cancellations for Christmas bookings would be dire for the hospitality sector, which relies heavily on the holiday season for its earnings. He said the mixed messaging from government about risks and restrictions was leaving patrons “terribly confused” about whether to keep their bookings at a time when restaurants and pubs were already “hanging on by their fingernails”. While the prime minister, Boris Johnson, struck an upbeat note about the rollout of the booster programme, England’s chief medical officer, Prof Chris Whitty, sent a clear message on Wednesday that people should cut back on socialising in the runup to Christmas, despite a lack of formal restrictions on group gatherings. “Unfortunately, with the latest fear campaign that’s being run, it’s damaging so many businesses that could have possibly survived, and as a consequence, thousands and thousands of businesses will now collapse in January”, Dardis told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “There are a lot of individual owner-operators who’ve been running their businesses for years and have thrown the kitchen sink – people have lost their marriages, they’re losing their livelihoods, and this is the last straw. This is the bit that they were desperately clinging on to and it’s been taken away from them without any support from government,” he added. More on this story here: Thousands may go bust amid UK Omicron ‘fear campaign’, says pubs boss The Bank of England has unexpectedly raised interest rates for the first time since the start of the coronavirus pandemic despite growing concern over the Omicron variant. Threadneedle Street’s monetary policy committee (MPC) voted by a majority of eight to one to raise rates from the historic low of 0.1% to 0.25%, judging that pressure from surging inflation outweighed the risks to the economy from the new variant. Official figures showed inflation hit 5.1% in November amid soaring energy prices and global supply-chain bottlenecks, hitting a rate the Bank had not expected to be reached until spring. The MPC has an official inflation target of 2%. However, the rate rise comes amid a severe deterioration in the economic outlook with Omicron triggering a collapse in consumer confidence, leading to a wave of cancellations for hospitality businesses during the key festive trading period. Here is the full story: Bank of England raises interest rates to 0.25% And my colleague Graeme Wearden has live updates over on the business blog: The rising wave of Omicron infections could lead to daily hospitalisations from Covid exceeding the peak of last winter when more than 4,500 people in the UK were admitted on a single day, England’s chief medical officer has said. The staggering speed at which Omicron is spreading means large numbers of vulnerable people may need hospital care over a very short space of time, Prof Chris Whitty told MPs on Thursday, with daily admissions potentially peaking above that seen last winter at the start of the vaccine programme. The highest number of Covid hospitalisations in a day in the UK was 4,583 on 12 January, when the Alpha variant – first spotted in Kent – was dominant. Omicron is now the dominant variant in London and is expected to become the most common in England within days or weeks. “Even if it is milder, because it is concentrated over a short period of time you could end up with a higher number than that going into hospital on a single day. That is entirely possible,” Whitty told the health and social care committee. “The whole point about this is it’s going to be really concentrated in a very short period of time, very possibly.” More on this story here: Omicron could lead to record daily Covid hospitalisations, MPs told Pregnant women have been made a priority group for vaccination following research showing that they are vulnerable to more serious illness and pregnancy complications if they are infected with Covid-19. The vaccines watchdog, the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI), announced on Thursday that pregnant women would be moved into priority group 6, alongside adults under the age of 65 years who have long term health conditions and urged pregnant women to get booster and primary doses as soon as possible. However, maternal health experts, who have repeatedly called for pregnant women to be prioritised, questioned whether the move would make a material difference to the ability of pregnant women to access vaccines. The JCVI’s decision was underpinned by research from the University of Oxford, showing that pregnant women and their babies were at particular risk if they became infected. The research found that 17 pregnant women died during the Delta wave of the pandemic – a 50% increase in maternal mortality compared with usual. It also found that of 1436 pregnant women admitted to hospital during the Delta wave, 33% required respiratory support, around 2% had a stillbirth, 2% had pregnancy loss and around one in five had a preterm birth. Pregnant women are less likely than the general population to have been vaccinated. In August, when pregnant women had to wait until their age group became eligible, only 22% of women who gave birth in England had received a single dose, and 25% in Scotland and 18% in Wales. The proportion has increased since then, but are still disproportionately less likely to be vaccinated, with the lowest rates seen in those from black and ethnic minority groups. Professor Wei Shen Lim, chair of JCVI Covid-19 immunisation, said: There is no evidence to suggest that Covid-19 vaccines used in pregnancy increase the risk of miscarriage, stillbirths, congenital abnormalities or birth complications. Having a UK approved Covid-19 vaccine is safer than having Covid-19 itself. Women who are pregnant are strongly encouraged to have a first, second or booster vaccine dose as appropriate in order to better protect yourself and your baby from any serious consequences from Covid-19. Gayatri Amirthalingam, from the UK Health Security Agency, said: We know that the vaccines used in the UK Covid-19 vaccination programme have been highly effective in preventing serious complications and those recommended for pregnant women have a good safety record. I would urge all pregnant women to come forward and get their vaccine without delay. This is the best way to protect you and your baby. Here is my colleague Amelia Hill’s story on what is understood to have been a precautionary decision taken by the Queen to cancel her pre-Christmas family lunch at Windsor. She was expected to host 50 or so members of her extended family, including Prince Charles and Camilla. But on Thursday, the Queen agreed that it would be irresponsible to go ahead, with a source suggesting the party could put too many people’s Christmas arrangements at risk. Here is a summary of some of the main points from this afternoon’s lobby briefing with No 10: Downing Street denied the government was sending out mixed messages on social contacts following the emergence of the Omicron variant. On Wednesday, the chief medical officer for England, Prof Chris Whitty, urged people to cut back on social contacts to help curb the spread of the disease whereas Boris Johnson had previously said people did not need to cancel Christmas parties. The prime minister’s official spokesman said: Both the prime minister and the CMO were making the point that given the current infection rate, the prevalence of this variant, people should be cautious and think carefully before mixing with others. The prime minister was clear that this is a personal choice and people should do what is right for them. Family visits over Christmas will be down to “individual circumstances and judgment”, No 10 said. The spokesman said: I think the public recognise that those deemed to be clinically extremely vulnerable are most at risk and they would want to do everything possible, using the guidance we’ve put out available and the mitigation such as testing and vaccinations, to protect their loved ones at a time of high prevalence. But it will be down to individuals to decide what is right for them. No 10 said the government was not seeking to cancel things on the public’s behalf. The spokesman said: Hospitality remains open, businesses remain open to trade. We recognise that the prevalence of this variant and the high transmissibility is leading to further challenges for the hospitality sector in particular, and that’s why we want to hear their concerns and that’s something the chancellor and chief secretary will be doing today. The government is not telling football fans not to go to matches, Downing Street has said. Following comments from the medical director for primary care at NHS England, Dr Nikki Kanani, that if anyone was visiting a football stadium this weekend it should be to get a jab at a pop-up clinic, the spokesman said there was “no guidance or restrictions in place”. He said: Like Professor Whitty and the prime minister, she’s not being prescriptive. We understand it’s a personal choice for the public. And there’s no restrictions on those sorts of events, obviously, apart from the use of the Covid pass which provides a level of reassurance and protection. Asked whether the government was telling fans not to attend matches, the spokesman said: “That is not our advice.” Downing Street said the capacity for posting out lateral flow tests was increasing. The spokesman said 649,000 orders for tests were received on Wednesday. But he said reports that distribution could be restricted to one pharmacy per town was not something he recognised. No 10 insisted there were enough PCR tests available for those who needed them. The spokesman said: There is sufficient PCR capacity for those with symptoms, 150,910 PCR test kits were dispatched yesterday, over half a million processed the day before on Tuesday. I believe our PCR testing capability is among the highest in the world and we are indeed going further, increasing booking slots at physical test sites by more than 100,000 and we’ve secured an increase in PCR testing capacity of a further 200,000 a day and are going beyond that procuring additional lab capacity. He said turnaround times of PCR test results were also improving. Given the massive upsurge in testing, which is to be welcomed, we know that will be a challenge for our laboratories. And I think the public will understand that, but we are further ramping up capacity to help mitigate that and we urge everyone to come and get a PCR test as required, as needed, because we do have sufficient capacity. No 10 was asked why the government was not putting out stronger messaging to protect the NHS, amid fears of staff shortages. The spokesman said: I think we are taking steps to that end through the introduction of plan B and massively increasing our booster programme. As we said when we announced we were bringing forward the target, this is because we know that without this sort of action the pressure on the NHS can become unsustainable. Obviously, the NHS has well-established measures in place to cope with staff sickness and absence, including via the use of staff banks, digital staff passports - which allow them to move between hospitals more easily - and we already have existing prevention and control measures in place and PPE for example. We will continue to make sure our NHS has what it needs in the coming weeks and months. Downing Street signalled there were no plans to ban French travellers from the UK after restrictions were imposed by Paris. The spokesman said the UK had been made aware of the announcement in advance, and the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, had spoken to his French counterpart. When asked if there were any plans for measures at UK borders, the spokesman said: I mean we think, given the rising Omicron cases around the world, a red list and sort of tighter border measures wouldn’t be effective or proportionate in slowing the import of Omicron from abroad. Downing Street dismissed a claim by Tory MP Joy Morrissey that Prof Chris Whitty is acting as if Britain is a “public health socialist state”. [see 9.57am.]. Asked if Boris Johnson agreed with her comment, the spokesman said: No. Professor Whitty is a hugely respected and trusted public servant who provides independent, evidence-based advice. I think he himself has been clear that he provides advice and it is right for ministers and elected politicians to decide. He has been a hugely trusted and valued part of our pandemic response and continues to be so. Downing Street said Rishi Sunak’s visit to California was a “long-planned trip”. The spokesman was asked why the chancellor’s trip was not on the list of government engagements for the week, and he said: I don’t know, I’d have to refer to [the] Treasury on that for when it was finalised, but I believe my understanding is a long-planned, long-standing trip. A Treasury spokesperson said: “The chancellor is in the US on a long-planned trip conducting government business. He is in constant contact with staff back home and will be speaking to UK hospitality businesses today to hear their concerns.” Downing Street said it was likely the prime minister’s audiences with the Queen would move to being virtual. Asked whether Boris Johnson would continue to meet the Queen in person, the spokesman said: That will be a matter for the royal family. I’m not aware of them not being... I think they will probably be moved virtually but that’ll be a matter for the palace. Scores of schools and colleges across the UK are closing early for Christmas, in defiance of No 10, while others are preparing for further disruption and possible closures next year as the Omicron variant sweeps the UK. The Welsh government has announced that its schools will delay the start of the new term by two days “to ensure they have robust plans in place to move to remote learning if required”, while school leaders in England are preparing for an extended switch to online learning in January, with many ensuring that pupils take laptops and textbooks home for the holidays. The Guardian has learned of primary and secondary schools in England and Wales that have decided to end term early because of staff shortages caused by illness and Covid-related isolation. While some schools have already closed on schedule, for most pupils the official end of term is on Friday, with schools in a few local authorities continuing until next Tuesday. The full story is here: Omicron leads many UK schools to close early for Christmas Away from Covid for a moment, Boris and Carrie Johnson, have named their baby daughter Romy. Speaking at a vaccination centre in Kent, the prime minister revealed the name. And posting on Instagram, Carrie announced the pair’s second child’s full name as Romy Iris Charlotte Johnson. She said Romy was picked after her aunt Rosemary, Iris for the Greek word for rainbow, and Charlotte after the prime minister’s late mother. The couple announced the birth of a healthy baby girl at a London hospital on 9 December. Nicola Sturgeon has warned the Scottish public and the UK government “we do not have time to waste”, as she confirmed it is likely that Omicron will be the dominant variant across Scotland by tomorrow. Sturgeon has said in a statement before first minister’s questions that “Omicron is currently running faster than even the fastest roll out of vaccines,” telling the public that if they don’t take action to slow down the spread the “consequences will be significant”. She told MSPs she wanted to “strongly underline” her advice to reduce contact with other households, and to stay at home where possible in advance of Christmas Day meetings, adding that there was “no evidence” that Omicron was milder than other variants. The first minister also called on the UK government to “act urgently”, saying she had asked to speak to Boris Johnson directly this afternoon about urgent financial support as she said “we must not sleep walk into an emergency for both health and business”. She said: We don’t have time to waste on vaccination, but we don’t have time to waste and putting in place the protective measures that will help slow this down. Lives again are at risk here, livelihoods are at risk and the NHS is at risk. Yes, the government’s got to speed up vaccination but all of us have to come together to do what is required to slow this down. And the UK government has to step up and provide the financial support that businesses need. Sturgeon said that the announcement of advance funding released by the Treasury for devolved administrations earlier this week was “not enough”. The return to school for pupils in Wales will be delayed by at least two days to give teachers time to plan for the possibility of a move back to remote learning. Schools will be asked to use the time to look at whether they will need to bring in further Covid mitigation measures to deal with the Omicron surge and contingency plans to make sure pupils taking exams are prioritised. Heads will also be allowed to operate staggered start and finish times. The health minister, Jeremy Miles, said: I am providing all schools with two planning days at the start of the spring term. This will allow time for schools to assess staffing capacity and put the necessary measures in place to support the return of all learners. Schools will be asked to make use of the planning days to ensure they have robust plans in place to move to remote learning if required – this could be for individual classes/year groups or possibly for the whole school. Schools will be asked also to use this opportunity to revisit contingency plans, ensuring exam years are prioritised for onsite provision should there be a need to restrict in-person learning at any time and consider what arrangements might need to be in place for vulnerable learners and the children of critical workers during any periods of disruption. Greg Clark asks whether we are now in a phase of giving broad advice rather than imposing restrictions, and if this is the right way to be thinking about Covid now. Whitty says it’s where we are now, but if we were in a situation where, for example, it looked as if the boosters were not going to be as effective against the disease and transmission, then ministers would clearly need to consider what else needs to be done. The further you go up the ladder of intervention the more damage you’re going to do in other areas, he says, so it needs to be balanced. Clark also asks what would trigger a scenario where we can de-escalate the advice being given. Whitty says there are multiple exit points and they depend on what happens next. It could be that with vaccinations and boosters and a milder variant, we could de-escalate quite quickly, he says. An alternative scenario could be a very sharp wave that decreases quite quickly. Another exit, albeit a longer one, would be an Omicron-specific vaccine, he says. However, again he says, there are so many unknowns at the moment. Back to the committee, on the link between case numbers and hospitalisations, Whitty says medics don’t yet know how many Omicron hospitalisations there will be. But we can say the new variant is not more dangerous than Delta, he says. In comparison to the last big wave, the hospitalisation rate prior to the vaccination programme was 22% with Delta, he says. After two doses of the Covid vaccine, that dropped to just 6%, he says. There isn’t evidence that Omicron is intrinsically milder, he says, and it is very critical to wait for more data before predicting what will happen. He says medics are taking the new variant extremely seriously as the NHS will be impacted by a shortage of staff as more people isolate with Covid. Whitty is asked how we deal with the 5-10% of the population who are unvaccinated. He says although those who aren’t vaccinated are very noisy the numbers are also small. He says that due to weird conspiracy theories and all sorts there are people who won’t get vaccinated. Unless these people work in places with lots of vulnerable people, the view is fine, he says, and this has to be accepted. However, he says of the percentage of unvaccinated people, some simply haven’t got round to getting their jabs, rather than being anti-vaxx. There are four things people want to know, Whitty says: The disease is a big enough threat The vaccines actually work The side effects are proportionate to the benefits the vaccines are giving them It is convenient to get vaccinated We have to make sure people’s fears are politely and scientifically addressed, and making it as convenient for people as possible, he says. Whitty is asked how the combination of restrictions is decided. He says the first layer in deciding measures is looking at things that have no downsides to the British public, such as wearing face masks, washing hands and opening windows. Do all of them because they protect you from different elements of risk, he says. Then he says ministers decide whether to enforce things that have more impact - socially and economically - such as advising working from home. And then you go up a ladder of intervention, and each step further makes more of an impact, he says. Hopkins says that for Omicron, the R value is between 3 and 5 in the UK, and that the variant is spreading rapidly - doubling in size every two days. The current R value of the Delta epidemic in the UK is estimated to be between 1.1 and 1.2. Back at the committee, Whitty says he strongly believes that we should be maximising the number of vaccines in lower to middle-income countries. It’s a humanitarian need and is a matter of self-interest as well, he says, adding there is absolutely nothing to be lost and everything to be gained. He says in Africa and resource-poor parts of Asia, there are good vaccination systems for vaccinating children under five, but there is not a good system in place for vaccinating older adults who need it more. It’s not just a product problem, it’s a system problem, he says. After last night’s astonishing press conference where medical advisers told people to deprioritise unnecessary social contact, Boris Johnson has this morning insisted he is not instituting an “effective lockdown” - as several Tory MPs claim. Backbenchers have been claiming that businesses will be hard hit by the change in message, with Steve Brine, a former health minister, claiming that “at a stroke, the chief medical officer changed government policy. But Johnson tried to play down any suggestion rules were being imposed, and instead said it was up to people to decide how much risk they wanted to take they may end up catching Covid and forced to isolate over Christmas. Speaking on a visit to a vaccine centre in Kent, the prime minister said: If you want to go to an event or a party, then the sensible thing to do, if that’s a priority... is to get a test and to make sure that you’re being cautious. But we’re not saying that we want to cancel stuff, we’re not locking stuff down, and the fastest route back to normality is to get boosted. Following concerns that hospitality firms have already been hit by a wave of cancellations and shops are seeing footfall sink during a crucial trading period, Johnson did not hint at any more support but said the government had “kept business going” through the pandemic. Johnson added he would do “whatever I have to to protect the public” and insisted “we’re in a very different position” from last year, when tough restrictions were imposed just days before Christmas. His message to the public was: There’s a lot of Omicron around, be careful, exercise caution if you want to avoid isolation, getting unwell, over Christmas. Implement Plan B but get boosted now is the fastest route back to normality because the booster does give you an excellent level of protection. The committee hears that in August, only 22.2% of pregnant women were vaccinated and that high numbers of critically ill patients were unvaccinated pregnant women. Whitty is asked if it was a mistake to not include pregnant women in priority groups sooner. Whitty says the uptake of vaccination in pregnant women is depressingly low and that significant numbers of women have come to serious harm. Pregnancy is a period of vulnerability, he says, adding I think we really should have made that point even clearer earlier on. We need to take on the myths around the vaccine and pregnancy and say it is not true that there are increased risks with this vaccine, Whitty says. We need to say that what is true is that Covid and pregnancy is a dangerous combination, he says, encouraging everybody who is pregnant to get vaccinated. Back to the committee. Whitty says data from South Africa and the UK suggest it’s too early to be sure but for now we can stick to the view that Omicron is much milder in children than in older adults. PA reports that the Queen has cancelled her traditional pre-Christmas family lunch next week. It is understood the decision was a precaution with a source suggesting it could put too many people’s Christmas arrangements at risk if it went ahead. And this is from the Sunday Times’s royal editor, Roya Nikkah Whitty says scientists and the government are trying to navigate how to keep people from spending Christmas alone while curbing the spread of Omicron. On staff shortages in social care affecting the Covid crisis, Whitty says there is a serious issue with recruitment in social care, which is longstanding over many years. He says there have been several attempts to look seriously at what can be done to improve the situation, but that he isn’t the right person to answer how it can be done. Whitty is asked about how mistakes made earlier in the pandemic can be avoided this time around. He says there were several mistakes made, including not being fast enough on cutting down on people working between care settings, and not spotting the effects of people not having adequate sick pay quickly enough. Those mistakes haven’t been repeated this time round, he says. The most difficult decision with Omicron is balancing the needs of family being able to see those in care, with reducing the risk of spread over Christmas. We’re trying to navigate a route between those two, he says. Lucy Allan asks if we will have to live with reduced social contact and “deprioritisation” for years to come in the event of more variants of concern. Whitty anticipates that in about 18 months we will have polyvalent vaccines which will cover a much wider range and several antivirals and a variety of other countermeasures that mean the great majority of the heavy lifting with a new variant can be met by medical means, unless it’s extremely different, he says. I don’t see this as we’re going to have to do this repeatedly every few months situation, he says, adding we’re in a transition. The response to this variant is very different to how we would have responded in a pre-vaccine era, he adds, and he thinks the risks will gradually decrease over time. Each six months will be better than the last six months, he says. Hunt asks if Whitty has advised the government to do more to reduce the spread of Omicron, that is another lockdown. Whitty says the only formal advice is what comes from Sage. To make tough social and economic decisions, there is a lot of information we don’t yet have, he says, and there is a wide range of possibilities where this will go. Ministers will take constant reviews of restrictions if vaccines prove less effective than expected, he says. Because of the steepness of this, a lot of people will simultaneously fall ill across the whole economy, which we will need to take quite seriously, he says. Whitty says he is extremely cautious about hospitalisation projections. We don’t yet know the level Omicron will peak at, nor do we know the effects, in terms of hospitalisation, of two doses of vaccine, or prior infection, and of a booster dose, he says. Hunt asks about the previous peak in hospital admissions of 4,583. Whitty says that even if Omicron is milder, because it is concentrated over a short period of time, you could end up with a higher number than that going into hospital on a single day. However, two caveats are how long people stay in hospital and that being vaccinated will provide some protection, he says. The doubling rate will slow down as people continue to take more precautions, including prioritising social interactions that matter most to them and working from home, Whitty says. This will buy us time to get boosting and slow it down, he adds. He estimates that Omicron will peak incredibly fast and it could come down faster than previous peaks, he says. Dr Susan Hopkins, chief medical advisor at the UK Health and Security Agency, says there are 15 patients in hospital with Omicron. Whitty adds there are many more than that - that number is only those who are proven. Updated figures will come out this afternoon. She adds that data on the severity of Omicron won’t be known for another fortnight. At least 250 patients would need to be admitted to hospital before there could be a statistical analysis of the disease, she says. That is likely to be between Christmas and New Year or early January, she adds. Moving onto Omicron, Hunt asks if current data on the extent to which a third dose of vaccine is more effective than two relates to antibody and/or T cell deterioration. Whitty says that on the lab side, they are looking at the antibody data, which suggests the antibody response is much less effective against Omicron than it was against Delta, Alpha and the original strain. That is likely to translate into reduced ability to reduce infection, which is what we’re seeing, he says. Clinical studies are showing lots of people are getting reinfected with Omicron who have been vaccinated or vaccinated and had a previous infection, he says, so it is likely to bypass some of the ability to reduce infection. What we don’t have is very good T cell studies, he adds. We don’t have clinical studies, from South Africa or anywhere else, telling us with confidence what the level of protections of one or two doses, and a booster dose, are on hospitalisations and deaths, he says. On the positive side, he says we think there will be some preserved immunity, particularly on the T cell side, and therefore it will be likely someone with two doses and a booster will have more protection against hospitalisation and death, even though the protection against infection is less good. On boosters, it does look as though they restore quite a lot of the ability to reduce infection, he adds. It will reduce the risk of severity, it will reduce probably the risk of mortality, and it almost certainly will reduce the risk of transmitting and getting symptomatic disease, so boosters are absolutely critical to this, he says. I’m trying to avoid making people’s choices for them, but people should prioritise the things that matter to them and cut down on the things that don’t, Whitty adds. Anybody who has something that really matters to them, concentrate on that one, rather than accepting every invitation, Whitty says. That also applies to work - work from home if you can, he adds. Prioritise the things that really matter to you, he reiterates. But if you wish to not end up self-isolating or unwell at a time you really don’t want to be, you really want to be doing fewer other things, he adds. The committee chair, Jeremy Hunt, asks what prioritising social interactions over Christmas means in practical terms. This is moving very fast, it’s highly transmissible and rates are going up, Whitty says. People have plans that are most important to them at this time of year, and that means it’s sensible to cut down on work or social interactions that are less important to them, so this is a period to prioritise, he says. England’s chief medical officer, Prof Chris Whitty, is due to be questioned by the Commons health and social care committee on the Omicron variant from 10.30am, which I will be covering here. Housebound elderly people are having to wait weeks to get their booster vaccine, despite being a key priority group for top-up jabs, raising fears about them being left at risk. Charities have warned that older people are being “overlooked” in the NHS’s rush to deliver the 1m boosters a day that Boris Johnson has ordered to reduce the threat posed by the Omicron variant. However, NHS staff involved in the booster rollout have privately told the Guardian that the longer time involved in jabbing the housebound, difficulty involved in transporting the Pfizer vaccine and million-a-day target has prompted some GPs and practice nurses to instead focus on vaccinating other patients, because they can get more done more quickly that way. Read the full story here: Housebound elderly people waiting weeks for Covid boosters The row between the UK Treasury and the Scottish government over the nature of additional Covid funding is ramping up, with first minister Nicola Sturgeon last night accusing Westminster of leaving her to fight the Omicron surge with “one hand tied”. On Tuesday, the UK Treasury announced £430 million to the devolved governments to support the booster roll-out and other health measures, with £220 million for Scotland. But, following Wednesday’s Cobra meeting, Scotland’s finance secretary Kate Forbes wrote to the Treasury calling for more funding, saying that the money released did not represent extra money but was the early release of money already budgeted for. Overnight, Sturgeon accused the Treasury of reducing funds to Scotland, saying: As feared, this is not ‘additional’ money - it is being brought forward from money we were expecting in January and had already budgeted for. But it’s actually more concerning than than that…the net effect of yesterday’s Treasury announcement appears to be that the Scottish government is £48m worse off than we thought we were before the announcement. The total we were expecting in January was £268m…we have just been told the actual amount is £220m. There is though a more fundamental point. Each of the four UK governments is responsible for protecting public health in their own country. But only when UKG takes decisions for England is funding triggered, leaving the rest of us trying to protect health with one hand tied. A UK government spokesperson said it was “giving the devolved administrations the certainty they need to spend more money in the coming weeks” and would “continue to engage with the Scottish government in the face of this serious health crisis.” Given the row over furlough extension we saw this time last year, as well as the pressure on the Scottish government from the hospitality sector following advice to postpone office Christmas parties, this is likely to escalate in the coming days. The shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, has called a Tory MP’s comments about Prof Chris Whitty “outrageous”. In a now-deleted tweet, Joy Morrissey, the MP for Beaconsfield, suggested that England’s chief medical officer should not give advice on people’s social plans ahead of elected officials. She wrote: “Perhaps the unelected Covid public health spokesperson should defer to what our ELECTED members of parliament and the prime minister have decided. I know it’s difficult to remember but that’s how democracy works. This is not a public health socialist state.” Streeting responded that the tweet was “extremely poorly judged” and the comments should be withdrawn immediately: It is outrageous to see a government PPS [parliamentary private secretary] attacking the chief medical officer in this way. She should apologise and withdraw this immediately. Chris Whitty has never disputed where policy is made – he makes this point repeatedly. It seems @joymorrissey has now deleted her extremely poorly judged tweet. I hope she will now have the good grace to apologise. The chief medical officer and every health and care worker in the country deserves our full support. Their only motivation is helping us. Labour has written to the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, urging him to provide more support for businesses facing “closure by stealth” amid concerns over calls for people to consider limiting their social contacts around Christmas. The shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, and the shadow business secretary, Jonathan Reynolds, said in the letter that they met business leaders and major trade union bodies on Wednesday. They said they “learnt that many of them hadn’t had proper engagement from government on how Plan B and the necessary restrictions resulting from Omicron would affect them”. The letter went on: Since then, the public have been told to ‘de-prioritise social contact’. Following the science is crucial, but this will hit businesses and workers hard, especially in sectors like hospitality and leisure. Businesses face a perfect storm of cancelled bookings, rising costs and staff shortages. Businesses and their employees have put up with so much from this government. It is time the government came forward with their plans to ensure our great British businesses and their workers have the clarity and support they need to weather this storm. The health minister, Gillian Keegan, admitted the situation was “terrible” for hospitality having also suffered last Christmas, but insisted this morning that there were still measures in place to help businesses through the pandemic, including VAT reductions, business rates cuts and recovery loans. The chancellor “keeps everything under review”, she added. But Labour said more support was needed after Prof Chris Whitty told the public on Wednesday to prioritise events that “really matter to them” over the festive period, in an effort to curb the spread of Omicron. Indeed, the news has drawn concern from the hospitality sector as people weigh up whether to risk nights out or cancel to improve the chances of spending Christmas with family. British Chambers of Commerce president Baroness Ruby McGregor-Smith said on Wednesday the cautions “will almost certainly have an enormous impact for businesses”. She added: Despite this still we heard no news of any new financial support measures coming from government to help those businesses, and others badly affected by the current restrictions. And the head of a company with 320 pubs and hotels said on Thursday that his business was now in a “zombie world”. Jonathan Neame, chief executive of Shepherd Neame, told Times Radio: Go to pubs. Don’t go to pubs. It was the message last time which is a really confusing and difficult message. And confuses both the operators but also confuses customers, too. Up until this point, I think that people have been mainly concerned not so much for their personal health, but for getting self-isolated and missing their family Christmases. That’s been a sort of key driver behind cancellations. But I fear now the messaging is changing. And therefore, we may see much more acceleration in cancellations. The acute problem is that if you miss Christmas, and we’re in the zombie world where we’ve been desperately trying to hang on to staff and want to hang on to staff, then what could be very profitable could quickly run into a significant loss. The shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, stressed that hospitality businesses were having a “hard time at the moment” and said the government should be “by their side”. “I do think the chancellor and the business secretary need to get business leaders around the table with trade union leaders to hammer out a deal to help hospitality because, you know, they really need us right now,” he told ITV’s Good Morning Britain. He said Sunak should return from his trip to California to agree a deal to help businesses hit by lower footfall due to the rise in Covid. We understand the chancellor is currently out of the country in California. So perhaps he might want to get himself on a flight back and get a grip on the situation because businesses need certainty and confidence now. The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, has said he has spoken to his equivalent in the French government, Jean-Baptiste Djebbari, and agreed that hauliers will be exempt from the new restrictions. France is set to tighten restrictions on travel from the UK to slow the spread of the Omicron variant that is causing record numbers of cases on the other side of the Channel, the French government has said. “We will put in place a system of controls drastically tighter than the one we have already,” the government spokesperson Gabriel Attal told BFM television, saying the office of the prime minister, Jean Castex, would issue a statement on the new measures in the coming hours. He said travellers coming to France would need a negative test less than 24 hours old, a blanket quarantine would be enforced on return to France, and trips for tourism limited. “We will reduce the validity of the test to come to France from 48 hours to 24 hours,” said Attal, adding: We will limit the reasons for coming to France from the UK, it will be limited to French nationals and residents and their families. Tourism or business trips for people who do not have French or European nationality or are residents will be limited. People [coming back] will have to register on an app and will have to self-isolate in a place of their choosing for seven days – controlled by the security forces – but this can be shortened to 48 hours if a negative test is carried out in France. Attal said this policy was aimed at “tightening the net” to slow down the arrival of Omicron cases in France and give time for the French vaccination booster campaign to gain more ground. The measures are expected to come into effect at the weekend. More on this story here: France to tighten Covid restrictions on travel from Omicron-hit UK And for more global updates on the pandemic, here is our global live blog: Good morning. People should “use their own judgement” to “make a sensible choice” about socialising over the festive period if their priority is to spend Christmas with their families, the health minister, Gillian Keegan, has told Sky News. She said “everybody is urging caution” due to the fast spread of Omicron. Most of us will know somebody now who’s positive with Covid, and that means if you’ve tested positive, then you’ll be in isolation over Christmas. So that’s bound to make people a bit more cautious. Make a sensible choice for yourself, make a sensible choice. You know, if you’re going to go to a party, take a test. If there’s lots of people there you don’t know, if that’s your priority, fine. If your priority is to make it through to Christmas Day with your family then take a different approach. Everybody’s got different pros and cons, you know, so make a sensible decision but definitely wear a mask and definitely, you know, make sure that you take a test beforehand and also try to go to well-ventilated places as well. Her comments echo those of England’s chief medical officer, Prof Chris Whitty, at the Downing Street press conference on Wednesday. Whitty said it would be “sensible” and it “is going to become increasingly important” for people to “prioritise” social interactions they most value and “deprioritise” others. In a separate interview with Times Radio, Keegan said: What they were saying was prioritise, because obviously the more contacts you have, the more chance you have of testing positive, and that would mean that you’d be isolated on Christmas Day. Obviously if you want to have a family Christmas, then be cautious, otherwise you could end up testing positive and having to isolate over Christmas. That’s the message. Everybody must prioritise, you know, if you’re going to have a family Christmas with your relatives, and you know, you’ve got some maybe elderly relatives, then of course people aren’t going to be going out to nightclubs in the run-up to that event, because the chance of success in testing positive after that is probably much higher. So people are being cautious anyway, people will make their own choices. It’s not for the government to say, for every single situation, you must use your judgment as well and take a test beforehand. It comes as the UK registered a record number of daily coronavirus cases on Wednesday, with 78,610 infections reported in a 24-hour period. I’ll be bringing you all the latest developments on the coronavirus pandemic in the UK for the next eight hours or so. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_Poachers have killed 24 rhinos in South Africa during the first two weeks of December after a lull in killings during the Covid pandemic. On Tuesday, the South African environment ministry said carcasses had been discovered in four provinces across the country since the beginning of the month, with seven rhinos found dead in Kruger national park, six in KwaZulu-Natal and seven in Mpumalanga. Four, including a pregnant female, were shot dead by poachers at a game reserve in the Western Cape last week while a fifth is being treated for gunshot wounds. Nine people have been arrested in connection with the rhino killings, which have been condemned by South Africa’s environment department after a decrease in poaching during the pandemic. In 2020, 394 rhinos were poached for their horns in South Africa, which is home to most of the animal’s population in Africa, compared with 594 the year before, according to official figures. Nearly two-thirds were killed in national parks. A record 1,215 were killed in 2014, up from just 13 in 2007, driven by demand in Asia that made rhino horn more valuable than gold. “Poverty is driving a lot of the people who are recruited as poachers to go into the parks. If there are economic difficulties, then that’s obviously going to be exacerbated,” said Richard Emslie, a former scientific officer of the International Union for Conservation of Nature’s (IUCN) specialist group on African rhinos. “One of the challenges is to economically empower people living in these rural communities … not just thinking in terms of hard law enforcement and anti-poaching in the parks.” Coronavirus lockdowns, travel restrictions and the Omicron variant have ravaged the country’s tourism industry, a major funding source for conservation, which contributed about 4.5% of all jobs and 3% of GDP in South Africa before the pandemic. While increases in rhino killings are common before Christmas and the Chinese new year, experts said arresting poachers would not break the cycle, and more needed to be done to crack down on criminal gangs and demand in Vietnam and China for horns. Kevin Pietersen, the former England cricket captain who is a prominent rhino conservationist, said visiting some of the 3 million people living on the edge of Kruger national park had opened his eyes about the challenges many are facing. “I started off absolutely hating. But I’ve educated myself,” said Pietersen, who recently hosted a National Geographic show on rhino conservation. “These are people that just want to feed their families. There is human greed, which is in all of us. But there is a lot of desperation which is unfortunately living alongside these national parks. And when you are desperate and I know as a parent that you’ll do anything for your kids, to feed your kids,” he said. “You win this war by looking after the people. That’s what they do in India.” Cathy Dean, the chief executive of Save the Rhino International who is also on the IUCN African rhino subgroup, said the collapse in ecotourism revenue was probably linked to the killings. “[The pandemic] has been a disaster. Obviously, the lack of tourism income has absolutely destroyed parks and reserves. It has completely trashed income,” she said. “We don’t employ staff directly but a lot of operations have had to make staff redundant.”A Bahraini man whose father has been detained for 10 years in the Gulf country will end a 23-day hunger strike outside Bahrain’s embassy in London on Friday after MPs vowed to raise his father’s case in the Commons. Ali Mushaima said he was suffering from back pain and had found the cold nights on a pavement outside the embassy “tough to take”. His father, Hassan Mushaima, an opposition leader in Bahrain, was arrested 10 years ago as part of a crackdown in the wake of the Arab spring. Ali Mushaima’s hunger strike is also in protest at the detention of Abduljalil al-Singace, an academic who was moved from prison to a medical centre in July after going on hunger strike himself. The king of Bahrain pardoned 105 inmates on Bahrain’s national day on Wednesday, but the list did not include any high-profile political prisoners. The UK has close security and political links with Bahrain, which has been widely criticised for the oppression of its majority Shia population. Bahrain insists it is reforming its judicial system. Explaining his decision to end his strike, Mushaima, 38, who has two children, said: “I cannot express to you how hard it has been, but my pain is nothing to the suffering that my father and hundreds of other political prisoners in Bahrain have gone through. “Knowing they are slowly dying, I could not let their pain go unnoticed or for their suffering to remain within a prison wall. I know some people think going on hunger strike is not the greatest idea or that it has no effect, but I can brave this out of the love and respect I have for my father.” The Scottish Liberal Democrat MP Wendy Chamberlain, who came to support Mushaima as his strike came to a close, said: “No one should have to starve themselves simply to secure the respect for their loved ones’ human rights. Nobody should have to spend a single second deprived of their freedom simply for calling for democracy.” She pleaded with Mushaima to go home, saying: “Myself and many of my colleagues are seriously concerned for your health.” The issue has also been raised by the Scottish National party MP Chris Law, Peter Bottomley, the father of the house, and Keir Starmer, Mushaima’s constituency MP and the Labour leader. After Starmer raised the issue with the prime minister in a letter, Boris Johnson replied with a two-paragraph letter that got Ali Mushaima’s gender wrong and said he had passed the issue to the foreign secretary, Liz Truss. It is the second time Ali Mushaima has been on hunger strike outside the embassy. His previous 46-day strike in 2018 led to the then Foreign Office minister Alan Duncan to call internally for a review of the rules on protests outside diplomatic missions. He called for an exclusion zone outside the embassy, and Bahrain’s leaders complained about the UK’s failure to “protect their London embassy from persistent demonstrators” – a complaint Duncan said in his diaries was “fully justified”. Bahrain’s officials say they have tried to mediate with Hassan Mushaima, who is 74, including by sending senior interior ministry officials to meet him on 12 September and propose his release subject to two conditions. These conditions were an assurance that there was no gathering in support of him when he was released, and that he remain silent in future about the country’s direction. His family say that after he rejected these terms, a telephone call between Mushaima and the family that day was cancelled, along with a family visit scheduled for the next day.Rishi Sunak cut short his stay in California and was flying back to the UK on Thursday night after furious business leaders demanded he put together a financial support package to help them survive a plunge in trade that they blamed on mixed messages from the government. The chancellor said he had spoken to representatives of the hard-hit hospitality sector and indicated he would be examining measures to help firms stay afloat, amid a flood of cancellations. Hospitality industry figures had earlier accused the government of turning its back on struggling businesses by “frightening” people into staying at home while failing to offer support to venues reeling from the resulting plunge in trade. The pub industry reported 3.2m cancellations last week alone and predicted 37m fewer pints would be sold, at a cost of £237m. Trade body UKHospitality estimated the cost to the wider industry at £4bn, with takings down by a quarter and expected to fall again by the same amount. Pub and restaurant bosses warned that firms would not survive the winter without an urgent package of financial support from the Treasury, calling for measures including: An extension of the VAT cut for hospitality. Expansion of relief on business rates. Immediate grants for struggling businesses. Greater state backing for the CBILS loan scheme. Targeted return of the furlough scheme. Many blamed a change in messaging amid the spread of the Omicron variant. At a sombre press conference on Wednesday, Prof Chris Whitty, England’s chief medical officer, told the public: “Don’t mix with people you don’t have to.” His tone was a sharp contrast to that of the prime minister, Boris Johnson, who continued to insist Christmas parties should go ahead and proclaimed that “a great national fightback has begun” with the acceleration of the booster jab programme. Chris Jowsey, the chief executive of 1,000-strong pub chain Admiral Taverns, said: “They’re frightening everybody into staying home but they’re not providing any support for the businesses that are most impacted.” He said city centre takings were down by as much as 70% after a wave of cancellations triggered by work-from-home guidance and Whitty’s comments on socialising, leaving businesses in dire need of a support package. “We’ve heard nothing from the chancellor and they must have known what the impact would be. It feels as if they’ve turned their back on the sector. If this carries on as it is, we’ll see businesses go under in January. Fact.” The British Beer and Pub Association is understood to have written to Sunak about the difficulties facing the sector, which the trade body said was hit by 3.2m cancellations last week, before Whitty’s comments. Phil Urban, the chief executive of Mitchells &amp; Butlers, whose 1,700 restaurants and pubs include the O’Neills and Harvester chains, called for the Treasury to move faster. “In Germany, where we have a business, restrictions have gone hand in hand with the support,” he said. “Here we have restrictions and are left dangling, not knowing whether we’ll get anything at all.” Leaders across the sector called on the government to rethink plans to restore the VAT rate on hospitality to 20% in April, asking for a continuation of the current 12.5% rate or a return to 5%. The industry’s other key ask is a total moratorium on business rates, given that many firms, in particular those in city centres, are paying duty on venues where trade has dwindled. Bosses also called for immediate grants to support the sector and strengthening of the coronavirus business interruption state-backed loan scheme. Simon Emeny, the boss of London-focused pub chain Fuller, Smith &amp; Turner, called for some form of targeted furlough to help venues in deserted city centres. “We’ve been left in no man’s land,” he said. As the industry demanded action from the Treasury, Boris Johnson’s official spokesperson appeared to hint that the government was moving towards offering more financial help for affected businesses. “We will listen. We understand the challenges that this new wave poses, and we recognise that the public are being more cautious given the prevalence of this variant. And so we will respond proportionately at all times, as we have before,” he said. While emphasising that the prime minister was not asking businesses to close, he said: “We recognise that the prevalence of this variant and its high transmissibility is leading to further challenges for the hospitality sector, in particular.” Sunak spoke to businesses virtually from California on Thursday and said via his Twitter account that he would continue talks ahead of the weekend, saying he was “listening to their concerns”. A spokesperson for Sunak said his trip was long planned, saying he had travelled to meet tech and investment leaders with a “packed schedule of meetings”. Sunak was originally due to return on Saturday, according to the BBC. Conservative MPs made clear they expected the Treasury to front up more money, accusing the government of imposing an “effective lockdown”. Steve Brine, a former health minister, said that “at a stroke, the chief medical officer changed government policy” at Wednesday’s press conference, and argued: “The Treasury is going to have to do more.” Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary, had earlier called on Sunak to returnfrom California and “get a grip on the situation, because businesses need certainty and confidence now”. Streeting urged Sunak and the business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, to “hammer out a deal to help hospitality because they really need us right now”.A Houston-based oil company and two subsidiaries have been charged over a massive oil spill off the coast of southern California in October that fouled waters and beaches and endangered wildlife. Prosecutors say the spill was caused in part by failing to properly act when alarms repeatedly alerted workers to a pipeline rupture. Amplify Energy and its companies that operate several oil rigs and a pipeline off Long Beach were charged by a federal grand jury with a single misdemeanor count of illegally discharging oil. Investigators believe the pipeline was weakened when a cargo ship’s anchor snagged it in high winds in January, months before it ultimately ruptured on 1 October, spilling up to 25,000 gallons (94,600 liters) of crude oil in the ocean. US prosecutors said the companies were negligent six ways, including failing to respond to eight leak detection system alarms over a 13-hour period that should have alerted them to the spill and would have minimized the damage. Instead, the pipeline was shut down after each alarm and then restarted, spewing more oil into the ocean. Amplify blamed the unnamed shipping company for displacing the pipeline and said workers on and offshore responded to what they believed were false alarms because the system wasn’t functioning properly. It was signaling a potential leak at the platform where no leak was occurring, the company said. The leak, in fact, was from a section of undersea pipe 4 miles (6.4km) away, Amplify said. “Had the crew known there was an actual oil spill in the water, they would have shut down the pipeline immediately,” the company said. The spill came ashore at Huntington Beach and forced about a weeklong closure of the city’s beaches and others along the Orange county coast. Fishing in the affected area resumed only recently, after testing confirmed fish did not have unsafe levels of oil toxins. It also seeped into delicate wetlands that are critical habitats for migratory and shorebirds, and other endangered species. It is still unclear how much of a lasting impact the spill had on plants and animals, even after the black globs were cleared from the beaches. If convicted, the charge carries up to five years of probation for the corporation and fines that could total millions of dollars. Orange county supervisor Katrina Foley said the indictment validates residents who had detected the spill a day earlier and reported it. “It’s terrible that they basically lied to the community during the press briefings and caused people to believe that what they saw with their own eyes or smelled or knew was actually not true,” she said. Pipeline safety advocate Bill Caram said the indictment paints a picture of a reckless company. “I understand there are false positives on leak detection systems but this is our treasured coastline,” said Caram, director of the Bellingham, Washington-based Pipeline Safety Trust. “The fact that they kept hitting the snooze button and ignoring alarms, stopping and starting this pipeline and all the while leaking oil in the Pacific Ocean is reckless and egregious.” Prosecutors also found that the pipeline was understaffed and the crew was fatigued and insufficiently trained in the leak detection system. The indictment’s description of company personnel as fatigued pointed to a long-standing industry problem, said pipeline expert Ramanan Krishnamoorti with the University of Houston. “Fatigue and overworked staff is old and trite and inexcusable,” he said. “This has been demonstrated over and over again as being the single most important vulnerability.”Time to wrap up, after a day of central bank drama, and rising concerns about Omicron’s impact on the UK and European economies. Here’s today’s main stories: Goodnight. GW Rishi Sunak has cut short his stay in California and was flying back to the UK on Thursday night. He’s returning after furious business leaders demanded he put together a financial support package to help them survive a plunge in trade that they blamed on mixed messages from the government. The chancellor said he had spoken with representatives of the hard-hit hospitality sector and indicated he would be examining measures to help firms stay afloat, amid a flood of cancellations. Nick Mackenzie, CEO of Greene King, says the hospitality sector urgently needs help, with some pubs suffering a 70% drop in sales: “The guidance from Government to limit social interactions and shift to working from home has put our industry into lockdown in everything but name. Sales in our pubs in some parts of London are down as much as 70% compared to the same time in 2019. As consumer confidence plummets and booking cancellations rise, we urgently need Government to act to support the industry now by freezing business rates and removing the existing cap, confirming a longer term reduction in VAT and providing targeted support for those most severely affected by the current situation. This will help to continue to preserve livelihoods and jobs in our sector.” The Bank of England has unexpectedly raised interest rates for the first time in three years amid growing concerns over inflation, despite the rapid spread of the coronavirus Omicron variant. Threadneedle Street’s monetary policy committee (MPC) voted by a majority of eight to one to raise rates from the historic low of 0.1% to 0.25%, judging that pressure on households from surging living costs outweighed the risks to the economy from the new variant. With inflation at the highest rate for a decade, the Bank warned there was unlikely to be any reprieve over the winter months from soaring energy costs driving up the rate from 5.1% at present to 6% next spring – three times its official target. However, the surprise decision comes amid a severe deterioration in the economic outlook with Omicron triggering a collapse in consumer confidence, leading to a wave of cancellations for hospitality businesses during the key festive trading period. Samuel Tombs, the chief UK economist at the consultancy Pantheon Macroeconomics, said: “The MPC’s decision to hike bank rates today, before it knows the full extent of the economic damage wrought by the surging Omicron variant, underlines how worried it is about the outlook for inflation.” The pound rose sharply on the global currency market on Thursday, up by almost a cent against the dollar,trading above $1.33 after the central bank became the first of its major peer global peers to raise rates. In a sign of institutions scrambling to tackle inflationary pressures worldwide, the European Central Bank also said on Thursday it would scale back its multi-trillion euro quantitative easing pandemic support package. The US Federal Reserve said earlier this week it anticipated raising rates three times in 2022. More here: The world’s top central bankers have made some significant moves in the last day, setting the scene for more drama next year. We seen the Federal Reserve speed up the tapering of its stimulus programme, and predict three rate rises in 2022. The Bank of England has surprised markets with a pre-Christmas interest rate rise, with concerns about rising inflation outweighing Omicron uncertainty. Paul Hollingsworth, chief European economist at BNP Paribas Markets 360, says: The BoE’s decision to hike rates affirms our view that on balance, the economic data would hold the upper hand. While the overall message was more hawkish than expected, we stick to our view that the next rate hike will not come until May, not least because of the MPC’s sensitivity to Omicron-related developments. Beyond that, we continue to expect the MPC to hike at a slower pace, but ultimately by more than is currently priced in to markets. The European Central Bank is wrapping up its pandemic stimulus programme (PEPP) next March, but boosting another package to cushion the impact, and forecast that inflation will fall below its 2% target in 2023. Craig Erlam of OANDA says this forecast means less action will likely be warranted from the ECB compared with others. As expected, the central bank announced that the PEPP will draw to a close in March but will be offset by a temporary boost to the APP until the fourth quarter. Again, the Bank will be flexible with all tools and make adjustments as necessary. This may seem obvious, but it is designed to avoid criticism and confusion at a time when forecasts are subject to such significant revisions. Flexibility is key. As we’re seeing outside of central banks, look at OPEC+. And Turkey’s central bank has cut interest rates again despite worries of a financial crisis and escalating inflation, sending the lira to new record lows. Stocks have rallied hard in London today, as investors shrug off the Bank of England’s surprise interest rate rise. Britain’s FTSE 100 index has closed 90 points higher at 7260 points, up 1.25%, shaking off recent Omicron losses. Banks led the risers; their profit margins benefit from higher interest rates. Lloyds Banking Group jumped 4.6%, HSBC gained 3.7% and Barclays rose 3.2%. The pound is still holding most of its gains, up over half a cent at $1.332 Erik Norland, senior economist at CME Group, says central bankers are starting to to diverge, which could lead to volatility: “The BofE’s decision to raise rates reinforces how monetary policy is beginning to diverge globally. This divergence has the potential to create volatility in currency markets next year. A number of central banks, mostly in emerging market economies, have already begun raising interest rates. By contrast, the People’s Bank of China is actively easing policy amid a slowdown in China’s real estate sector while central banks in the eurozone and in Japan show no signs of tightening economic policy.” European markets also surged, with Germany’s DAX and France’s CAC gaining around 1%. Last night’s hawkish move from the US Federal Reserve, which is wrapping up its stimulus faster, has gone down pretty smoothly. I’m afraid the Bank of England’s shock rate increase meant I didn’t cover much about the European Central Bank meeting today. But you can catch up with this thread: Holger Schmieding of Berenberg Bank has a nice summary: Relative to the Fed’s dramatic pivot yesterday and the Bank of England’s rate hike today, the European Central Bank remains in the slow lane. As expected, the ECB announced today that it will reduce its net asset purchases step-by-step next year. But the ECB left the question when it will end these purchases and start to raise rates wide open. While the ECB raised its staff projection for inflation in 2022 by a record amount, from 1.7% to 3.2%, it still projects a slowdown to 1.8% in 2023 and 2024. For the two years that matter for its medium-term outlook, the ECB thus still expects inflation to fall short of its 2% target. Taken at face value, this suggests that the ECB does not (yet) see a need to raise rates within the next two years. Once again, the ECB emphasised that Eurozone inflation is mostly transitory, for instance by emphasising that energy prices accounted for more than half of November’s 4.9% inflation rate. Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey says rising gas prices, driven by tensions between Russia and Ukraine, will push UK inflation to 6% in the next few months. Speaking to Sky News, Bailey says that recent upward pressure on wholesale gas prices will drive up the cost of living, when the energy price cap is next lifted in April. Bailey points out that gas prices are going up again, having dipped back from their highs this autumn, as geopolitical tensions rise. I think this is directly related to some of the tensions we’re seeing on the border between Russia and Ukraine where a lot of Europe’s gas supply comes through. That will feed through, I’m afraid, when the next price cap is set for all of us as domestic customers. That will feed through to the next price cap. European gas prices headed towards record highs this week, after Germany said the controversial Nord Stream pipeline from Russia which bypasses Ukraine could not be approved, as Moscow builds up military forces on the Ukrainian border. Explaining today’s interest rate rise, Bailey also explained that the labour market is very tight, with firms reporting difficulties recruiting staff. He also warns of signs of “more persistent price pressures”, which are worrying the Bank. Here’s a video clip: The European Central Bank has taken a rather more cautious approach than the Bank of England today. The ECB has decided to scale back its €1.85trn pandemic stimulus programme next quarter, and end this bond-buying in March, following pressure from hawkish policymakers worried about inflation. But bond buys under another scheme will be ramped up, from current monthly pace of €20bn to €40bn in the second quarter of 2022 and to €30bn in the third quarter. The ECB also let its headline interest rate at 0%. A message for the chancellor.... Rishi Sunak is expected to meet representatives from “a dozen” affected businesses this afternoon, dialing in virtually from California. A spokesperson for Sunak said his trip was long planned, saying he had travelled to meet tech and investment leaders with a “packed schedule of meetings”. Sunak will return to his desk in London on Friday, our story explains. The case for more government support for businesses struggling in the pandemic became even more compelling, says economics writer Duncan Weldon. If the Bank is tightening monetary policy, the fiscal side needs to loosen to help the economy through the Covid-19 wave: Were the Bank jolted into raising rates by Wednesday’s shock surge in inflation, and that jibe from the IMF? Bank of England policymaker Silvana Tenreyro was a lone voice at this week’s meeting, opposing higher interest rates. She argued that the significant uncertainty introduced by Omicron warranted waiting until February for more clarity before considering any change in Bank Rate. Tenreyro pointed out that the new variant and renewed voluntary social distancing would “unambiguously slow economic activity”, but would have two-sided effects on inflation. So the overall effect of Omicron would ‘critically’ depend on the transmissibility, vaccine resistance and severity of the variant, and the overall policy response, both domestically and abroad (which we don’t know yet). The minutes of this week’s meeting explain why one member (Tenreyro) voted to leave rates at 0.1%, although the other eight didn’t agree: Some scenarios would call for tighter monetary policy, while others would require a somewhat longer period of accommodation. In line with risk management concerns owing to the asymmetry of available monetary policy tools, this member preferred to wait for further evidence that the recovery remained entrenched, and was not threatened materially by the new variant, before tightening monetary policy. Rachel Reeves MP, Labour’s Shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer, says: “Prices have been soaring and many are feeling the pinch, so families will be concerned about additional pressures on their finances from higher mortgage payments and other debt. “The Chancellor should get on a plane back from California and get to work on a plan for growth, and crucially a plan to tackle the cost of living crisis. “That must start immediately by scrapping VAT on household gas and electricity bills to ease some of the burden this winter.” The MPC took today’s decision in full knowledge of the spread of Omicron, which it said had the potential to lead to “a very high number of infections over a very short period”, our economics editor Larry Elliott writes: What’s more, it accepted the new variant of coronavirus would weigh on the economy in the short term. But for now, the Bank seems to be assuming that the impact of Omicron will be to lead to still higher inflation, while having only a modest and temporary impact on output. That’s because tougher restrictions on socialising shift spending patterns away from face-to-face services and towards goods, where supply-chain bottlenecks have been responsible for a surge in prices. The Bank does not have to hit the government’s 2% target at all times. It can tolerate a significant overshoot (or undershoot) if it believes precipitate action would cause damage to the economy. On this occasion, it has decided the threat of inflation becoming embedded is greater than the risk to growth. That judgment will come under intense scrutiny in the coming weeks, and if things get really bad the Bank will come under pressure to bring rates down again. In the meantime, the rate rise has made clear that the Bank sees its main task to be hitting the inflation target. With the Bank currently anticipating that borrowing costs will need to rise further next year, the onus is now on Rishi Sunak to support the economy through what look likely being a testing few months. Here’s our Q&amp;A explaining what higher interest rates means for you: The Bank of England has now surprised the City two months in a row, by raising interest rate today after not doing so in November. This may trigger further criticism over its communications strategy, given recent comments from MPC members, as Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, says: “It was only a fortnight ago that Bank of England hawk Michael Saunders, who was one of just two MPC members to back a hike in November, suggested even he might pause on voting for a rate hike this month in light of the threat of Omicron. However today, many traders have been caught off guard with the unexpected hike, sending the pound and the FTSE 100 sharply higher. “There is a growing sense of frustration among traders and investors around the mixed messaging from the central bank, prompting many to label Andrew Bailey as the second unreliable boyfriend.” The Financial Times’s Alphaville site isn’t convinced there’s an economic argument behind today’s rate rise. Claire Jones writes: You might recall MP Pat McFadden labelling the Bank an “unreliable boyfriend” for wishy-washiness in the past. Well, here we go again. We’re not convinced there’s an economic argument either. The Bank’s justification is built around an idea that raising rates will keep inflation expectations anchored around its 2 per cent target — something of a jump down from the latest print of 5.1 per cent. How a meagre 15-basis-point hike will work its magic in the face of a Covid-induced supply side shock that will put further pressure on the cost of consumer goods, we’re not sure. What we’re more certain of is that the latest surge in cases is likely to hit demand for services, and rate hike won’t help that one iota. The Institute of Directors says bosses will welcome the rate rise, even though it will lift the cost of debt repayments. Kitty Ussher, Chief Economist at the Institute of Directors, explained: “Business leaders will be relieved that the Bank has demonstrated its determination to take action on inflation by leading the world in raising rates even as the Omicron situation remains uncertain. “Our internal data over the last few months had been causing us concern that high expectations of future inflation are increasingly embedded. Yesterday’s inflation data confirmed our suspicion because it showed price rises spreading across the economy rather than being confined to transitory factors. “At this point in time, most business leaders are more concerned about inflation than the rising cost of debt and so this demonstration of leadership by the Bank will be welcome.” Businesses may also be worried that their staff are, rightly, pushing for pay rises which reflect the rising cost of living and the squeeze on living standards. November’s surge in inflation means real wages are falling again. The Unite union warned that wage rises must at least match RPI inflation, which hit 7.1% last month. Today’s interest rate rise comes two days after the International Monetary Fund said the Bank of England should not delay too long before clamping down on rapidly rising inflationary pressures. The IMF, in an unusual intervention, encouraged the BOE to avoid “inaction bias” - and policymakers may have heeded that nudge. Matt Weller, global head of research at FOREX.com and City Index, says the markets are pricing in further rate rises next year: Of course, a 15bp adjustment to interest rates won’t have a major impact on the economy in and of itself, but it does signal that the tide has shifted and BOE policymakers are now prioritizing fighting inflation as the biggest economic risk. Looking ahead, markets are still pricing in about a 60% chance of another rate hike in the BOE’s next meeting in February, with rates expected to rise to above 1.00% by the end of 2022. Another former Bank policymaker, Andrew Sentance, says the MPC has taken a small step in the right direction: Professor Danny Blanchflower, a former Bank of England policymaker, says the BoE has made an ‘enormous error’ by raising interest rates today. Blanchflower served on the MPC from 20o6 to 2009. In the run-up to the financial crisis, he was a lone voice calling for rates to be cut (as they eventually were..) The Bank of England has become the first of the major central banks to raise interest rates in the pandemic, points out Thomas Pugh, economist at RSM UK. ‘Overall, the small hike in Bank rate today was a signal by the MPC to financial markets and the public that it is committed to keeping inflation under control. ‘Assuming that there isn’t another full lockdown over the next few months, then the MPC will probably raise interest rates from 0.25% to 0.50% in May. But that’s as far as we expect them to go. We expect interest rates to be closer to 0.5% than the 1.0% expected by the financial markets next year. Policymakers, market participants and firm managers should anticipate that global central bankers will talk like hawks to influence the yield curves and inflation expectations, all while acting like doves and maintaining accommodative policies.’ The emergence of Omicron had been expected to deter the Bank of England from lifting interest rates today, given the uncertainty over the variant. The Monetary Policy Committee were briefed by Sir Chris Whitty, chief medical officer for England, about the risks to public health from the Omicron variant. The minutes say: The MPC had noted previously the risks to the economy from a drop in vaccine effectiveness arising from viral mutations, although it was unclear currently to what extent the Omicron variant would lead to a decline in vaccine protection against severe disease. Given the clear signs of increased transmissibility for the new variant, there was the potential for a very high number of infections over a very short period. But policymakers are also worried that pandemic disruption would lead to further supply chain disruption, and higher prices. The minutes explain: There was some value in waiting for further information on the degree to which Omicron was likely to escape the protection of current vaccines and on the initial economic effects of this new wave. There was, however, also a strong case for tightening monetary policy now, given the strength of current underlying inflationary pressures and in order to maintain price stability in the medium term. The economic impact of the new variant could, in some scenarios, increase these inflationary pressures further. The Bank of England will probably continue to raise rates in 2022, predicts Hussain Mehdi, macro and investment strategist at HSBC Asset Management: “The 8-1 vote to raise rates is fairly surprising given the emergence of the Omicron variant and uncertainty over the near-term growth impact. Nevertheless, there were solid reasons for immediate action. The labour market is tight, and Omicron has the potential to exacerbate supply-side constraints in goods and labour. Ongoing upside inflation risks are likely to push the MPC into further action in 2022.” Raising interest rates won’t fix the global supply chain problems that have pushed up goods prices, or the record gas prices that have stoked energy bills. And as monetary policy works with a lag, today’s surprise interest rate rise will take time to filter through to the inflation rate. Ed Monk, associate director at Fidelity International, says households should expect prices to keep rising, and less cheap credit to help them. “The Bank of England’s decision to raise rates ahead of Christmas and in the face of another potential blow to growth from Omicron indicates how seriously it takes the recent acceleration of inflation. Like most economists, the Bank has been caught off-guard by the speed of price rises. “Even with the action taken today, households should expect their costs to continue to rise for some time. The small rise in rates will have a limited impact on demand and may take time to filter through to consumer behaviour, while many of the factors driving inflation remain outside of the Bank’s control. A rise in UK borrowing costs won’t ease up clogged supply chains or lower shipping costs. “The signal today’s rate rise sends is that we should expect a period of belt-tightening and less cheap credit from here on out.” The Bank of England has also cut its growth forecasts for December and the first quarter of 2022 because of the spread of Omicron (and still decided to raise interest rates....). Bank staff now expect the economy to grow by 0.6% in the final quarter of this year, down from 1% forecast in last month’s November Report. That would leave the economy around 1.5% below its pre-Covid level, and would be a slowdown on the 1.3% growth in July-September. The minutes of the Bank’s meeting explain: Growth in many sectors had continued to be restrained by disruption in supply chains and shortages of labour. The impact of the Omicron variant, associated additional measures introduced by the UK Government and Devolved Administrations, and voluntary social distancing would push down on GDP in December and in 2022 Q1. The experience since March 2020 suggested that successive waves of Covid appeared to have had less impact on GDP, although there was uncertainty around the extent to which that would prove to be the case on this occasion. There had already been some tentative signs that UK economic activity had started to be affected by the emergence and spread of Omicron. We’ve seen further evidence this morning: with private sector growth hitting a 10-month low (see here) and the number of seated diners falling again (see here). Here’s Reuters’ Jamie McGeever on today’s surprise interest rate rise: The Bank of England has raised interest rates because prices are rising much faster than its target, and the labour market looks robust (although will Omicron change that?..). The Bank now expects the CPI inflation rate to hit 6% next April, when the cap on energy bills is lifted. That’s triple its 2% target - and clearly the MPC feels it needs to act, after inflation hit a decade high of 5.1% yesterday. In the minutes of today’s meeting, it says prices have kept climbing since its last meeting (when it surprised investors by NOT raising rates): Twelve-month CPI inflation rose from 3.1% in September to 5.1% in November, triggering the exchange of open letters between the Governor and the Chancellor of the Exchequer that is being published alongside this monetary policy announcement. Relative to the November Report projection, there has been significant upside news in core goods and, to a lesser extent, services price inflation. Bank staff expect inflation to remain around 5% through the majority of the winter period, and to peak at around 6% in April 2022, with that further increase accounted for predominantly by the lagged impact on utility bills of developments in wholesale gas prices. And on unemployment, the BoE judges that the labour market has ridden out the end of the furlough scheme. On Tuesday, the jobless rate dropped again, to 4.2%, and firms have been reporting record vacancies. At its November meeting, the Committee judged that, provided the incoming data, particularly on the labour market, were broadly in line with the central projections in the November Monetary Policy Report, it would be necessary over coming months to increase Bank Rate in order to return CPI inflation sustainably to the 2% target. Recent economic developments suggest that these conditions have been met. The labour market is tight and has continued to tighten, and there are some signs of greater persistence in domestic cost and price pressures. Although the Omicron variant is likely to weigh on near-term activity, its impact on medium-term inflationary pressures is unclear at this stage. The Committee judges that an increase in Bank Rate of 0.15 percentage points is warranted at this meeting. Bank shares are rallying too, points out Victoria Scholar, Head of Investment at interactive investor. Some snap reaction to today’s interest rate rise: The pound has jumped by almost a cent against the US dollar, as traders react to the surprise rise in UK interest rates. It’s hit $1.335, up 0.7% today, its highest in over two weeks, after hitting one-year lows earlier this month. Eight members of the Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee voted to raise UK interest rates to 0.25% -- governor Andrew Bailey, deputy governors Ben Broadbent, Jon Cunliffe and Dave Ramsden, chief economist Huw Pill, and external members Michael Saunders, Jonathan Haskel, and Catherine L Mann. Only Silvana Tenreyro, the fourth external member, voted against, preferring to maintain Bank Rate at 0.1%. Newsflash: The Bank of England has raised interest rates for the first time since the start of the coronavirus pandemic despite mounting concern over the Omicron variant. Threadneedle Street’s monetary policy committee (MPC) voted to raise rates from the historic low of 0.1% to 0.25%, judging that pressure from surging inflation outweighed the risks to the economy from the new variant. Official figures showed inflation hit 5.1% in November amid soaring energy prices and global supply chain bottlenecks, hitting a rate the Bank hadn’t expected to be reached until the spring. The MPC has an official inflation target of 2%. More to follow.... Elsewhere in the markets, Turkey’s currency has slumped to a new record low after its central bank cut interest rates again. The lira fell to 15.5 against the US dollar, after the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey slashed its headline rate to 14%, from 15%, despite inflation soaring over 21%. The move had been expected, given the pressure from president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan to lower interest rates. He says lower borrowing costs will help manufacturing, create jobs, and lower inflation (although traditional economics says higher rates will cut inflation). The lira has lost half its value this year, which pushes up the cost of imported goods, and fuels concerns that a financial crisis is approaching. Here’s a breakdown of the emergency measures which could help UK firms, particularly in hospitality and leisure, to ride out the new wave of Covid-19: Reduce VAT for hospitality and tourism back to its emergency rate of 5% In July 2020 the government cut the 20% VAT rate to 5% before increasing it in March this year to 12.5%. The current discount runs out in April, when it is due to return to 20%. Reinstate 100% business rates relief for retail The British Chambers of Commerce said this was needed to give businesses “the financial headroom to weather this challenging period”. Firms were able to claim 100% business rates relief until July when the discount was cut to 66%. Sunak said the programme will expire next April. Make additional grant funding available Funding to be administered locally by councils after they have judged which businesses face a cash crisis. If ministers adopt plan C measures that come close to a fourth lockdown then “the government should remain open to increasing grant funding” to all businesses, the BCC said. Reintroduce furlough (including flexible-furlough) for those sectors most exposed to the new measures The furlough scheme closed altogether in September after the level of government support was reduced from 80% to 60% over the preceding three months. Business groups have asked for the 80% scheme to be reinstated. Further support for businesses who have used government loan and tax deferral schemes. Hundreds of thousands of businesses have taken out loans that must be repaid. Those that have yet to repay loans or applied for tax deferral schemes should be allowed to take longer repaying them. HMRC, which has preferential creditor status in insolvencies, should also outline what steps it will take to play in supporting businesses at risk of failure. Chancellor Rishi Sunak will hold talks with the hospitality sector later today, a junior finance minister said, as firms call for fresh support. John Glen, economic secretary to the Treasury, told parliament. “He will continue to engage today with other ministers, with the representatives of the hospitality sector and others, to hear their concerns about what further support should be required.” Paul Waugh of the i newspaper has more details: Fast fashion group Boohoo has warned that full-year profits and sales will be lower than expected after being hit by more customers returning clothes, delivery disruptions and surging costs. Shares in the online clothing retailer plunged 15% in response to its second warning in four months, despite its insistence that the current difficulties facing the business were mostly related to the pandemic and therefore “transient in nature”. Rishi Sunak has been criticised as missing in action for being in California while businesses groups requested urgent financial help to help them stay afloat in the run-up to Christmas after people were told to deprioritise unnecessary social contact. Our political correspondent, Aubrey Allegretti, reports: Labour’s Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary, urged Sunak and the business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, to “hammer out a deal to help hospitality because they really need us right now”. Streeting said: “Those businesses are having a hard time at the moment and we want government to be by their side.” He added: “We understand the chancellor is currently out of the country in California. So perhaps he might want to get himself on a flight back and get a grip on the situation because businesses need certainty and confidence now.” A spokesperson for Sunak said the trip was long-planned and that while he was there, the chancellor would be meeting industry leaders from the tech and investment sectors – “with a packed schedule of meetings”. They added: “He is in constant contact with staff back home and will be speaking to UK hospitality businesses today to hear their concerns.” Sharon Graham, leader of the Unite union, is calling on the government to bring forward a package of support for hospitality workers today. The uncertainty the prime minister is causing is devastating - workers don’t know if they will even have a job to go to next week. This is an appalling position to put people in. Hospitality workers did not cause this crisis and they should not be the ones who pay for it. They still have rent to find and bills to pay but are seeing their incomes disappear before their eyes. They need help now.” Some UK shops are also short of painkillers and frozen turkeys. Paracetamol was out of stock at 6% of UK stores surveyed by market researchers Kantar between last Friday and Monday, with low availability at another 14%. Frozen turkeys were also unavailable at 6% of stores, and limited at 11%, after some customers bought their Christmas food early, fearing that a lack of food processing workers would leading to turkey shortages at Christmas. And multipack crisps were in low supply at 13% of shelves, after Walkers suffered an IT problem that hit production. In another worrying sign, 7% of businesses say they have little or no confidence that they would survive the next 3 months. That’s up from 4% in early October, the Office for National Statistics reports. Also, 13% of firms says they have no cash reserves to tide them through a downturn, the highest percentage reported since June 2020, while 25% have less than three months of cash reserves. The number of people dining out in the UK has fallen again, as the rush of Christmas party cancellations hit the sector. The average number of UK seated diners in the seven days to Monday dropped to just 2% higher than in the same week in 2019, the lowest level since the reopening of indoor dining in England, Wales and Scotland back in May. That’s down from 5% higher in the previous week, and the third weekly fall in a row, the Office for National Statistics’ weekly economic healthcheck shows. It confirms that trading is deteriorating just when pubs and restaurants normally see a vital pick-up in business. Transactions at Pret A Manger stores fell last week (apart from in Yorkshire). At London airports, Pret spending fell to the lowest level since late August, as the introduction of new travel restrictions hit passenger numbers. Visits to shops fell too. Overall retail footfall in the UK fell by 1 percentage point in the week to 11 December 2021 and was 82% of the level seen in the equivalent week of 2019, the ONS says. Growth across UK companies has tumbled this month, as the spread of the Omicron variant has hammered British hospitality and travel companies. Private sector growth slowed to a 10-month low, data firm IHS Markit reports, due to tighter pandemic restrictions and renewed business uncertainty. Business confidence fell, driven by a slump in morale among consumer-facing companies as some customers cancel bookings. New business growth in the services sector was the weakest since lockdown measures were eased in March. Service sector firms, particularly in travel and hospitality, said consumer demand had been hit by tighter Covid-19 stringency measures and renewed travel restrictions [as pub and airline bosses have been warning]. This pulled Markit’s preliminary “flash” survey of purchasing managers down to 53.2 in December from 57.6 in November. That’s much weaker than expected, showing weaker growth so far this month. Chris Williamson, chief business economist at IHS Markit, warns that the recovery is likely to keep weakening: “The flash PMI data show the UK economy being hit once again by COVID-19, with growth slowing sharply at the end of the year led by a steep drop in spending on services by households. Some brighter news came through from manufacturing, where an easing of supply chain delays helped lift production growth, but more importantly also helped take some upward pressure off prices to hint at a peaking of inflation. “With COVID-19 infections set to rise further in coming weeks due to the spread of the Omicron variant, and more restrictions being introduced, the pace of economic growth looks likely to continue to weaken as we head into 2022. The bigger uncertainty will be on how rising infection rates both at home and abroad might cause further supply and labour shortages, and whether this means the easing of inflationary pressures seen in December proves frustratingly short-lived.” UK cleaning products maker McBride continues to be hammered by cost pressures. The firm behind the Oven Pride cleaning products warned it expects to make a larger half-year loss, as high packaging costs, pricier fuel and shortages of lorry drivers push up its expenses. It now forecasts an interim operating loss of £14m and £17m for the six months to December, up from £10m in October, despite lifting its own prices to try to cover these soaring costs. AJ Bell investment director Russ Mould says McBride’s woes shows the problems caused by inflation: “It is usually a bad sign when a company flags that profits will be more weighted toward the second-half than usual and it often implies that management has the prayer mat out and is hoping something helpful will turn up. In McBride’s case, something has turned up, but it is more trouble, in the form on more inflationary cost pressures, not more help. Shares have dropped over 7% to a two-year low. Mould adds: It looks like McBride is the meat in the sandwich between suppliers and buyers and its profits – and share price – are being squeezed accordingly. Growth at eurozone companies has fallen to a nine-month low, as the latest wave of Covid-19 hits Europe’s services sector. Data firm IHS Markit reports that the renewed restrictions imposed in some European countries, and travel restrictions to curb the Omicron variant, slowed the recovery in the service sector this month. Tourism and recreation were worst hit. This pulled its Composite Purchasing Managers’ Index, which tracks growth in the economy, to its lowest since March (down to 53.4, from 55.4 in November). Germany’s private sector stalled, following a surge in cases that prompted a lockdown for unvaccinated people. Chris Williamson, chief business economist at IHS Markit, said the Omicron variant poses further downside risks to the growth outlook as we head into 2022: “The eurozone economy is being dealt yet another blow from COVID-19, with rising infection levels dampening growth in the service sector in particular to result in a disappointing end to 2021. Germany is being especially hard hit, seeing the economy stall for the first time in a year-and-a-half, but the growth slowdown is broad based across the region. More encouragingly, manufacturers reported that supply chain strains are showing some signs of easing, he added. France is to tighten restrictions on travel from Britain to slow the spread of the Omicron variant of Covid-19, the French government has said. “We will put in place a system of controls drastically tighter than the one we have already,” the government spokesperson Gabriel Attal told BFM television, saying the office of the prime minister, Jean Castex, would issue a statement on the new measures in the coming hours. He said travellers coming to France would need a negative test less than 24 hours old, a blanket quarantine would be enforced on return to France, and trips for tourism limited. “We will reduce the validity of the test to come to France from 48 hours to 24 hours,” said Attal. “We will limit the reasons for coming to France from the UK, it will be limited to French nationals and residents and their families. Tourism or business trips for people who do not have French or European nationality or are residents will be limited. “People [coming back] will have to register on an app and will have to self-isolate in a place of their choosing for seven days – controlled by the security forces – but this can be shortened to 48 hours if a negative test is carried out in France.” Here’s the full story, from Agence France-Presse: British transport minister Grant Shapps has tweeted that “hauliers will remain exempt” from these new COVID-19 controls. Patrick Dardis, chief executive of pub chain Young’s, has warned that thousands of hospitality businesses will collapse in the new year, due to lost Christmas trading. He told Radio 4’s Today Programme that people are ‘terribly confused’ by the ‘mixed messages last night’ from Chris Whitty and Boris Johnson over the omicron variant. [Whitty urged Brits to limit festive socialising, which goes beyond the government’s previous advice, while Johnson said people should be cautious] Dargis says the situation is having a significant impact on trading in the crucial December weeks. They are critical for thousands and thousands of businesses across the country that were ‘hanging on by their fingernails’ in the hope of a good Christmas. And Dardis claims that a ‘fear campaign’ is damaging hospitality, saying: Unfortunately, with the latest fear campaign that’s being run, it’s damaging so many businesses that could possibly have survived. As a consequences, thousands and thousands of businesses will now collapse in January. [Earlier this week, Wetherspoon’s founder Tim Martin said the UK was introducing a “lockdown by stealth”] Dardis adds that more Christmas booking cancellations are being made every day, meaning many pubs won’t survive. There are a lot of individual owner-operators who’ve been running their businesses for years and have thrown the kitchen sink. People have lost their marriages, they’re losing their livelihood. And this is the last straw. This is the bit that they were desperately clinging onto, and it’s been taken away from them without any support from government. Dardis adds that the government should permanently leave the VAT rate on hospitality at the current temporarily level of 12.5% [rather than returning to 20% next spring], and scrap business rates as they discourage growth. Shadow health secretary Wes Streeting said the Chancellor should “get himself on a flight back and get a grip on the situation” amid reports Rishi Sunak was in California as businesses called out for support. The Daily Mirror reported that the Chancellor was on a four-day official trip to the US where he would meet industry leaders from the tech and investment sectors. But the shadow health secretary said Mr Sunak should come back to the UK to agree a deal to help businesses hit by lower footfall due to the rise in Covid-19. Mr Streeting told Times Radio: “We understand the Chancellor is currently out of the country in California. So perhaps he might want to get himself on a flight back and get a grip on the situation because businesses need certainty and confidence now.” Rishi Sunak was accused of going “missing in action” last night after it emerged he was in California rather than at his Treasury desk planning how to help struggling businesses, the Daily Mirror reported. Sources told the Mirror that the Chancellor was on a four-day official trip leaving his team back home scrabbling to work out a package of support. Unions called on Mr Sunak to announce immediate measures to help workers and firms in the hardest hit hospitality, leisure and arts sectors. The government should introduce a targeted furlough scheme to help firms hit by the current Covid-19 wave, argues the Resolution Foundation thinktank. It points out that hospitality and leisure firms will lose customers, and employees will lose their jobs, whether new restrictions are imposed or not. The Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme, which ended in September, can easily be brought back into use quickly to help firms who have to sideline staff, Resolution explain. But without further action, those who work in hard-hit sectors face ‘huge income falls’ if they lose their jobs, and inadequate sick pay if forced to isolate. Resolution say: Whatever the imminent cause of that economic pain, the right policy answer is to provide targeted economic support. Reviving a more limited version of the furlough scheme is the easiest way to do that and protect household living standards. Going into another Christmas with a wave of the pandemic beginning isn’t what anyone wanted, and nor is more spending on economic support than the Treasury had in mind. But those worst affected by this wave are no less deserving than those hit by previous waves. And, unlike then, we know that boosters offer us a way out of this mess in the months ahead. The past two years have taught us that economic policy can make a huge difference, it’s time it did so once again. Resolution’s chief executive, Torsten Bell, thinks the Treasury will act within days: Theatre director Sir Nicholas Hytner warned last night that venues were in “crisis mode”, with shows closing as actors and other staff contracted coronavirus while bookings have “fallen off a cliff”. The former artistic director of the National Theatre told BBC Newsnight: “We now surely don’t want to get into a situation where the Government’s investment last year is wasted because the sectors that it has supported collapse in the new year. “We need to see short term finance, we need to see loans, we need to see VAT looked at again, we need to see business rates looked at again.” Chef Tom Kerridge called for a return of the drop of VAT to 5% for the hospitality industry [from the current reduced rate of 12.5%], adding: “Undoubtedly there will be many places that close their doors for Christmas and don’t reopen.” Evening Standard: Hospitality pleads for help after Chris Whitty call for socialising to be cut Business groups are urging the government to provide more support for the hospitality sector to help them survive the impact of the omicron variant. Pubs and restaurants are predicting a slump in takings, as Covid-19 infections hit record highs and cancellations jump in a crucial month for hospitality. Last night, Professor Chris Whitty, England’s chief medical officer, sent a clear message that people should cut back on socialising in the run-up to Christmas Day, warning that a rise in Covid hospitalisations is “nailed on” after cases hit a record high. Appearing on Wednesday alongside the prime minister, who has continued to insist formal restrictions on gatherings are unnecessary, Whitty said: “Don’t mix with people you don’t have to.” The hospitality sector had already warned that Christmas cancellations will cut their festive takings by 40%. Baroness Ruby McGregor-Smith, CBE, President of the British Chambers of Commerce, has warned Whitt’s advise to the public to ‘de-prioritise social contacts’ will almost certainly have an enormous impact for businesses, particularly in the hospitality sector. Despite this we still heard no news of any new financial support measures coming from Government to help those businesses, and others badly affected by the current restrictions. “With the UK recording its highest ever number of Covid cases in a single day, and this being set to rise further in the coming days and weeks, businesses now face the two-punch combination of serious issues with staff absence and plummeting consumer confidence. “Until now the Treasury has stepped up at every stage of this crisis to help offset restrictions that limited business’ ability to trade fully, which is what makes its complete absence at this crucial moment all the more baffling. “Businesses have heard nothing from the Treasury since this new round of Covid interventions arrived over a week ago. Not even a rationale has been provided for why it believes no new support is required. They deserve better. The CBI has also called for ministers to provide support in lockstep with future restrictions. They say: Specifically, distributing unspent grants can be done now to alleviate firms hit hardest. If restrictions persist following the January 5 review date, then further business rates relief and other help to reduce fixed costs should be on the table. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. The Bank of England has a dilemma on its hands as it meets to set interest rates today. With inflation hitting a 10-year high of 5.1% yesterday, more than double its 2% target, there’s pressure to lift borrowing costs from their current record lows. But the uncertainty over omicron, and the economic impact of the pandemic, means the BoE may well leave rates on hold at 0.1% at noon. Silvia Dall’Angelo, senior economist at the International Business of Federated Hermes, says the outcome of today’s meeting has been a close call since the BoE resisted raising Bank Rate last month. “The Bank could well use few more weeks to get more clarity about Omicron’s implications for the outlook and to see whether the recently adopted government’s measures are sufficient to contain its fast rise in the country. In the meantime, additional data on the impact from the expiry of the furlough scheme on the labour market will also become available. Overall, it makes sense for the Bank of England to keep rates on hold at its upcoming meeting, avoiding rattling markets just before the liquidity-light holiday period. The February meeting – including a full reassessment of the outlook and a press conference to explain the rational underpinning a policy change – seems to offer the MPC a more appropriate set-up for rates lift-off.” Last night, the US Federal Reserve predicted it would raise interest rates three times in 2022. In a hawkish pivot on inflation, the Fed also announced it would end its huge stimulus programme more quickly, wrapping up the ‘tapering’ of this bond-buying by next March. Wall Street took the news well, with the Nasdaq surging 2% in a relief rally. Europe is set to open higher. Naeem Aslam of Think Markets explains: Futures in the United States and Europe are up today as investors react positively to the Fed’s decision to speed up its tapering process to tackle surging consumer prices before they get out of control. Despite liquidity being sucked out of the economy, stock traders are optimistic that the United States will be able to stay on track and achieve sustainable growth in 2022. This is good news for stock markets because economic growth ultimately translates into higher profits for companies, which will mean higher returns for investors in the form of more dividends and rising share prices. We also get new healthchecks on firms in the UK, US and eurozone, which may show the impact of omicron this month. And in a busy day for monetary policy, the European Central Bank and the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey are also meeting. The ECB could dial back its stimulus programme, while the CBRT may press on with its interest rate cuts, despite a currency crash and soaring inflation. The agenda 9am GMT: Flash PMI survey of eurozone businesses in December 9.30am GMT: Flash PMI survey of UK businesses in December 11am GMT: Turkey’s central bank interest rate decision Noon GMT: Bank of England interest rate decision 12.45pm GMT: European Central Bank interest rate decision 2.45pm GMT: Flash PMI survey of US businesses in DecemberTurkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, has vowed to take on the currency markets after a fresh cut in his country’s interest rates sent the lira plunging to its lowest ever level against the US dollar. Erdoğan said Turkey’s destiny would not be determined by the level of borrowing costs or by foreign exchange speculators despite signs his unorthodox approach to running the economy was leading to rapidly rising inflation. The Turkish president announced the minimum wage would be increased by 50% to maintain its US dollar value and promised unspecified measures to ensure stability in the coming days. His move followed a fall of more than 5% in the lira’s value against the dollar triggered by an announcement by Turkey’s central bank that interest rates were being cut by a percentage point, a bigger fall than the markets had been anticipating in light of the lira’s recent weakness. At Erdoğan’s insistence, interest rates have been cut by one percentage point five times since September, a period during which the currency has halved in value against the dollar and inflation rose to 21% – more than four times the official 5% target. The central bank has intervened in the currency markets four times in the past two weeks, selling its depleting stock of dollars in an attempt to halt the lira’s decline. However, analysts warned the latest cut in interest rates would intensify the pressure on the currency. “It is a bold move that will certainly cost Turkey a lot of money, and headache. The kneejerk reaction is a heavy sell-off in the lira,” said Ipek Ozkardeskaya, a senior analyst at Swissquote Bank. Marek Drimal at Société Générale said the increase in the minimum wage “will fuel inflation pressures further, together with the cumulative impact of the lira’s weakness”. Commenting on the central bank’s plan to reassess its monetary framework in the first quarter, he said the best-case scenario was probably that it refrained from further cuts.You can tell who the country trusts. People no longer look at Boris Johnson on TV and ask themselves why is this liar lying to me. They already know why. Boris lies because he knows no other way of interacting. Deceit is his default setting. It’s not just the past that is a foreign country; it’s also the present. Truth and Boris have never been on speaking terms. So when Chris Whitty and the prime minister hold a press conference together, there’s only one person to whom the country is listening. In the earlier days of the pandemic, the chief medical officer appeared rather starstruck by the Johnson swagger and the Downing Street setting and would automatically tend to defer to anything Johnson said. Even the stuff he knew was bullshit. But over the last nine months, the chief medical officer has wised up and is no longer fooled by the overbearing narcissist. Instead he speaks his mind. Wednesday evening was a case in point. Just as Johnson was talking drivel about people still needing to go out and about to parties – only don’t turn up to your own – despite the Omicron variant being far more transmissible than the Delta, Whitty went freelance. In his view the government advice didn’t go nearly far enough and was just plain bonkers. If you wanted an even chance of making it through to Christmas without getting ill – never mind stopping the NHS from being overwhelmed – then it was time to start cancelling some engagements and reprioritising your social calendar. The reaction was almost immediate. Though many people had already decided to cut back their social events on the basis it’s invariably safest to do the opposite of what the government suggests, given that its health policy is driven by what the boneheaded libertarians on the right of the Conservative party will tolerate rather than the public good, a great deal more chose to follow Whitty’s advice and cancel Christmas parties and outings. It was no surprise then that Labour opted to table an urgent question, asking the Treasury for the government to do more on statutory sick pay for those off work and to offer financial assistance for the hospitality and entertainment industries. The shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, had a good excuse for not being in the Commons in person: she’s at home self-isolating. Rishi Sunak, not so much. He’s on a chill-out tour of San Francisco, seeing friends in Sausalito, the Napa Valley and Haight-Ashbury. Oh, and obviously working extremely hard. Mainly at distancing himself from Boris. He doesn’t want to be seen too close to the prime minister with the possibility of a leadership election in the offing sometime in the new year. Sunak and Johnson match one another in the self-serving disloyalty stakes. In the absence of the chancellor, we got the hapless junior minister John Glen, who enjoyed a miserable 45 minutes being harangued by MPs from all parties. “It’s going to be fine,” he said desperately. Could everyone just please wait for the afternoon. To give Rishi a chance to wake up, fit in a yoga session followed by a tantric massage, and then make the 10-minute phone call with some unnecessarily stressed business dudes back in the UK. In the meantime, could everyone take some deep, Omicron-free breaths and realign their chi. Or kundalini. Or something. None of which remotely reassured anyone. Glen tried again, repeating what the government had done and dropping heavy hints that something would happen in a day or so once Rishi had completed his life-changing ayahuasca experience. So could people stop pestering the Treasury about their worries of going out of business. He was fed up with people always thinking primarily about themselves. That was the problem with society. Too much me, me, me. Om. People should just knuckle down and follow the government advice of going out and catching Covid. That’s what Boris wanted people to do and that’s what they ought to be doing. After all, that way no clubs and restaurants would be at risk. He would also like it on record he would be taking his team out for lunch on Monday in Salisbury. And could someone please keep the receipt. I’ve got news for Glen. Someone in his team would probably be cancelling the reservation as he spoke and he would be eating on his own. Not for the first time, I guess. All of this was too much for the increasingly unstable Steve Baker, who is turning into a one-man vigilante unit. On guard against anything halfway sensible. He wanted to know why “unelected” scientists, who actually know their subject, should be allowed to have a say in protecting the NHS. The people who should have the final say on public health were the politicians who were paid to make the wrong judgment calls. And if people died, they died. It was God’s way of punishing a decadent society that no longer trusted its own prime minister. Glen and the rest of the chamber stared at the floor in embarrassment. Brand Rishi – reassuringly expensive “sliders” available at £99.99 from www.dishirishi.com – wasn’t the only one to dodge a bullet in the Commons. Liz “call me ma’am” Truss, Sunak’s main rival for Boris’s job, was working on her Britannia-themed Instagram account, and so was unable to answer Tom Tugendhat’s urgent question on why Johnson had lied to him during prime minister’s questions about the projected 10% cuts to the Foreign Office. This time it was James Cleverly, who continues to be on a mission to disprove theories of nominative determinism, who had to clear up the mess. Read my lips, he said. There would be no 10% cuts to the Foreign Office. There could be 9.8% or 10.2% cuts. But definitely no 10% cuts. It was lame even by the normal standards of ministerial non-denials and it fooled no one. We had a government that not even the Tories could trust and we’d given up on the Brexit lies of the UK as a global superpower. Happy Christmas, Little Britain. • A Farewell to Calm by John Crace (Guardian Faber, £9.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.My brother, Martin Dezzani, who has died aged 67 of acute respiratory failure, was diagnosed as autistic at the age of six. Little was known about this neurological condition then. In June 1966, aged 12, he was accepted at the pioneering National Autistic Society school for autistic children run by Sybil Elgar in Ealing, west London. It was here that his artistic talent flourished. Martin won or took second place in the Art of the Invalid Child exhibition in the City of London in four consecutive years, from 1967 until 1970. At the 1968 exhibition, where he won first prize for a harvest scene, the president of the Royal Academy, Sir Thomas Monnington, lauded Martin’s work and he acquired several pieces over the years. Others who appreciated and collected Martin’s work included the artist Dame Laura Knight, and the actors Robert Morley and David Tomlinson. It was Morley who introduced two of the Beatles, John Lennon and Paul McCartney, to the school for autistic children in Ealing. Lennon acquired Martin’s ink graphic illustrating various forms of transport, intending to use it as a design for wrapping paper in the Beatles ill-fated Apple store in Marylebone, London, which closed down soon afterwards. Martin was born in central London, the eldest of four children of Anglo/Italian parents, Mario Dezzani, a restaurant manager, and Yolanda (nee Secchi), a dancer. It was clear from an early age that Martin was precociously intelligent. At his second birthday party he astonished those attending with a rendition of La Donna è Mobile from Verdi’s opera Rigoletto. In 1957, our family moved from an apartment in Hanson Street, central London, to the new town of Crawley in West Sussex where our father opened a cafe and restaurant. Martin was fascinated with the jukebox in Cafe Mario and could recall the reference letter and number of every single hit. His love for music was a way for him to express emotion that his autism otherwise prevented him from expressing verbally. Martin was able to play a tune on many instruments including the piano accordion. He continued to prolifically produce paintings and drawings for his own pleasure but Martin’s autism precluded a career in art. He seemed to like drawing mainly trains, and also filled in old diaries with illustrations and detailed memories of each particular day. Martin’s deep love of all things to do with transport, especially steam locomotives, was reflected in his extraordinary funeral service at the Bluebell Railway at Horsted Keynes station in West Sussex. Martin is survived by our mother and his two brothers, Paul and me. Our father, Mario, and our sister, Maria Teresa, predeceased him.She is married to former US president Donald Trump, but now you, too, can stare into the “cobalt blue eyes” of Melania Trump at the touch of a button and with your very own piece of trendy digital art. The former first lady has jumped into the latest internet craze by launching a non-fungible token (NFT) just in time for Christmas. It puts Melania right in the middle of a fashion frenzy in hi-tech art circles – though critics may regard it as the latest attempt by the Trump family to cash in on political success. An NFT is a digital asset – typically pictures, songs or videos – bought in an online marketplace and stored on blockchain, a secure public ledger. Blockchain allows anyone to verify the NFT’s authenticity and keeps a record of who owns what. In Melania’s first public venture since leaving the White House almost a year ago, an NFT named Melania’s Vision can be bought between 16 and 31 December with the SOL cryptocurrency or an old-fashioned credit card. An irony-free statement from her office says it is “a breathtaking watercolor art by Marc-Antoine Coulon, and embodies Mrs Trump’s cobalt blue eyes, providing the collector with an amulet to inspire.” “The limited-edition piece of digital artwork will be 1 SOL (approximately $150) and includes an audio recording from Mrs Trump with a message of hope.” Melania, 51, joins a growing list of celebrities offering lucrative digital memorabilia. Earlier this year Argentinian footballer Lionel Messi, Jamaican athlete Usain Bolt and American football player Tom Brady launched their own collections of NFTs. Singer Justin Bieber and K-pop group BTS have also dived in. The statement notes that “a portion” of the proceeds from the Melania’s NFTs, which will be released in regular intervals at MelaniaTrump.com, will support children aging out of the foster care system. But it does not say where the rest of the money will go. “I am proud to announce my new NFT endeavor, which embodies my passion for the arts, and will support my ongoing commitment to children through my Be Best initiative,” Melania is quoted as saying. “Through this new technology-based platform, we will provide children computer science skills, including programming and software development, to thrive after they age out of the foster community.” The press release also promises “a one-of-a-kind auction of historical importance” next month including three elements: digital artwork, physical artwork and a physical one-of-a-kind accessory. Former first lady Jackie Kennedy was a noted art lover who negotiated a temporary exhibition of Leonardo da Vinci’s painting Mona Lisa in Washington and New York. Michelle Obama sat for a portrait by artist Amy Sherald that is drawing crowds on a nationwide tour. Melania, by contrast, was better known for a piece of performance art in 2018 when she boarded a plane wearing an olive green coat that read, in white capital letters, “I really don’t care. Do U?” Since her husband’s election defeat, she has withdrawn from the spotlight and kept an even lower profile than she did as first lady. Thursday’s announcement was met with some skepticism. Richard Hine, a novelist, commented on Twitter: “I’m not saying most #NFTs are scams operated by grifters and money launderers. I’m just saying Melania Trump is launching an #NFT.”The European parliament has rebuked Slovenia’s government for “attacks, smear campaigns and slander” against journalists and critics, in a vote that underlines rising alarm about the threat to media freedom. MEPs backed a resolution condemning the Slovenian government for a “climate of hostility, distrust and deep polarisation” and seeking to weaken independent prosecutors and interfere with state-funded media. The resolution did not name Slovenia’s prime minister, Janez Janša, but is clearly aimed at the rightwing nationalist politician, who has called journalists liars and “presstitutes”, attacked investigative reporters and promoted conspiracy theories. While the resolution is non-binding, it shines an uncomfortable spotlight on Slovenia in the final weeks of its six months holding the EU’s rotating presidency. MEPs from the parliament’s centre-right European People’s Party, which counts Janša as a member, largely voted against the text, although a handful abstained. The resolution was passed with 356 votes in favour, 284 against and 40 abstentions, having secured the backing of the centre-left, liberal, radical left and green groups. An amendment drafted by a Belgian nationalist MEP congratulating Slovenia for a “successful” presidency of the EU council and noting that its institutions function well failed to win support. The parliament’s investigation was triggered by Slovenia’s delay in nominating prosecutors to the European public prosecutor’s office, a new body tasked with investigating fraud against the EU budget. Two people were nominated in November, but the government has since described these as temporary and sought to change the rules on the appointment of public prosecutors, meaning they could be dismissed. Slovenia’s emergency Covid rules have also come under scrutiny, with MEPs voicing concerns about the “continuing practice of rule by decree” without parliamentary scrutiny. One of the strongest concerns was freedom of the press, after government pressure on the Slovenia News Agency (STA). Janša’s government withheld the legally mandated state subsidy for most of 2021, bringing the agency to the point of bankruptcy. Most of the money has since been paid, but at least €507,000 remains outstanding, according to the European parliament. Similarly, MEPs called for Slovenia’s government to secure “sufficient funding” and “cease all political interference and pressure” on the public television network RTV Slovenia. Following the model of Viktor Orbán’s government in Hungary, Janša has sought to curb the independence of publicly funded media. He has called the Slovenian news agency a national disgrace and tried to remove its director general. On Twitter he accused an RTV Slovenia journalist of lying when they compared health spending with military spending. Unnamed Slovenian public figures and members of the government also stand accused by the European parliament of smear campaigns, slander against critics and using lawsuits to suppress public interest journalism. Slovenia is ranked 36th in the World Press Freedom Index compiled by Reporters Without Borders, down four places on its 2020 ranking. The NGO has raised concern about the criminalisation of defamation and “slanderous verbal attacks” from politicians, a trend it says worsened after Janša became prime minister in March 2020. Janša, who was in Brussels on Thursday for a summit of EU leaders, has yet to respond to the vote. When MEPs visited Ljubljana on a fact-finding mission in October, Janša described some as “Soros puppets”, in a tweet referring to the Hungarian philanthropist George Soros that fits into antisemitic conspiracy theories. The image embedded in the tweet, later deleted, was said to have come from a radical hate blog, and pictured several prominent MEPs from the Netherlands including Sophie in ‘t Veld, who led the parliament’s fact-finding mission. The Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, condemned the tweet “in the strongest possible terms” and the Slovenian ambassador was summoned to hear the same message. Janša responded by calling on Rutte and In ‘t Veld to “protect your journalists from being killed in the streets”, an apparent reference to the crime reporter Peter de Vries who was fatally shot in central Amsterdam in July.Scores of schools and colleges are closing early for Christmas, in defiance of No 10, while others are preparing for further disruption and possible closures next year as the Omicron variant sweeps the UK. The Welsh government has announced that its schools will delay the start of the new term by two days “to ensure they have robust plans in place to move to remote learning if required”, while school leaders in England are preparing for an extended switch to online learning in January, with many ensuring that pupils take laptops and textbooks home for the holidays. The Guardian has learned of primary and secondary schools in England and Wales that have decided to end term early because of staff shortages caused by illness and Covid-related isolation. While some schools have already closed on schedule, for most pupils the official end of term is on Friday, with schools in a few local authorities continuing until next Tuesday. Parents at Mersey Drive community primary school in Bury were told by the school: “We have reached the point where we are unable to maintain safe staffing levels. After consultation with the local authority we have reluctantly had to make the decision to close early for Christmas in order to keep everyone safe.” Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary for England, told headteachers he was planning to encourage former teachers to help fill the gaps left by staff shortages. In a letter to heads, Zahawi said: “We will work with sector leaders and supply agencies over the coming days to offer advice to ex-teachers who want to provide support to schools and colleges.” Geoff Barton, the general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said Zahawi’s move was “very unlikely to be enough to solve a problem at such a scale as this”. In other cases, schools and colleges have been advised by local health officials to close or switch to online learning, including Rochdale’s sixth-form college and Falinge Park high school. Parents of students at the Rochdale college were told it needed to close because the “A-level timetable and the high population density” made it impossible to identify close contacts of a confirmed Omicron case. The BBC reported that schools in at least 30 local authorities in England had moved teaching online during the last week of term. That has come despite a clear message from No 10 that schools should remain open. Asked on Monday whether schools might close early for Christmas, a spokesperson for No 10 said: “Certainly we do not think anyone should be closing schools early, unless they have received advice from the local director of public health that it’s necessary on public health grounds.” Stephen Morgan, the shadow schools minister, said: “Children have been in and out of school facing ongoing disruption to education and wellbeing again this term. This cannot continue. The government has continuously failed to plan ahead, but must act now and use the Christmas holidays to prevent the chaos seen last January.” Local authorities in England, Wales and Scotland are making preparations in case of school closures next month, or delaying reopening to allow for testing. A spokesperson for Southampton city council said some schools there were “postponing their return date by one to two days to ensure a thorough testing programme is in place to enable them to welcome students back safely … The situation is under constant review, and we are on standby to support schools in implementing any new guidance.” Other areas are preparing to take further measures such as reintroducing “bubbles” of students to minimise the spread of infection, and reintroducing social distancing measures such as staggered starts and restricted use of school facilities. Jeremy Miles, Wales’s minister for education, said all schools should plan for measures based on the Welsh government’s “very high risk level” of infection control, and was giving authority for schools to operate staggered start and finish times. “I am providing all schools with two planning days at the start of the spring term. This will allow time for schools to assess staffing capacity and put the necessary measures in place to support the return of all learners,” Miles said. Schools in Guernsey are closing early, the island’s government has announced, before the scheduled end of term on Wednesday.Persistent absence from school caused by Covid and mental illness is hampering efforts by pupils to catch up on lost learning, according to a report by Ofsted. The schools inspectorate said its visits to 98 primary and secondary schools in England had found many were “still working on getting back to pre-pandemic attendance”. It said most of the absences were related to Covid, including cases of infections and mental health issues, and what it called “Covid-19-related anxiety” among parents and pupils. Many school leaders said mental health concerns continued to cause difficulties for some of their pupils, with some reporting increased numbers of pupils suffering from anxiety and self-harm. Inspectors were told that other Covid-related absences were the result of “low resilience to setbacks or illness”, as well as families taking rescheduled or rearranged holidays during term-time. Covid-related absences were said to be higher among disadvantaged pupils and pupils with special educational needs or disabilities, as well as older students. The report found gaps in literacy and maths were commonplace, although how big they were varied. “How much pupils had learned, and how secure they were in this knowledge, depended on whether they were in school during lockdowns, how much they had engaged with remote learning and how independently they could work at home,” the report said. Ofsted also found that teacher absences related to Covid were having a profound effect on how schools function, with improvement plans and staff training being slowed down or postponed. Headteachers said they had to operate with “multiple members of staff” off at the same time. Amanda Spielman, Ofsted’s chief inspector, said: “The pandemic is still with us, and children’s education is still being disrupted. But it’s clear that many school leaders and staff have responded to these challenges with tenacity, and demonstrated creativity in how they have supported children and learners’ education and personal development. “Children have missed out so much already. And some pupils remain persistently absent from school for a variety of reasons. So, as we face further turbulence, we must do all we can to make sure children are able to continue learning in their classrooms.” Pupils starting at both primary and secondary schools appear to have been the most disrupted, with inspectors hearing that children had arrived “with lower starting points” than in previous years and were taking longer to settle in. In reception year, children who had missed out on nursery were struggling more with peer interactions, behaviour and attitudes to learning. “Some teachers said that the impact of the pandemic on reception pupils was bigger than they had expected,” the inspectors noted. The report did have at least two bright spots. Headteachers said some pupils who had previously withdrawn from their school in favour of home schooling had changed their minds and returned. And some staff said pupil behaviour had improved compared with before the pandemic. Pupils were happy to be back in school and showing a positive attitude to learning, they said.In 2020, the schedules of the classical record industry hardly seemed to miss a beat, despite all the disruptions of Covid-19. Live performances mined from the archives and a backlog of studio-made recordings provided more than enough material to maintain a near-normal stream of releases. And even this year, when such reserves have surely been depleted, there has been no obvious slackening in the pace of new issues. The range and variety has however very clearly changed, with certain areas of the repertory significantly less well represented in comparison with previous years. Those shortages have been most acutely in the areas of opera and orchestral music. Even before the pandemic, major studio recordings of opera were becoming increasingly rare, with most new issues stemming from live performances; now, with most of the world’s opera houses closed for large parts of the last two years, even that source is starting to dry up, if only temporarily one hopes. Perhaps the most significant operatic release of the year came on DVD from the Bayerisches Staatsoper’s new label, its 2019 production of Korngold’s Die Tote Stadt, with Jonas Kaufmann and Marlis Petersen leading the cast. Orchestras, too, have had few opportunities to give live concerts or make studio recordings with a full complement of players. Krystian Zimerman’s cycle of the Beethoven piano concertos, with Simon Rattle conducting the London Symphony Orchestra, was squeezed in between lockdowns at the end of last year, as were Gabriel Schwabe’s wonderfully straightforward performances of two of the greatest British cello concertos, Elgar’s concerto and Bridge’s Oration. But two of the most significant new orchestral releases, Osmo Vänskä’s superb reading of Deryck Cooke’s “performing version” of Mahler’s unfinished 10th Symphony, and András Schiff’s typically intelligent accounts of the two Brahms piano concertos, played on an 1859 Blüthner piano with the period instruments of the Orchestra of the Age of Enlightenment, were recorded in 2019, while both Antonio Pappano’s much praised version of Strauss’s Ein Heldenleben with the Santa Cecilia orchestra and Kirill Petrenko’s uncompromising Munich performance of Mahler’s Seventh Symphony date back farther, to 2018. The roots of the year’s most ambitious song release go back to 2018 as well, when the baritone Christian Gerhaher and the pianist Gerold Huber embarked on their project to record all of Schumann’s songs. Other singers were involved as necessary on the 11 discs, but it’s very much Gerhaher’s achievement overall. More modest but just as enjoyable were Claire Booth and Christopher’s Glynn’s Unorthodox Music, a programme of songs and piano pieces by Mussorgsky; mezzo Marianne Crebassa’s Séguedilles, a recital of mostly French songs and arias with a Spanish flavour; and Passion, a collection of arias by Lully, Desmarets and Charpentier from Véronique Gens. As peerless in 19th-century French operetta as she is in the baroque, Gens also featured this year on the Bru Zane label’s recordings of rarely heard stage works by Hahn, Messager and Lecocq. As usual there was no shortage of high-quality chamber music and solo-piano releases. The Takács Quartet in Mendelssohn, both Fanny and Felix, Les Vents Français surveying the Hindemith wind sonatas and Nicholas Daniel and the Doric Quartet in a selection of early 20th-century British oboe quintets were all in their very different ways outstanding. The exceptional piano releases were headed by Igor Levit’s pairing of Ronald Stevenson’s Passacaglia on DSCH and Shostakovich preludes and fugues, and Piotr Anderszewski’s selection from the second book of Bach’s Well-Tempered Clavier. But there was also elegant Liszt from Kenneth Hamilton, brilliant Ligeti Études from Danny Driver, and the start of a series devoted to the piano works of the disgracefully neglected Elisabeth Lutyens from Martin Jones, as well as a delectable selection of French music for two pianos from Paul Lewis and Steven Osborne. Once again much of the most interesting contemporary music came from the small niche labels. Apartment House’s meticulous realisations of a selection of John Cage’s late number pieces for Another Timbre were clearly a real labour of love, while the binaural recording of Aldo Clementi’s canons on All That Dust is pure sonic delight; NMC’s latest release by Tansy Davies included her piano concerto Nature, and the wonderfully imaginative piece she wrote for the National Youth Orchestra, Re-Greening. And among the discs this year from the unstoppably prolific violinist Patricia Kopatchinskaja was one devoted to the music of Francisco Coll, including the concerto he composed for her in 2019, which seems to take his music into a different expressive world altogether. Andrew Clements’ top 10 classical releases of 2021 1. Igor Levit: On DSCH – Works by Shostakovich and Stevenson We said: “Levit’s performance reveals what wonderfully pianistic pieces [Shostakovich’s] are, whether considered individually or as a magnificently arcing sequence … while his performance of the Stevenson has never been equalled.” Read full review. 2. Patricia Kopatchinskaja: Coll Violin Concerto We said: “Kopatchinskaja’s extraordinary, freewheeling virtuosity appears to have unlocked a new vein of immediacy and expressiveness in Coll’s music, which the Violin Concerto seems to me to take on to another plane altogether.” Read full review. 3. Osmo Vänskä: Mahler/Cooke: Symphony No 10 We said: “The Minnesota Orchestra plays magnificently, and Vänskä’s meticulous attention to instrumental detail and to the weighting of every chord, and his unswerving sense of symphonic coherence and continuity, make the total effect overwhelming.” Read full review. 4. Apartment House: Cage Number Pieces We said: “Apartment House’s performances are wonderfully committed and considered – every note played, you sense, is there for a reason – and reveal the strange beauty in these works.” Read full review. 5. Claire Booth and Christopher Glynn: Mussorgsky Songs We said: “Booth brings each song to life with operatic vividness … Every one becomes a miniature scena, while the piano pieces that Glynn places between them sometimes offer contrast, sometimes reinforcement. The whole thing is presented with tremendous panache.” Read full review. 6. Piotr Anderszewski: Bach Preludes and Fugues We said: “While purists may recoil in horror at hearing this music presented in what might seem a disruptively wilful order, they ought to be convinced by the sheer intelligence and lucidity of the playing, its immaculate phrasing and minutely graduated range of tone.” Read full review. 7. Christian Gerhaher: Complete Schumann Songs We said: “A fine, constantly rewarding set, with every song delivered with the fastidious attention to detail and to the individual colouring of each phrase that has always been a feature of Gerhaher’s lieder singing.” Read full review. 8. Dunedin Consort: Bach Cantatas We said: “There’s a sense of rightness and lightness in the way John Butt directs the music, and of individually characterful musicians coming together with a single purpose. It’s a seriously uplifting recording.” Read full review. 9. András Schiff: Brahms Piano Concertos We said: “Schiff makes his interpretative points without exaggeration or over-assertiveness. The performances cast new light on two of the greatest piano concertos in the repertoire.” Read full review. 10. Martin Jones: Elizabeth Lutyens Piano Music We said: “Lutyens has been scandalously overlooked since her death in 1983 … Jones’s survey of the piano music – in meticulous, clearly affectionate performances – should fill at least one of the yawning gaps.” Read full review.Old acquaintances will be renewed next summer when England face Germany, Italy and Hungary in a formidable looking Nations League group, while Wales have a reunion with Belgium. England harbour a long history with Germany but Gareth Southgate’s side beat them 2-0 in the last-16 of the delayed Euro 2020 last summer before losing the final to Italy on penalties. The general sense of deja vu will be only be heightened by the presence of another familiar opponent in Hungary in a tournament England’s coach regards as ideal preparation for next winter’s World Cup in Qatar. “That’s the beauty of the Nations League, the brilliance of this competition is that the quality of the matches is so high,” said an undaunted Southgate after Thursday’s draw in Switzerland. “To play Italy again is a great challenge but I think the fire is burning in our group of players. This is the high-level opposition we wanted in a World Cup year. The high quality of the games is what helps the team improve; these are the matches we’ve learned most from. The key thing is you learn more about the group tactically. You get tested in every aspect of the game. And this is an opportunity to win a trophy.” If Italy’s coach Roberto Mancini remains a familiar foe, Germany now have a new face at the helm in Hansi Flick. “England v Germany is an incredible historic fixture and with Germany having had a change of manager they’ve got some fabulous young players coming through,” said England’s manager. “But we got a win against Germany in the summer so we are now starting to beat those teams. What we have got to do is beat them on a regular basis. That’s the next step. To win tournaments you’ve got to win the big matches against the biggest countries and we’ve now got to do that consistently.” Crowd trouble at Wembley before the Euro 2020 final against Italy prompted Uefa sanctions dictating that England’s first Nations League home game will be played behind closed doors. Meanwhile Southgate can only hope there will be no repetition of events in Budapest when Hungary fans directed monkey chants at Raheem Sterling and Jude Bellingham and missiles were thrown from the stands in a recent World Cup qualifier. Although England won that night, Hungary held them to a draw at Wembley. “We don’t know when the Hungary fixture will be played,” said Southgate. “Or if it might be the one that’s behind closed doors but we’ve got to understand it could be a difficult fixture. It’s another challenge but one we’ve got to respond to in the right way.” Wales and Belgium have a seemingly magnetic attraction in tournaments and they join Poland and the Netherlands in another awkward looking Nations League A Group, with matches scheduled to take place in June and September. After that, the four Group A winners head to the finals in June 2023 and the bottom four teams drop into Nations League B for the competition’s next edition in 2024-25. While Wales recently faced Belgium in World Cup qualifying, their most memorable meeting came in the quarter finals of Euro 2016 when Chris Coleman’s then side recorded the most famous win in their history. Despite their significant recent progress under Steve Clarke, Scotland are currently ranked as a B League country and find themselves grouped with familiar foes in the Republic of Ireland in addition to Armenia and Ukraine. Down in the Nations League C section, Ian Baraclough’s Northern Ireland were drawn with Cyprus or Estonia, Kosovo and Greece. France, the defending Nations League champions, will meet Denmark, Austria and Croatia, while the final A Group comprises Portugal, Spain, the Czech Republic and Switzerland.Tory MP Daniel Kawczynski has been reported to the parliamentary commissioner for standards, after the Guardian revealed how the politician hosted a Saudi Arabian businessman in parliament while hoping to secure a lucrative second job. Thangam Debbonaire, the shadow leader of the Commons, has now asked Kathryn Stone to investigate whether any wrongdoing took place, saying: “This would appear to be yet another potentially egregious breach of the rules. An MP trying to use their parliamentary resources to tout for a second job is unacceptable.” WhatsApp messages seen by the Guardian show how the Conservative MP pleaded with a fixer for lucrative regular paid work from Saudi businessman Yasser bin Homran. At one point in November 2017 Kawczynski took Bin Homran for dinner in a private dining room at the House of Commons and offered a tour of parliament. On another occasion, in September 2017, Kawczynski asked the fixer to secure him a large payment for speaking at a conference about the Qatar World Cup because the MP needed “to pay school fees”. He then invited the fixer to a meeting in parliament to discuss the project, saying: “Perhaps you could come to Commons?? We could have coffee together in my office in Commons or can meet you somewhere else if not convenient for you!” The fixer says the meeting took place in parliament but they did not discuss business, saying it was instead a “general meeting to get to know more about each other”. The messages were sent in 2017 and 2018. Labour’s letter to the standards commissioner cited the MPs’ code of conduct, which states that MPs are personally responsible for ensuring publicly-funded offices and facilities are used to support parliamentary duties, rather than for “undue personal or financial benefit”. Debbonaire said: “The parliamentary commissioner for standards should investigate this. Labour supports toughening up the standards system, with a ban on directorships and paid consultancies for MPs. We have seen time and time again that Conservative MPs repeatedly think they can put their own private business interests ahead of their constituents and the prime minister must put a stop to this.” While attempting to secure a second job, the Tory MP for Shrewsbury and Atcham asked the fixer to find him work with a Saudi employer, describing himself as the most “pro-Saudi” member of parliament and boasting that the Saudi leader, Mohammed bin Salman, “has stated that Saudi has no better friend in UK than me”. No new work appears to have materialised from Kawczynski’s pleas. In her letter to the standards watchdog, Debbonaire acknowledges that the current rules do allow for MPs to undertake some paid consultancy work. Kawczynski did not respond to request a for comment but in a statement to the Times, his office said: “It is clear that at this time, the press wish to keep a momentum going, the sale of stories no matter the consequences to people’s lives. At this time, Daniel Kawczynski is focused on Covid spread prevention measures, and his work for the constituency of Shrewsbury and Atcham. No rules were broken with regards to consultancy work, nor were any parliamentary resources used for personal gain.”There are calls for an urgent Holyrood inquiry into more than 100 instances of alleged police intimidation, harassment and aggression towards activists at the Cop26 summit in Glasgow, as a report challenges Police Scotland’s insistence that it would carry out a human rights-based operation. Supported by the Scottish Greens – now government partners after their post-election deal with the Scottish National party – an extensive report by the Network for Police Monitoring (Netpol) and the Article 11 Trust argues that “systemic abuses of power” demand critical consideration by MSPs after Police Scotland’s repeated insistence that policing of protests at November’s climate conference would be “human rights-based” and “welcoming, friendly and proportionate”. The Scottish Greens MSP Maggie Chapman said the report, published on Thursday, was “very concerning”. “Police Scotland promised to put human rights at the heart of their operations at Cop26, but some of the alleged tactics and abuses documented by Netpol and Article 11 are very worrying. They seem totally disproportionate and should have no place in the policing of peaceful protest,” she said. “Accountability is vital, and so is getting to the truth of the matter. We need to learn from what has happened to ensure that it is not repeated. That is why I support the calls for an independent parliamentary inquiry and will explore it further with colleagues on the criminal justice and equalities, human rights and civil justice committees.” During the summit, the Guardian reported how accumulated incidents of police intimidation were creating “an atmosphere of fear and repression” on the streets of Glasgow and had a chilling effect on protest, according to campaigners and monitoring groups. The assistant chief constable Gary Ritchie said officers had “enjoyed very positive engagement and constructive relationships with the vast majority of people” who had come to Glasgow to “have their voices heard and engage in peaceful protest”, with fewer than 100 arrests. “In general, the vast majority of people who wanted to have their voice heard and protest in relation to Cop26 have been able to do so safely and peacefully. The very small minority who wanted to cause more major disruption have been appropriately, and proportionately, dealt with.” Drawing from 120 witness statements from campaigners, members of the public and legal observers, the report highlighted a number of areas of concern. It noted that the event’s gold commander, assistant chief constable Bernard Higgins, told the Scottish police authority after the summit that people in two “containments” – which activists described as “kettling” – were not being held “against their will”. But the report claims witness statements refute this, with individuals refused exit for many hours without access to food, water, appropriate clothing and toilets, instead being forced to urinate in the street. It also raised concerns that throughout the conference, stop and search powers were used “in a seemingly arbitrary way and, it appears, as an intelligence-gathering tool”. Campaigners and members of the public also reported “intrusive and intimidating” surveillance, with activists “followed, filmed and unlawfully harassed to give personal details”. The report also claimed legal observers at protests were frequently prohibited from carrying out their duties and that on several occasions officers obstructed their view or threatened them with arrest.Oisin Murphy, Britain’s champion jockey on the Flat for the last three seasons, said on Thursday that he has “temporarily” relinquished his licence to “focus on rehabilitation” after it emerged that he will face disciplinary charges early in 2022 relating to two racecourse positives for alcohol in 2021, as well as a failure to follow Covid protocols in September 2020. Murphy was stood down from riding at Newmarket in September after failing a pre-race breath test, which was believed at the time to be his second positive for alcohol in just over two years, following a similar incident at Salisbury in June 2019. However, it emerged on Thursday that he also failed a urine test at Chester in May 2021, which means in turn that his failed breath test at Newmarket would be his third positive within 36 months. That would trigger an automatic ban of between 60 and 180 days, with an entry point of a 90-day ban. In addition, the British Horseracing Authority said in a statement on Thursday that Murphy will also face charges of “misleading or attempting to mislead the BHA regarding his true location between 9 and 12 September” last year, “accessing the racecourse in breach of the Covid-19 requirements” and “acting in a manner prejudicial to the proper conduct and good reputation of horse racing”. The jockey had been due to appear before an independent disciplinary panel earlier this month for the Covid breach, but that has been postponed after submissions from his legal team and the rider’s decision to temporarily hand in his licence. In a statement released jointly with the BHA’s announcement of the charges against him, Murphy said: “In September 2020 I failed to follow the Covid protocol set out by the BHA. In breaking these rules, and attempting to mislead the BHA, I’ve let my governing body down, along with trainers, owners, staff, sponsors and family for which I wish to apologise.” His statement continued: “In addition to this there have been two racecourse incidents linked to alcohol during 2021. It became obvious to me and to everyone else that I needed to seek serious help. In recognition of this I have relinquished my licence and will now focus on my rehabilitation. I am grateful to the BHA for agreeing to postpone the disciplinary hearing [originally scheduled for 10 December] until I have been able to take these steps. Whether I deserve it or not, many kind people have stood by me and I really appreciate their support. I’m deeply embarrassed and regret my actions.” Murphy was crowned champion again in October after an epic battle with William Buick. The Killarney-born rider looked set for a comfortable defence of his title with a few weeks of the season to go – but a late charge from Buick set up a thrilling finale, with Murphy ultimately coming out on top by 153 winners to 151. Away from his big-race victories, Murphy – who is the retained rider for Sheikh Fahad’s powerful Qatar Racing operation – has been in the headlines for all the wrong reasons of late and admitted he thought about quitting racing altogether while serving a drugs ban. He was banned for three months in November last year after a racecourse test, taken at Chantilly in July, found traces of cocaine in his system. Having always strenuously denied he had taken any drugs, Murphy requested a B sample – and upon receiving the results, France Galop held a hearing where the rider’s defence of environmental contamination from a sexual encounter and scientific hair test evidence was accepted.The government’s new building regulations were supposed to be the blueprint for carbon-neutral homes, helping the country reach net zero by 2030, but instead are a step backwards, industry experts have said. The government policy, published on Wednesday and due to be introduced by 2025, has mandated a 30% carbon cut in all new buildings and a 27% cut in others. The new rules will come into force in June in England, with a transition period to allow for planning applications that are in progress at the time. The housing minister, Eddie Hughes, said the change would pave the way for the future homes and future buildings standards in 2025 and would mean all future homes would be ready for net zero and not need any retrofit work. “The changes will significantly improve the energy efficiency of the buildings where we live, work and spend our free time and are an important step on our country’s journey towards a cleaner, greener built environment,” he said. However, construction industry experts said the new regulations are “a tiny and far cry from what is needed” especially considering Cop26 commitments. They argue, in particular, that allowing large building companies to use their own performance metrics does not bode well for a reduction in emissions. “From a first glance it may seem that the interim uplift is positive. From the face of it, it looks like buildings under the 2021 uplift will emit 30% less carbon,” explained Clara Bagenal George from LETI, a network of 1,000 built environment professionals that are working together to put London on the path to a zero carbon future. She argued that in fact, “due to the methodologies behind the regulation, this is more likely to translate into only a 5%-10% improvement in energy efficiency in practice”. Joe Baker, head of carbon management at Haringey council, reacted on Twitter to the regulations, saying: “This is disappointing and lacks ambition. Industry experts, investors, and citizens have shared with the government what is possible and what they want to see. They have given examples of where development is delivering better building far beyond this proposal. Showing the benefits to the industry, investors, and building occupiers. However, their views, expertise, and experiences, have been disregarded for a lower standard. “What happened to global Britain? Where is the global leadership in building a better zero carbon future? Using the UK’s skills and knowledge to deliver this ambition.” Experts have also argued that the new commitments don’t require existing housing stock to be retrofitted, which would reduce energy consumption and improve efficiency. Julie Godefroy at the Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers, explained: “CIBSE had many concerns about the consultation proposals, including performance metrics, the treatment of heat networks and the lack of ambition to retrofit the existing stock. Some of these concerns have been partially addressed and, in some cases, government has adopted the most ambitious option from the consultation. “However, the uplift is a significant missed opportunity to provide a meaningful step towards the future homes/buildings standard, and it risks adding to the legacy of buildings and networks which will need future retrofit. “New buildings are the easiest part of decarbonising the built environment, so we must get it right, and there is huge industry support for net zero, which government must build on.” Vanessa Scott, the climate change manager for West Oxfordshire district council, said: ‘‘At a local authority level, in order to achieve net-carbon homes, we needed government to be listening to experts and pushing forward with standards that will lead us towards this goal and sooner rather than later. Industry experts have shared with the government what is possible, but they have not been listened to.”Thousands of business have been left reeling by a dramatic drop in trade in the run-up to Christmas, with concerns about the Omicron variant of Covid-19 prompting consumers to cancel bookings or stay away. The work-from-home guidance introduced last week under plan B measures in England has left city centres depopulated. Some business owners blamed the falloff on mixed messages from the government, after the chief medical officer, Chris Whitty, advised against socialising but venues were allowed to stay open. Here are some of the areas of the economy that have been hardest hit: Restaurants and pubs A week ago, the Parkers Arms, a countryside gastropub near Clitheroe in Lancashire, was fully booked for Thursday’s lunchtime sitting. Just 11 out of 50 continued with their bookings after the warnings about socialising, said landlady Stosie Madi, while more than half of weekend bookings are also now cancelled. “I’ve had people wanting deposits back and I’ve had to dig my heels in,” she said. Madi is far from alone. According to UK Hospitality, which represents pubs, bars, cafés and restaurants, trade is already down by one-third and the industry is expecting a further 22% drop in bookings for December, at a cost of £4bn. Business owners like Madi are facing an uncertain future without government support. “We’ve still got a backlog of rent debt, we’ve invested in the food, we’ve got suppliers and staff to pay, astronomical winter costs with heating and energy,” she said. Madi criticised the government for issuing advice that has made people wary of socialising but failing to offer businesses financial support to cushion the resulting blow to trade. “I’ve never know such a bunch of cowards, making statements like that, hanging us out to dry and then leaving us crumbling. What on earth do they expect us to do? How many knocks are we supposed to take?” James Chiavarini took over the Il Portico restaurant in South Kensington, London, that was started by his family in the 1960s, and runs its sister venue, the wine bar Pino. “It [trade] has been 80% or 90% on some days. Thirty seven people have cancelled for tonight, out of 80 covers. Next door, at our wine bar, we’re down to 1 table that hasn’t cancelled, out of 60. It’s been annihilated,” he said. “If the industry suffers, a lot of people will end up on universal credit. The question in January is how many redundancies will have to be made. Hopefully none but that’s up to Mr [Rushi] Sunak really.” Hairdressers Hair salons around the country have also spoken of facing a wave of cancellations during a period that is normally their busiest. “We’ve had a lot of cancellations, about 20 alone in the run-up to Christmas. It is what it is, people are just wary of Covid,” said Aidan Garlington, who runs a unisex salon in Bristol. Some said they thought most were due to people testing positive or having to self-isolate, but the cancellation of events such as Christmas parties was also having a knock-on effect. “We’ve had something ridiculous like seven cancellations in one day,” said Georgia Grealey, a technician at c in Birmingham. “We’ve got quite a lot of gaps now up to Christmas and I think everyone is quite concerned.” Uncertainty and confusion around Omicron was one of the main factors behind decisions to cancel, she said. “We’ve gone from being fully booked to having a chance to sit down throughout the day, which in December … feels weird.” Hair salons have faced multiple closures throughout the pandemic, with this year’s festive period seen as key time to boost profit after a year of losses, and without any government support businesses are wary about the future. Live performance Venues for gigs and concerts have suffered a “catastrophic” 23% drop in attendance since the plan B announcement, with many fearing they will never reopen, according to the Music Venues Trust (MVT). The charity conducted a 24-hour survey of grassroots music venues and found 140,000 “no shows” from ticket holders resulting in a 27% decline in gross income. Mark Davyd, its chief executive, said: “It feels like we are back exactly where we were in March 2020, when confusing government messaging created a ‘stealth lockdown’ – venues apparently able to open but in reality haemorrhaging money at a rate that will inevitably result in permanent closures unless the government acts quickly to prevent it.” The survey also revealed that 61% of venues had cancelled at least one gig in the past week. In Cardiff, promoters have postponed until June next year gigs headlined by Stereophonics and Tom Jones as a direct result of Omicron. On social media there is evidence of gig tickets being sold at a fraction of the original cost by people not wanting to go because of the Covid risk, but also realising they cannot get a refund. It is a similar story for the UK’s theatre industry at a crucial time of year. It is the money generated from the annual pantomime that allows regional theatres to take more risks with other productions during the year. One big Omicron panto casualty is Aladdin at the Brighton Centre which was due to star Anita Dobson. It has been postponed for a year. The entertainment union Bectu said there had been a wave of theatre cancellations and it would again be freelance workers – many of whom were excluded from support earlier in the pandemic – who suffered most. Philippa Childs, head of Bectu, said: “This started as a public health crisis but it could quickly become a jobs crisis as well.”Wonderful to know that microbes are evolving to eat plastics (Report, 14 December). I just hope they don’t get too good at it. Looking round this room, I would lose the keyboard I am typing this on, the phone, the file boxes, half the vacuum, plugs, the front-doorbell receptor, probably one handbag and all the CDs and DVDs. It would be terrifying to come in one morning and find that they had all jellified. Margaret Squires St Andrews, Fife • My first tattoo, at 71 (Meet the people who had their first tattoo after 60, 14 December), is a celebration of my suffragette great-granny’s Holloway brooch, awarded to her by Emmeline Pankhurst. It was given to her after her stay in Holloway prison, where she, along with many others, was force-fed. The tattoo, on my wrist, is of the purple, white and green flashes from the middle of the brooch. Sally Smith Redruth, Cornwall • The mayor of London aims to “rewiggle” its streams to alleviate flooding (Sadiq Khan leads ambitious plans to rewild Hyde Park, 14 December). If this proves impractical, then Northamptonshire can supply him with any number of “pre-wiggled” streams if the price is right. Alan Woodley Northampton • Ms Percy might find that the guests leave even more quickly if her husband appears in the doorway without his pyjamas, not in them (Letters, 14 December). Michael Cunningham Wolverhampton • My aunt Marjorie used to announce: “I’m in my home and I wish everyone else was in theirs.” She wasn’t famous for hospitality. Liz Fuller London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I am an NHS worker. On Wednesday night I left the Labour party due to its stance on voting in favour of compulsory vaccination for NHS staff, and vaccination passes (MPs back Covid passes in England amid large Tory rebellion, 14 December). I am fully vaccinated myself, after I debated and weighed up the risks, and I will fight to the death to maintain the right to decide what I put into my body. To threaten people with loss of employment unless they have a vaccination is coercive control, it is abusive, and I don’t understand how it can be legal. To mandate for one group of employees, who happen to have some of the most stressful and responsible jobs in society, is so obviously wrong and unethical. Yes, mandate for social behaviour, ie regular testing, providing evidence of negative tests, wearing PPE with all patients and vulnerable people, social distancing measures etc. But as a society I thought we subscribed to the right to have control over our bodies. Name and address supplied • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.As a relatively small charity that helps people to live better with sight loss, like many others we have seen donations drop over the last two years. We want to do more. We would like to be able to concentrate on doing the work we know makes a difference rather than scrabbling around for scraps of funding here and there until we get enough to make it through. What’s galling is the amount of money that’s actually out there, money that those who have it don’t use or don’t really need (Britain’s top earners giving less to charity while incomes rise, 15 December). I can promise you that I will find a better use for it – one that will improve more people’s lives and save the public purse from picking up the tab for the consequences were we not here. The Sackler family’s name may be mud at the Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York’s Met museum to remove Sackler family name from its galleries, 9 December), as it was at our London art galleries a couple of years ago, but we could use their money too: I think I could hold my nose just about long enough to take some of that apparently stinking pile and do something better with it. Are there any other disgraced billionaires out there who want to salve their conscience a bit? Come and talk to me. I can help. Hugh Sorrill General manager, Coventry Resource Centre for the BlindRe John Crace’s sketch (Broken Boris Johnson can no longer lie his way out of trouble, 15 December), there were two blatant falsehoods from Boris Johnson at Wednesday’s PMQs. Perhaps we don’t care any more. Or perhaps they should always be called out. The prime minister claimed “we have the fastest growing economy in the G7” and that “we now have 500,000 more people in work than there were when the pandemic began”. However, from the Office of National Statistics website, we can see that there were in fact 33,012,000 people employed in January to March 2020 (before the pandemic) and 32,506,000 in August to October 2021. That’s roughly 500,000 fewer people in work, not more. With regard to the “fastest growing economy in the G7”, this also doesn’t seem to be true. From the figures for quarterly GDP growth published by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, we can clearly see that the UK was behind Germany, Italy and France for the third quarter of 2021. UK growth in the second quarter was a lot better (5.5%), but that would be cherry-picking a good quarter. In the overall ranking of recovery compared with the start of the pandemic, the UK is a laggard. How is he allowed to spout this easily disprovable nonsense? Tom Parke Abingdon, Oxfordshire • I could not believe what I was hearing at PMQs, so I am grateful to John Crace for confirming that Boris Johnson actually denied that the government had to rely on Labour to win the vote on new Covid measures in England. Surely the Speaker should have intervened with the prime minister and called him out for ordure, ordure. Mike Pender Cardiff • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Patrick Butler (Star Hobson case raises more questions over burden on children’s services, 14 December) noted that Bradford, where 16-month-old Star Hobson was horrifically killed, is “not the only council struggling to keep its child protection department afloat and working effectively”. I fear that it is about to get worse. This week, it was reported that social workers have been threatened, attacked and spat on. There are consequences from the media coverage that this case has received, which will make children less safe and less protected. Experienced social workers, heath visitors, community paediatricians and others – already overwhelmed by the extent and nature of their workloads – will be more difficult to retain. It will escalate the current difficulties of a less experienced and less stable workforce, and a dependence on short-term agency workers, driving big profits for employment agencies and taking funding out of children’s services. What families will see is more delay and disruption, and more churn and change in who makes contact with them – helpful if you want to disguise what is happening to children as no one builds up the picture of concerns over time. Dr Ray Jones Earlswood, Monmouthshire • Patrick Butler is right to identify the contribution of contextual factors in individual child abuse cases, but societal inequalities also have a major impact on the day-to-day work of children’s services. There is extensive evidence showing the negative impact of poverty on children’s wellbeing, including a causal association with children needing help and coming into care. Since 2011, this has contributed to a 125% increase in child protection inquiries and a 24% rise in the number of children in care. Both the strengthening of child protection and the transformation of children’s services promised by the review of children’s social care, due to report early next year, will have to build on a foundation of equality – as well as reversing the legacy of cuts to services. Prof Mike Stein University of York • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.My sister Sally Austin Brown, who has died of cancer aged 74, found her vocation in 1978 when she joined Greenpeace and campaigned in the original crew of the Rainbow Warrior, the first of her lifelong actions in the growing environmental movement. Born in Colchester, Essex, to Pamela (nee Woodhead) and Sq Ldr John Austin, who met whilst serving in the WRAF and RAF, she endured boarding at Redmaids’ school in Bristol. Although she wanted to go to art school, instead she attended Gloucestershire Technical College, where she gained essential O-levels but her artistic interests were unfulfilled. Aged 18 she trained as a state registered nurse at West London hospital in Hammersmith, then worked in renal care where she met and married Craig Dexter. They divorced a few years later and Sally moved to Cornwall where she lived the rest of her life, starting work in Falmouth hospital on the children’s ward. When our father John died in tragic circumstances, she lived with Pam for a year, during which time she saw a 1978 television documentary about whaling and Greenpeace. Out of nowhere she found a passion. After writing to express interest she was invited to the London office. Within weeks she had joined the crew of the UK branch’s new flagship, the Rainbow Warrior, then moored in Amsterdam, as nurse and cook, for various campaigns on whaling and nuclear waste. In 1982 commercial whaling was banned worldwide. Sally foresaw many of the ways in which humanity needs to change if it is to live healthily, peacefully and harmoniously with the natural world. But more than that, she took action, promoting vegetarianism, selling whole foods, fighting harmful developments, reducing plastic consumption and creating healthy cleaning products. She combined the last two of these in 2005 when she started making natural, non-toxic soap-based cleaners in her shed, first in Falmouth, and later at her home in the village of Devoran. She founded the Ecogenie cooperative with her friend Kate, and they sold their products to refill recycled plastic bottles, using them in house cleaning services and supporting schools and communities in the south-west. After the company closed in 2013, Sally continued to sell her natural soap products. Sally’s family were everything to her: her loving partner of 40 years, David Brown, their son, Tom, and her stepson, Jon – all three boat riggers – and their wider families. Caring for her grandchildren as well as our mother in her declining years exemplified her selfless commitment to others. Many old friends in her community will miss her dearly. We are all profoundly influenced by her values, which live on through us. Pam died in 2015. Sally is survived by David, Tom, Jon and me.The UK’s largest building control organisation was warned 18 months before the Grenfell Tower fire that “any number of buildings” could go up in flames because they were fitted with combustible panels that did not meet building regulations. But the body did not check whether it had given approval to any such blocks, the public inquiry into the disaster heard on Thursday. The warning, from a facade manufacturer, came at a construction safety conference in January 2016 addressed by Steve Evans, head of technical operations at the National House Building Council (NHBC). It prompted the event chair to ask if “we are sitting on … a timebomb”. The inquiry has already found that combustible aluminium composite (ACM) panels applied to Grenfell Tower between 2014 and 2016 were the main cause of spread of the fire that killed 72 people. A similar warning of “grave concern” was sent by the same manufacturer to the government’s senior civil servant with responsibility for fire regulations, Brian Martin. He replied that such panels should be tested but “if the designer and building control body choose to do something else then that’s up to them”. The evidence came as the government applied sanctions to a sister company to the Grenfell Tower refurbisher Rydon, suspending it from the help-to-buy scheme which allows first-time buyers to get cheap loans on new homes. Michael Gove, secretary of state for levelling up, housing and communities, said the move against Rydon Homes was due to “the extremely concerning evidence heard by the Grenfell Tower inquiry” about Rydon Maintenance Ltd’s role as the main contractor on the disastrous refurbishment. The move, more than a year after the evidence emerged, comes as the inquiry begins to investigate whether ministers and officials knew about, but failed to tackle, risks posed by dangerous building techniques. Gove said: “I will continue to go after those who put lives at risk, are responsible for the building safety crisis and are failing to play their part in fixing it.” Earlier, the inquiry heard how the “timebomb” issue was raised in the wake of a huge cladding fire in Dubai. In a question-and-answer session at the industry conference Nick Jenkins, a senior technician from Booth Muirie, which manufactures cladding systems, said: “You could have an exact repeat of the Dubai fire in any number of buildings that we supply product to in London.” Jenkins said he felt “real concern” because over the last 15 years his firm had only supplied limited combustibility cladding on two projects in the UK. The rest, he implied, was combustible. This was because of ambiguity in the UK government’s building regulations, policed in part by the private organisation NHBC, over whether panels that were not of limited combustibility were allowed on high-rise apartments. Evans told the inquiry he had trusted that the NHBC hadn’t signed off such buildings for approval, but admitted that even after Jenkins had raised the threat, he was not aware of any effort to check if they had. Under cross-examination by the counsel to the inquiry, Richard Millett QC, he said he “didn’t have a view” at the time on whether Jenkins was right to consider it a grave concern and he was only focused on buildings under construction, not projects that had been completed. He said it might have been a case of “not joining up all the dots”. The inquiry heard Jenkins was so worried he also wrote to the government. Martin said full-scale tests were needed to determine whether such panels were safe. When Jenkins replied that he believed no full-scale tests had been done, and the number of tall buildings with ACM panels that do not meet building regulations were “many and … growing”, Martin conceded that he was doubtful even ACM panels with fire retardant cores would pass tests. Lawyers for the bereaved have already told the inquiry that Martin was “fully aware” of the dangers of combustible materials on high-rise blocks. Martin is currently head of technical policy in the building regulation division at the department of levelling up, housing and communities. He is to give evidence in the new year. The inquiry continues.This was the year that the cinema emerged, blinking, from its enforced hibernation, and the new James Bond film, which was beginning to feel like some sort of commercial or cultural myth, actually came out to tumultuous box office business. International film festivals were once again happening in reality. And some old debates and quarrels have been revived. Cannes artistic director Thierry Frémaux, who has decided against scheduling any films that did not have a big-screen cinema release, pointedly asked his audience at the opening press conference if Netflix has ever nurtured any directors from the beginning of their career. Answer came there none – although Twitter was lively on the subject afterwards. But maybe 2021 was the time to put this argument to bed. The fact is that Netflix really is supporting major films by major film-makers, including what many believe to be the best of the year: The Power of the Dog, by Jane Campion. The practice of established directors attacking superhero films, and getting attacked for attacking superhero films, continues. (And renowned arthouse director Chloé Zhao scored a miss with her solemn Marvel movie Eternals.) The increasingly remarkable Ridley Scott – who had two colossal feature films released this year – sounded off defiantly against the heroes in tights and capes. And then, when his period drama The Last Duel performed unconvincingly at the box office, he criticised millennians [sic] and their phone habits. Well, if anyone has earned the right to be grumpy about young people, it’s Scott, and his other film, the outrageously silly and enjoyable true-crime black comedy House of Gucci starring Lady Gaga, was a big hit. True to form, Scott dismissed the Gucci family’s complaints on this subject with magnificent hauteur. Will the omicron variant bring the shutters back down? We have to hope that it won’t. The cinema defied the premature obituaries this year. Of course, streaming services did well – but so did the movie theatres. Like going to pubs, or nightclubs, or sports arenas, cinema-going turned out to be a real-world collective thrill that we were longing for. But it was in this real world that the movies also gave us one of the year’s most shocking and scandalous stories: the accidental fatal shooting of cinematographer Halyna Hutchins on the set of the western movie Rust, by its star and producer Alec Baldwin. Baldwin has since given an emotional TV interview on the subject to George Stephanopoulos, in which his tears, though perfectly genuine, coexisted with an obvious desire to control the narrative, pre-empt legal jeopardy and finesse the question of his own indirect responsibility as producer. And what is still staggering, despite all the discussion, is the still unanswered question – how on earth did a live round get into the prop gun? Yet the question naively overlooks the bigger picture. Could it be that people were casual around guns and ammo on this American movie set because people are casual around guns and ammo in the US generally, where the western film genre has incidentally done much to promote and romanticise gunplay? The sexual politics of Hollywood, once the hottest of hot-button issues, appear also to have cooled a little since Harvey Weinstein was found guilty in February 2020. In fact, this year we saw glimmerings of what is being called the new “uncancel culture”: a bland new quasi-forgiveness in the air, now that a big wrongdoer has been brought down, precisely the outcome predicted by many at the time. Kevin Spacey (who has no criminal charge against him) has taken a small role in an Italian movie, pointedly playing a cop investigating child abuse. And the continued success of Mel Gibson, whose bigoted, misogynist and antisemitic outbursts are notorious, is one of the film industry’s creepiest phenomena: he is in talks to direct Lethal Weapon 5 and is slated to appear in a John Wick origin-myth TV show. One talking point that has arisen in 2021 is the debate about abolishing gender categories in acting awards. For some, they have always been an absurdity; after all, we don’t have different awards for male and female directors, or cinematographers, or sound editors. But the division arguably enforces diversity and historically has done its bit to ensure women get their seats at the table. The Braddies Rightly or wrongly, I have kept the usual distinction in these Braddies, my personal choices which are distinct from Guardian Film’s best-of-the-year countdown. The nominees are listed in no particular order and readers are invited to vote for their favourites. Best film Dune (dir. Denis Villeneuve) The Green Knight (dir. David Lowery) Azor (dir. Andreas Fontana) Limbo (dir. Ben Sharrock) Petite Maman (dir. Céline Sciamma) No Time to Die (dir. Cary Fukunaga) The Power of the Dog (dir. Jane Campion) Drive My Car (dir. Ryûsuke Hamaguchi) Nomadland (dir. Chloé Zhao) West Side Story (dir. Steven Spielberg) Best director Lee Isaac Cheung for Minari David Lowery for The Green Knight Andrei Konchalovsky for Dear Comrades! Jasmila Žbanić for Quo Vadis, Aida? Jane Campion for The Power of the Dog Emerald Fennell for Promising Young Woman Kelly Reichardt for First Cow Ryu Hamaguchi for Drive My Car Nia DaCosta for Candyman Alonso Ruizpalacios for A Cop Movie Best actress Lady Gaga for House of Gucci Joanna Scanlan for After Love Kristen Stewart for Spencer Olivia Colman for The Lost Daughter Rosamund Pike for I Care a Lot Mónica Del Carmen for A Cop Movie Ruth Negga for Passing Tessa Thompson for Passing Rachel Sennott for Shiva Baby Frances McDormand for Nomadland Best actor Amir El-Masry for Limbo Benedict Cumberbatch for The Power of the Dog Clayne Crawford for The Killing of Two Lovers Oscar Isaac for The Card Counter Dev Patel for The Green Knight Adarsh Gourav for The White Tiger Anthony Hopkins for The Father Riz Ahmed for Sound of Metal Neil Maskell for Bull Jean Dujardin for Deerskin Best cinematographer Andrew Dunn for The United States vs Billie Holliday Quyen Tran for Palm Springs Chung Chung-hoon for Last Night in Soho Andrew Droz Palermo for The Green Knight Claire Mathon for Spencer Caroline Champetier for Annette Gabriel Sandru for Azor Robbie Ryan for C’mon C’mon Matthew Lewis for Boiling Point Greig Fraser for Dune Best debut Identifying Features (dir. Fernanda Valadez) Rare Beasts (dir. Billie Piper) Shiva Baby (dir. Emma Seligman) Limbo (dir. Ben Sharrock) Censor (dir. Prano Bailey-Bond) Sweetheart (dir. Marley Morrison) After Love (dir. Aleem Khan) Azor (dir. Andreas Fontana) The Lost Daughter (dir. Maggie Gyllenhaal) Lamb (dir. Valdimar Jóhannsson) Best screenplay Jane Campion for The Power of the Dog Ryûsuke Hamaguchi and Takamasa Oe for Drive My Car Céline Sciamma for Petite Maman J Blakeson for I Care a Lot Cristi Puiu for Malmkrog Andy Siara and Max Barbakow for Palm Springs David Gaitán and Alonso Ruizpalacios for A Cop Movie Ron Mael and Russell Mael for Annette Christine Molloy and Joe Lawlor for Rose Plays Julie Paul Schrader for The Card Counter Best documentary The Velvet Underground (dir. Todd Haynes) Getting Away With Murder(s) (dir. David Nicholas Wilkinson) The Story of Looking (dir. Mark Cousins) Last Man Standing (dir. Nick Broomfield) The Sparks Brothers (dir. Edgar Wright) Ultraviolence (dir. Ken Fero) Janine Jansen: Falling for Stradivari (dir. Gerald Fox) Summer of Soul (dir. Questlove) Poly Styrene: I Am a Cliché (dirs. Celeste Bell, Paul Sng) Mother (dir. Kristof Bilsen) This article was amended on 17 December 2021 for the best debut line-up as Souad was not a debut film, and has been replaced by After Love.Hospitals in England are already 94% full, with four out of five critical care beds occupied, even before the spread of the Omicron variant of coronavirus has started to cause a big influx of patients. NHS statistics published on Thursday showed hospitals under intense pressure and sparked fresh fears that the health service may struggle to deal with the coming surge in Covid cases. NHS Providers said the figures were “worrying” and it expressed concern that Omicron was already resulting in large numbers of NHS staff being off ill, especially in London. Chris Hopson, the organisation’s chief executive, said: “It is worrying that 94% of hospital beds and 81% of critical care beds are already full, given the new Omicron variant is in its early stages and has so far led to only a relatively small number of people needing hospital care. “However, with infection levels rising rapidly, trust leaders are increasingly clear that they are likely to see significant numbers of extra Covid-19 patients over the coming weeks. What remains unclear is how many patients and with what severity of illness.” In recent days senior doctors and scientists – including the UK Health Security Agency boss, Dr Jenny Harries, and Graham Medley, a professor of infectious disease modelling and a member of the government’s advisory group Sage – have raised concerns that Omicron could lead to hospitals becoming overwhelmed. The figures were contained in NHS England’s latest weekly batch of “winter sitreps” data, which set out how hospitals and ambulance services are coping with the extra demand they come under in December, January and February. They show that of the 90,702 adult general and acute beds in acute hospitals that were open in the week to last Sunday, 85,558 (94.3%) were occupied. Of the 4,016 critical care beds that hospitals had open, 3,246 (80.8%) had patients in them. These are the beds that will be used by people left seriously ill by Omicron. The data also showed that NHS trusts in England had to divert patients in ambulances to other nearby hospitals 28 times last week because their A&amp;E was too busy to admit them. It happened nine times at University Hospitals Birmingham trust and eight times at Worcestershire acute hospitals trust. However, no emergency department had to shut altogether. Record numbers of patients are having to be looked after by ambulance crews outside hospitals for long periods because A&amp;Es do not have the staff or space for them to be offloaded. Ambulances are meant to hand their patient over to A&amp;E personnel within 15 minutes of arrival. But last week almost one in four handovers took more than 30 minutes, and one in 10 took at least an hour – far more than the equivalent figures for the same week last year, when the Delta variant was taking hold. An average of 10,510 hospital beds were occupied each day last week by people who were medically fit to leave but could not be discharged, highlighting the continuing inability of social care services to help patients return to their home or care home. Saffron Cordery, NHS Providers’ deputy chief executive, said hospital bosses were deeply concerned about the weight of demand on the health service. “These figures highlight how trusts are consistently working under significant pressure, operating beyond full stretch, before Omicron has even taken full hold in the community,” she said. “While the picture is still emerging about how severe the impact from Omicron might be, the NHS is expecting many more patients in hospital over the coming weeks, as even a small percentage of people needing care from thousands of infections is still a large number.”Prosecutors laid out their closing arguments in the trial of Elizabeth Holmes on Thursday, painting the picture of a founder who chose “fraud over failure” and calling the story of Theranos a “tragedy”. Prosecutors wrapped their closing arguments and the defense made it through several hours of their own before court broke for the day. The face-off caps dramatic proceedings that has stretched over 15 weeks. On Friday, prosecution will have the opportunity to present a rebuttal before the case goes to jurors in the coming days. Holmes faces up to 20 years in prison and has pleaded not guilty. The fallen Silicon Valley star faces 11 charges of defrauding investors and consumers over her technology, which she claimed could carry out hundreds of tests using just a single drop of blood. Prosecutor Jeff Schenk presented to the jury a recap of arguments that Holmes knowingly lied about the capabilities of Theranos testing, saying the evidence shows “she made the decision to defraud her investors and then to defraud her patients”. “She chose fraud over business failure. She choose to be dishonest with investors and patients,” he said. “That choice was not only callous, it was criminal.” Schenk cycled through a PowerPoint presentation recapping all 29 witnesses the prosecution has called during the trial, reiterating the claims made in their testimony. He also re-shared transcripts and recordings of allegedly incriminating statements from Holmes, deconstructing her defense point by point. He said Holmes oversold the capabilities of Theranos technology to attract investors, advertised inflated revenue projections and made false statements to recruit patients. Schenk said that Holmes was repeatedly told by internal lab workers, her own brother, and by her former lover and business partner Sunny Balwani of problems with the technology – but ignored them. “The story of Theranos is, in some ways, a tragedy,” he said. “What happened to the investors and the patients should not have happened. They should have been treated with honesty.” Defense attorney Kevin Downey explained in closing arguments to the jury the high burden of proof it has to find Holmes guilty “beyond a reasonable doubt”. He presented slides to the jury refuting evidence from the prosecution, in particular stating that its focus on whether Holmes illicitly photoshopped logos of pharmaceutical firms onto reports shared with investors was “a distraction”. “I ask you to wait and hear the whole story and go through the evidence with me,” he said. “The picture can change a good deal as a result of waiting for the full story and looking through the full material.” Holmes, meanwhile, sat silently in the courtroom, surrounded by friends, family members, and the family of her partner Billy Evans. The trial chronicled missteps in Holmes’s 15-year reign as CEO of Theranos, a blood-testing startup she founded after dropping out of Stanford University when she was just 19. Holmes, now 37, offered a compelling promise. Instead of relying on vials of blood drawn from veins, Theranos touted a technology that Holmes said would be able to scan for hundreds of diseases and other potential problems with a few drops of blood taken via a finger prick. Theranos wooed billionaire investors while assembling a board of directors that included former US cabinet members spanning from the Nixon to Trump administrations. It raised more than $900m, struck partnerships with major retailers Walgreens and Safeway and turned Elizabeth Holmes into a Silicon Valley sensation with an estimated fortune of $4.5bn. But unknown to most people outside Theranos, the company’s blood-testing technology was flawed, often producing inaccurate results that could have endangered the lives of patients who took the tests at Walgreens stores. The problems, exposed in 2015 and 2016 by stories in the Wall Street Journal and the findings of a regulatory audit, led to Theranos’s collapse in 2018. That, in turn, triggered felony charges against Holmes. Government prosecutors have painted Holmes as a charlatan who duped investors, business partners and patients in pursuit of fame and fortune while positioning herself as a visionary similar to her hero Steve Jobs, the co-founder of Apple. Holmes’s lawyers have depicted her as a trailblazer who took a few wrong turns while running Theranos, but never committed any crimes. In seven days on the stand, Holmes expressed some contrition while insisting she never stopped trying to refine Theranos’s technology. She also blamed Balwani for many of the company’s problems while accusing him of mental, emotional and sexual abuse that she said turned her into his pawn. Balwani, Theranos’s chief operating officer from 2009 until Holmes ousted him in 2016, faces similar criminal charges in a separate trial scheduled to begin early next year. His attorney has adamantly denied Holmes’s allegations. Schenk in his closing arguments told jurors not to be swayed by the evidence of abuse. “You do not need to decide whether that abuse happened to reach your verdict,” he said. The Associated Press contributed to this report.At least five people died as a powerful and extremely unusual storm system swept across the Great Plains and midwest amid unseasonably warm temperatures, spawning hurricane-force winds and possible tornadoes in Nebraska, Iowa and Minnesota. In south-eastern Minnesota, Olmsted county Sheriff’s Lt Lee Rossman said a 65-year-old man was killed Wednesday night when a 40ft tree blew onto him outside his home. In south-western Kansas, blinding dust kicked up by the storms Wednesday led to two separate crashes that killed three people, Kansas Highway Patrol trooper Mike Racy said. And in Iowa, a semitrailer was struck by high winds and rolled onto its side in eastern Iowa Wednesday evening, killing the driver, the Iowa State Patrol confirmed. The storm shifted north of the Great Lakes into Canada on Thursday, with high winds, snow and hazardous conditions continuing in the upper Great Lakes region, the National Weather Service said. More than 400,000 homes and businesses were without electricity in Michigan, Wisconsin, Iowa and Kansas, according to poweroutage.us, which tracks utility reports. High winds, snow and other harsh weather conditions were reported north of the Great Lakes area, according to the National Weather Service. At least 13 tornadoes were reported on Wednesday, with high winds clocking in at over 70mph throughout parts of Kansas, Nebraska and Iowa. “To have this number of damaging wind storms at one time would be unusual any time of year,” said Brian Barjenbruch, a meteorologist with the National Weather Service in Valley, Nebraska. “But to have this happen in December is really abnormal.” The storm system came after a slew of tornadoes last weekend that cut through Arkansas, Missouri, Illinois, Tennessee and Kentucky, killing more than 85 people. Dust created by severe winds in the area also reduced visibility to zero in parts of Kansas, causing at least four semitrailer trucks to blow over, said the Kansas Department of Transportation. Officials in Kansas closed all state highways across nine counties in the state, including Interstate 70, which runs all the way across the state. High wind warnings were also issued for a large area extending from New Mexico to upper Michigan, including Wisconsin and Illinois. Strong wind gusts of 80mph were recorded in Texas panhandle and in western Kansas, with some areas clocking winds of over 100mph. In addition to strong winds, experts have warned about a fire risk in some areas already affected by high winds due to dry conditions. Scientists have said that extreme weather events are probably due to human-caused climate change, but trying to find a cause for a specific weather event, such as storms throughout many regions in the US, requires additional analysis that requires time and can be inconclusive. “I think we also need to stop asking the question of whether or not this event was caused by climate change. All events nowadays are augmented by climate change,” said Northern Illinois University meteorology professor Victor Gensini. “We need to be asking, ‘to what extent did climate change play a role and how likely was this event to occur in the absence of climate change?”’ • This article was amended on 29 December 2021. Interstate 70 runs across the whole of Kansas, rather than ending at Salina as an earlier version said.Ghislaine Maxwell’s former assistant in Jeffrey Epstein’s New York City office spoke fondly of her one-time boss on Thursday, saying she had “fun” working for the former British socialite. “I highly respected Ghislaine,” Cimberly Espinosa, told jurors in Maxwell’s Manhattan federal court sex-trafficking trial. “I looked up to her very much, and I actually learned a lot from her. “I attribute my career right now as an executive assistant to what I learned supporting Ghislaine,” said Espinosa, who worked for Maxwell from 1996 until 2002. Espinosa, who was Maxwell’s first defense witness, also described disgraced financier and sex trafficker Epstein in seemingly glowing terms, saying “he was a giver”. Shortly before working for Maxwell, Espinosa was an assistant for Epstein’s lawyers. “He was generous and I always knew him to be donating to charities and just being a kind person.” Espinosa said that Epstein paid for her professional massages and “paid for a personal trainer” for her. Defense lawyer Christian Everdell’s questioning of Espinosa directly addressed prosecutors’ claims that Maxwell was an unflinching, icy boss who wielded an iron fist in acting as Epstein’s deputy. Earlier in the trial the former house manager at Epstein’s Palm Beach estate, Juan Alessi, had testified that Maxwell instructed him to “never” look his boss in the eyes. When asked how Maxwell treated her, Espinosa said: “She treated me fair and nice and it was fun.” Espinosa said that Maxwell was “Epstein’s estate manager” but she did not handle his financial or legal matters. She described Maxwell as working tirelessly on Epstein’s projects, including his private island estate in the US Virgin Islands. They “even shipped in sand and palm trees”, she said. Espinosa also described Maxwell and Epstein’s relationship, saying she thought “they were a couple”. Towards the end of her time working for Maxwell, Espinosa said: “They just kind of went their separate ways. “Ghislaine moved on,” Espinosa said. “I know that she started dating.” Espinosa’s testimony came shortly after the judge announced that she will not permit defense witnesses to testify under pseudonyms. That decision came moments before Maxwell’s lawyers started their defense case. In a decision made public Thursday morning, Judge Alison Nathan wrote: “None of the defense’s witnesses intend to testify to sensitive personal topics or sexual conduct. Rather, they all are anticipated to deny misconduct by Epstein and Ms Maxwell, and therefore do not qualify as victims … Further, there is no similar concern, as there are for alleged victims of sexual abuse, that denying the use of pseudonyms will deter reports of misconduct. “It is notable that the defense does not cite in support of its motion a single case in which a court granted the use of pseudonyms to defense witnesses,” Nathan also wrote. “Neither does the government. And nor could the court after significant independent research. “It appears, then, that the defense’s requested relief is unprecedented.” The former British socialite’s counsel had asked Nathan to permit some of their witnesses to testify under pseudonyms or with their first names, saying they might otherwise not take the stand. Shortly before the defense called their first witness, Nathan rejected that request. “We have been in contact with a number of our potential witnesses, and we are already getting requests – and I think these are valid requests – that at least some of them testify anonymously,” Everdell said Friday. “We all know that this case has gotten a lot of attention and that people who are testifying here might get a lot of unwanted attention, especially if they are testifying on behalf of Ms Maxwell,” Everdell also said. “And they would like to be able to do this, at least some of them, with some sort of anonymous protection.” Nathan also addressed this in her opinion, writing: “These generalized concerns are present in every high-profile criminal case. They do not present the rare circumstances that prior courts have found justify the use of pseudonyms.” Before Maxwell’s defense started calling witnesses, they revealed that one of their planned witnesses had Covid-19 and couldn’t come to court. They asked for this witness to testify via Webex, a video-conferencing platform. Nathan said she anticipates the witness could do so. Maxwell’s defense also called Dr Elizabeth Loftus, a psychologist whose field of expertise includes false memories. She has contended that memory becomes vulnerable to being influenced over time. Some of the allegations against Maxwell in this case are nearly 30 years old. “If there is post-event suggestion, maybe disinformation, it can enter a witnesses memory and cause a contamination,” Loftus said. “The older the event is, the more susceptible people are to having post-event suggestion potentially contaminate their memory.” Loftus, who has testified in almost 300 trials since 1975, also explained why she has only testified for prosecutors one time, saying: “The potential for false memories, it’s not something that typically fits in their agenda.” Maxwell, 59, is being tried on six counts for her alleged involvement in disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein’s sexual abuse of minor teens. She was arrested at a luxe New Hampshire property in July 2020. Maxwell insists that she is innocent of all wrongdoing. Epstein, a convicted sex offender, counted Prince Andrew and former US presidents Donald Trump and Bill Clinton among his high-profile associates. He killed himself in a New York City federal jail more than two years ago, while awaiting his own sex trafficking trial.Edward Colston was “chief executive officer” of a company responsible for enslaving more Africans than any other in British history, the historian David Olusoga has told a court, as defendants argued they acted “lawfully” in toppling his statue. Appearing on Thursday as an expert witness in the trial of four people accused of criminal damage of the memorial to Colston, the presenter of the BBC’s A House Through Time series described the horrors of the trade. Rhian Graham, 30, Milo Ponsford, 26, and Sage Willoughby, 23, are accused of helping to tear down the statue of the slave trader during a Black Lives Matter protest on 7 June last year. They are standing trial alongside Jake Skuse, 33, who is accused of helping to roll the bronze to Bristol harbour where it was thrown into the River Avon. Olusoga, a professor of public history at the University of Manchester, said that while Colston was a shareholder in the Royal African Company it shipped 84,000 Africans into slavery, including 12,000 children. Overall, he said, the company “transported more Africans into slavery than any other company in the whole history of the slave trade in the north Atlantic”. Olusoga said Colston was heavily involved in the company, eventually becoming deputy governor, a position equivalent to a modern chief executive. “For almost all of his tenure he was in the elite of the elite, not just someone who was invested but someone able to make directions,” he told Bristol crown court. The court has heard that the statue “cast a shadow” over Bristol, offended residents, and the council ignored repeated requests for it to be removed. Liam Walker, representing Willoughby, argued in his client’s defence that the statue “was forcibly and, we submit, lawfully removed from its plinth”. Jurors heard of the violence and brutality meted out to Africans kidnapped into slavery by the company, which operated fortresses along the coast of Africa where people were imprisoned before being transported. “The company followed a practice that was common then: the word ‘brand’, which we now associate with commerce and trade,” Olusoga said. “They would brand Africans who they had purchased; they would brand them with the initials RAC. “A piece of hot metal in the shape of those initials was burned into their chests,” he said, adding that this would be done to children as young as nine years old. Britain created a “slave society” in its colonies, with a legal code classifying Africans as less than human, Olusoga said. “A slave code made black people property that could be bought, that could be sold, that could be insured; [but] that couldn’t be murdered because they were not human beings: they could be destroyed … and that was carried out routinely,” he said. Earlier the court heard from Willoughby, a carpenter, who said he had targeted the statue of Colston “because he was a racist and a slave trader who murdered thousands and enslaved even more”. “I will put it to you this way,” he said. “Imagine having a Hitler statue in front of a Holocaust survivor; I believe they are simultaneous in their insult.” Jurors saw video of Willoughby scaling the statue of Colston and attaching a yellow rope to it. William Hughes QC, cross-examining Willoughby, suggested that pulling down the statue was a violent escalation of a peaceful protest. Willoughby replied: “I’m going to have to disagree with you. This was not a violent act; this was an act of love for my fellow man and the people of Bristol.” Skuse, Graham, Ponsford and Willoughby all deny criminal damage. The trial continues.Undocumented migrants who attempt to cross the border from Mexico to the US are disproportionately dying in a harsh stretch of desert that is becoming deadlier due to the climate crisis, a new research has found. Migrants and asylum seekers trying to enter the US are often forced to traverse the harsh environment of the Sonoran desert in order to avoid border patrols and fortified crossing points. This hazardous journey is putting many of them under severe physical stress, according to researchers, with many dying in the heat due to dehydration and organ failure. This risk will only intensify as the world heats up further due to human activity, with the research finding that in the next three decades migrants will become so dehydrated in the desert that they will have to carry 34% more water with them in order to survive. “Crossing the border across these extreme environments is really dangerous for humans to do and in the next 30 years, with rising temperatures, it’s going to become even more extreme and push those levels to even further beyond what humans can actually sustain,” said Hallie Walker, a researcher at the University of Idaho and co-author of the research, published in Science. “It is incredibly dangerous.” In the year to 30 September, US border agents apprehended more than 1.7 million people attempting to cross from Mexico into the US. Many of those who avoid arrest do so by taking on the daunting journey across the Sonoran desert, a rocky, scrubby expanse of land in Mexico and the southwestern US that oscillates between scorching heat in summer to freezing conditions in winter and contains more species of rattlesnake than any region in the world. An estimated 350 people a year, many fleeing violence and persecution at home, die attempting this crossing, with some of these deaths due to suicide, exposure or car accidents. Researchers found, however, that a significant risk is the loss of fluids in a region where summer temperatures can reach 48C (118F). Using a model that factored in the physical toll of making a journey from Nogales, a Mexican border city and Three Points, Arizona, the study found that people can succumb to the conditions within just a few days, with migrants often ill-prepared for the journey. The stress is highest for pregnant women and children, with the research finding that a pregnant women needs nearly 12 liters of water a day to survive making the trek in June. Many do not get the adequate water and rest required, leading to deaths. The study found a “significant correlation between high levels of predicted evaporative water loss and the density of deaths” which “strongly implicate temperature and water availability as major contributors to broader patterns of migrant mortality during summer”. The loss of water can cause disorientation and hallucinations, before becoming potentially fatal. The research cites interviews with migrants who explain how their toenails fell off during long hikes over the desert’s mountains or how they lost their eyesight and suffered chest pains as they struggled onward. “Essentially the US is funneling individuals into places that they experience such extreme physiological stress that I, as an evolutionary biologist, couldn’t get approval from my university to put animals through the sorts of stresses that individuals are being put through,” said Shane Campbell-Staton, a researcher at Princeton and lead author of the study. “That’s how extreme these physiological stresses are.” Migrants crossing the US’ southern border have become a political target in recent years, with Donald Trump instituting punishing detention and child separation policies, as well as a system known as “remain in Mexico”, which expels people back to Mexico as their claim to stay in the US is considered. Joe Biden opposed this plan but recently reinstated it following a legal challenge from two states. This sort of deterrence is unlikely to completely halt people from seeking refuge in the US, particularly those increasingly fleeing intolerable conditions in Mexico and Central America that are being worsened by the climate crisis. A series of droughts and storms have wreaked havoc upon communities, particularly farmers, forcing them to seek livable alternatives further north. “We knowingly kill them at the border. And yet we ignore them once they’re here, when they’re doing the jobs that Americans don’t want to do,” said Jason De Leon, an anthropologist at the University of California, Los Angeles, who was also involved in the study. “I think we were about to live in a climatic version of the book Children of Men, where instead of a fertility issue, we’re dealing now with a global climatic issue. We are seeing people having to leave their homes because of climate change,” he added. “And I think that we can no longer disentangle those two things, that they’re intimately related and it’s only going to get worse, unfortunately for a lot of people around the globe.”