1) More Tuchel tinkering after ‘lucky’ win Chelsea were far from their best in victory against Watford in midweek and Thomas Tuchel admitted his side were lucky to take all three points. The German was forced to rotate his squad heavily for the trip to Vicarage Road and will reshuffle his deck again before his team’s lunchtime appointment at West Ham after Trevoh Chalobah succumbed to a hamstring injury. The young central defender joins the key players Reece James, Mateo Kovacic, N’Golo Kanté and Ben Chilwell in the treatment room. In better news for Chelsea, Romelu Lukaku got 21 minutes under his belt on Wednesday while Jorginho should replace Saúl Ñiguez, who, not for the first time this season, was hooked at half-time and looks to have played his last game on loan at the club. BG West Ham v Chelsea, Saturday 12.30pm (all times shown GMT) 2) Clarets have money-can’t-buy opportunity Burnley have lost once in their past seven Premier League matches. Despite five being draws it is certainly a platform to build on for the slow starters. Confidence should be relatively high thanks to their disciplined defence picking up a clean sheet in midweek at Wolves and the knowledge they finally have a bona fide match-winner in Maxwel Cornet. It is all well and good picking up individual points but Burnley have a bit of catch-up to do, as they are currently in the relegation zone, two places and three points above Newcastle. If they can open up a gap over Eddie Howe’s side this weekend, they will strike a psychological blow, in full knowledge that the new Newcastle owners will look to spend their way out of trouble in January, while Burnley are unlikely to splash too much cash to solve their problems – and three points in a relegation battle is something money cannot buy. WU Newcastle v Burnley, Saturday 3pm 3) Can Brighton maximise the threat of Lamptey? Southampton and Brighton go into Saturday’s match at St Mary’s on the back of entertaining draws with Leicester and West Ham respectively, and it would be no great shock to see the points shared here by two sides separated by seven Premier League places but just four points. Against West Ham, Brighton lost Jeremy Sarmiento, Adam Webster and Adam Lallana to injury, and will be without the trio on Saturday, but the excellent form of Tariq Lamptey, who is being carefully managed back from a serious hamstring injury after missing the second half of last season, is a huge positive for Graham Potter’s side. Brighton have won just one of the eight games in which the 22-year-old has featured this season and despite how well they’re currently playing, need to find a way of converting the attacking threat he offers down the right into match-winning goals. BG Southampton v Brighton, Saturday 3pm 4) A Liverpool audition for Traoré? How do you solve a problem like Adama Traoré? Strong, lightning quick and well able to beat a man or two on his regular rampages upfield, the Wolves winger is undeniably talented but constantly lets himself down with poor finishing and questionable decision-making in the final third. It is a flaw in his game that has been highlighted at length, most recently by Danny Murphy on Match of the Day. Just seven league starts this season suggest he has yet to convince Bruno Lage, and the 25-year-old Spaniard is reported to be on the radar of Saturday’s visitors, Liverpool, despite his appalling scoring record of just seven goals in 152 Premier League appearances. Jürgen Klopp clearly thinks he can get a tune out of him, and he will never get a better chance to impress his potential new employers – assuming he is given a run-out. BG Wolves v Liverpool, Saturday 3pm 5) Aké must make the most of injury crisis Pep Guardiola has bemoaned Manchester City’s problems with injuries, which is quite fair given he has been forced to pack the bench with teenagers. One beneficiary this week was Nathan Aké, who has been a fill-in man since arriving at the Etihad in 2020 for a hefty £40m from Bournemouth. There was a rare outing for him at Aston Villa on Wednesday alongside Rúben Dias, only the fourth time he has started in the league this season, to go with the nine throughout the last campaign, which was blighted by injury. He looked confident alongside his more esteemed colleague, a man signed after the 5-2 defeat to Leicester last season, with Aké notably at the heart of a failing defence. The Netherlands international will be hoping his positive performance at Villa Park will earn him more appearances in a very busy period through to the New Year, aided by the fact he can play at left-back, too. If he can’t convince Guardiola of his qualities at this stage, Aké’s City career might be over before it got going. WU Watford v Manchester City, Saturday 5.30pm 6) A sighting of the lesser-spotted Patrick Bamford While the programme notes in which the Leeds CEO, Angus Kinnear, crassly compared Tracey Crouch’s fan-led review to a totalitarian collectivisation policy that resulted in the deaths of 15 million Chinese citizens prompted more headlines than the actual match for which it was published, there was a real sense that Raphinha’s late, late winner might have marked a turning point for Leeds after a poor start to the season. They host Brentford on Saturday in what looks a promising game between two attacking sides that may come a bit too soon for the recovering duo Luke Ayling and Patrick Bamford. These two key players have been conspicuous absentees from the Leeds line-up since mid-September but both featured for the under-23s on Monday night, with Bamford playing a full 90 minutes. Even the sight of him among the substitutes would further brighten the mood of the Elland Road collective. BG Leeds v Brentford, Sunday 2pm 7) Rangnick must be better than before Sunday’s game at home to Crystal Palace will be Ralf Rangnick’s first in the Manchester United dugout, and it will be fascinating to see how he goes about his new yet temporary job. So far in his career, Rangnick has managed very good players and very good teams but relatively few brilliant players and no brilliant teams, but if he is to succeed at United he must be able to differentiate between them. Though he has done fantastic work while inspiring a generation of coaches, Leipzig were the best side he has managed, and handy though they were, if he and whoever follows him cannot build a better one, they will depart Old Trafford having failed. Moreover, Rangnick is a systems guy, but the best teams have managers who make allowances for spontaneity and superstars, and given the squad he finds, he will need to do this too – while operating at a level he has not previously reached. DH Manchester United v Crystal Palace, Sunday 2pm 8) No excuse for Spurs’ impotence Structural change takes time, so Spurs’ continuing travails under Antonio Conte should not be entirely alarming. But the shortage of new manager bounce, until Thursday’s win against Brentford, is concerning. Though there are defensive problems that cannot be solved in four weeks, especially now Cristian Romero is injured, in no circumstances should a squad boasting the attacking talents of Harry Kane, Son Heung-min, Steven Bergwijn, Lucas Moura, Bryan Gil, Sergio Reguilón, Tanguy Ndombele, Giovani Lo Celso and Dele Alli be so shot-shy or impotent. In theory, a home fixture with Norwich is exactly what is required to get things going – only Newcastle have conceded more than their 28 goals in 14 games. But things have improved markedly since the appointment of Dean Smith, making this a difficult fixture: all the pressure of one Spurs must win, against opponents brimming with renewed belief. This will probably not be the best game of the weekend, but it might well be the most interesting. DH • Tottenham v Norwich, Sunday 2pm 9) Chukwuemeka has opportunity at Villa Carney Chukwuemeka is keen to leave Aston Villa due to a lack of first-team opportunities. Needless to say, that is a very strange concept when taking about a player who turned 18 in October and was sent on against the Premier League champions Manchester City to help turn the game in Aston Villa’s favour. He almost scored the equaliser, only for Ederson to produce a fine save to divert Chukwuemeka’s shot, after a fine run into space, away from goal. Chukwuemeka made his first-team Villa debut younger than the £100m man on City’s bench, Jack Grealish, so he is a step ahead of a future England international. Steven Gerrard obviously has faith in the midfielder coveted by the likes of Manchester City and Liverpool, too. The teenager looks set to be given more opportunities to appease him by a manager with a thing or two to explain about playing in midfield. Chukwuemeka would be well advised to seize his chance and make the most of a clear pathway rather than listen to his agent. WU Aston Villa v Leicester, Sunday 4.30pm 10) Time Arsenal’s senior players took responsibility It’s been a strange season for Arsenal, who are handily placed to finish fourth – the best they could possibly do. Nevertheless, the balance in Mikel Arteta’s side is not right and, like their north London rivals, there is no excuse for their constipated attacking given players as creative as Bukayo Saka, Emile Smith Rowe, Martin Ødegaard, Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, Nicolas Pépé and Alexandre Lacazette. The first two can be absolved of any blame – without them, Arsenal would be nowhere – but their centrality should be a cause of great shame to the last four, who have accumulated the princely total of seven goals and two assists between them, in a combined 41 league appearances; by way of comparison, Saka and Smith Rowe have seven and four in 28. But however good they are, relying on players so young is probably unsustainable, and though Arteta is also responsible for the malaise it is about time others stepped up. DH Everton v Arsenal, Monday 8pmKaillie Humphries is now, officially, an American. And just like that, the US medal hopes in bobsledding at the Beijing Olympics just got much stronger. The reigning world champion in both monobob and women’s bobsleigh was sworn in as a citizen in San Diego on Thursday, ending her long saga to become an American and have the right to compete for the US at the Olympics. She does not yet have her passport, but that is likely to be little more than a formality. Without the passport, there was almost no chance the Canadian-born Humphries would have been allowed to slide at the Olympics. “Most stressful morning ever, but it’s done,” Humphries told The Associated Press from the plane as she was leaving San Diego. It was a whirlwind finale to the process. Humphries raced in a World Cup stop at Austria this past weekend. She got to Altenberg, Germany for this week’s race on Monday, did the two necessary training runs Tuesday that she needed to qualify for World Cup races this weekend, then made the five-hour drive to Frankfurt for a Wednesday morning flight to San Diego. Her citizenship meeting was Thursday, and not long afterward was back on a plane for the return to Europe. “I think she’s super excited,” US bobsled coach Mike Kohn said in a telephone interview from Germany. “She’s had a great couple of years with us. I think she’s going to just really shine now. I think, the uncertainty, it’s held her back a little bit. I think it’s held us all back.” Humphries – a two-time Olympic champion and three-time Olympic medalist, all won for Canada – lives in San Diego, has held a green card and is married to an American, former bobsledder Travis Armbruster. She won the right to slide for the US in September 2019 after a lengthy and ongoing dispute with Canadian bobsled officials over claims of verbal abuse, mental abuse and harassment. Humphries left the Canadian team, she said, to seek a safer work environment. Joining the US team was not an easy decision, especially since she knew it did not come with a guarantee of being able to slide for the Americans at the Beijing Games – but was still a move she deemed necessary for her mental and physical safety. She could have pursued the chance to slide for another country at these Olympics, but made the decision long ago that if she was going to Beijing she was going as an American. Which, as of Thursday, she is. Her resume is one of the best in the sport’s history: five world championships, 54 World Cup medals – 27 of them gold – and she’s the only women’s pilot to win two Olympic golds and drive to three medals at the games. Humphries won the world titles last season for the US and has been allowed to compete in World Cup and world championship events for the Americans because different rules apply in those situations. Canada’s federation released her in 2019, clearing the path for her to slide for another country. But the Olympic rules are tighter and mandate that, in nearly every instance, an athlete have a passport of the country they are representing. The International Olympic Committee could have waived that rule, but gave no indication it would do anything on Humphries’ behalf. Now, the US is likely heading to the Olympics with two drivers that can win medals – Humphries and Elana Meyers Taylor. The addition of monobob to the women’s Olympic program means female bobsledders have two chances for medals now at the games, like the men have had for decades. The US has won at least one medal in bobsledding in each of the last five Olympics. “It’s going to inject some enthusiasm into the team,” Kohn said. “It’s going to let Kaillie be herself again. She’s had this on her mind all year. And now such a weight is off her shoulders.”Teacher absences are the biggest barrier to children recovering the learning lost during the pandemic, according to head teachers in England, as new data showed that shortages in key subjects such as physics are becoming worse. More than half of the 1,000 senior teachers in England surveyed by The Key – a support service for school leaders – said they had insufficient staff due to absences, caused by Covid and illnesses, to help pupils fill the gaps arising from school closures. “Staff absences are having a massive impact,” one respondent said. “Children learn best with their own teacher, not supply teachers.” Three-quarters of those surveyed said their pupils were “behind” or “significantly behind” compared with previous years. Nicola West Jones, head of research at The Key, said: “Many of the comments left in our survey point to reduced resilience, concentration and stamina among pupils in the classroom – all crucial prerequisites for learning. This, coupled with ongoing staff and pupil absences, explains why progress is going to take some time.” A final report on how pupils in England have fared, carried out by the National Foundation for Educational Research, found that children in Year 1 and Year 2 remain two to three months behind in reading ability, compared with pre-pandemic cohorts. The study assessed children aged five to seven in maths and reading, most recently in July. It showed that children from disadvantaged backgrounds had been particularly affected, with a widening gap to their better-off peers. “Schools’ ability to respond to the challenges posed by the pandemic is mainly constrained by the resources available to them and it is vital that their important work with children at the beginning of their educational journey is not shackled by insufficient funding by the government,” said Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders. But teachers in specialist subjects such as sciences and languages are likely to remain in short supply in England, after the Department for Education revealed that the pandemic’s boost to teacher recruitment last year has disappeared. Just 22% of the new physics teachers forecast by the DfE have been recruited this year, along with only 71% for modern foreign languages, 69% for computing, 45% for business studies and 23% for design and technology. Other subjects where recruitment fell short of demand included maths and geography, prompting unions to warn of a shortage of secondary school teachers at a time when pupil numbers are rising. Last year, there was a welcome spike in applications for initial teacher training, amid fears over the impact of the pandemic on jobs. Just 82% of the DfE’s target for secondary trainees was reached this year, well short of last year’s peak of 103% and below even the 83% achieved in 2019. The government enjoyed greater success among would-be primary school teachers, achieving 136% of its target. James Zuccollo, director for school workforce at the Education Policy Institute, said: “Historical trends tell us that when the economic picture of a country improves, fewer graduates are likely to go into teaching, but the speed of the national recovery and improvement of the wider UK labour market have meant that this drop-off in teacher recruitment numbers has occurred much more suddenly than expected.” The DfE said it was investing “millions in bursaries and salary boosts” to attract graduates in high-demand subjects into teaching.Assessment and planning by the government relating to risks facing the UK are deficient and “veiled in secrecy”, a report has found. The 129-page report, entitled Preparing for Extreme Risks: Building a Resilient Society, was produced by the House of Lords select committee on risk assessment and risk planning – a group appointed in October 2020. James Arbuthnot, chair of the committee, said that while the UK’s risk assessment processes had been praised across the world before the pandemic, the impact of Covid suggested there may be problems. “It had been advised that if there were to be a coronavirus pandemic, as a country we would suffer up to 100 deaths,” he said. “Over 140,000 deaths later, we realised that we could perhaps have been doing rather better in our assessment and our planning.” The report – which draws on sources including oral evidence from 85 witnesses, including from the chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance, during 29 sessions – looked at the country’s approach to assessing and preparing for a wide range of risks, from chemical warfare to the climate crisis and severe space weather. “If you ask, what keeps me awake at nights, it is the growing possibility of major disruption due to more and more frequent cyber-attacks,” said Lord Rees, a committee member. “And even more, I worry on a timescale of tens of years about bioterrorism, bioengineered viruses and all that, which are going to be feasible.” The report’s conclusions point to a number of shortcomings. Among them the committee highlighted a tendency for the government to focus on immediate problems rather than preparing for the long term. “The likelihood of major risks actually occurring during the term of the government is low,” said committee member Lord Mair, noting as a result there is no incentive to prepare for them. The committee also flagged concerns over the National Risk Register and the National Security Risk Assessment (NSRA), and called for better processes to categorise risks, including looking at how vulnerable the country would be to certain threats, and better modelling of how risks can cascade – with Arbuthnot noting as an example the impact of Covid on school exams. Among other issues the report criticised a lack of transparency by the government. “The current risk management system is veiled in an unacceptable and unnecessary level of secrecy,” the report noted, adding that in turn has hampered the country’s preparedness, with frontline responders including local government and volunteer groups struggling to access the information they need. It is not the first time the government has been accused of secrecy over risk assessment and planning: a report on Exercise Cygnus, the 2016 government simulation of how the country would handle a fictitious “swan flu”pandemic was only made public after a copy was leaked to the Guardian. Among other actions, the latest report recommends: The establishment of an Office for Preparedness and Resilience by the government, headed by a newly created post of government chief risk officer. A presumption of publication by the government, and the publication of the content of the Official-Sensitive National Security Risk Assessment except where there is a direct national security risk. The publication, every two years, by the government of a brochure on risk preparedness to inform the public on topics including what to do in an emergency. “[It’s] much better to face some of these issues, having prepared for, and practised for, and exercised for them in advance rather than doing them first in the heat of battle,” said Arbuthnot Arbuthnot added the Covid pandemic had offered the chance to “address a public that is ready to be addressed. And people have proved that they’re up to it.” Prof David Spiegelhalter, chair of the Winton Centre for Risk and Evidence Communication at Cambridge University, and who contributed evidence to the report, welcomed its publication. “It’s extraordinary that the National Risk Register does not get any public promotion or media coverage, and I welcome the committee’s recommendation to radically improve the communication with the public about the risks they face,” he said. “These vital issues deserve to be widely known and discussed.”The former house manager of Jeffrey Epstein’s Palm Beach home said on Thursday that Ghislaine Maxwell warned him that he should “never look” his boss in the eyes, describing a work environment where he faced the grim task of cleaning up their sex toys amid stifling micromanagement. Juan Alessi, who worked at Epstein’s Florida residence from about 1990 to 2002, made the disclosures during his testimony at Maxwell’s child sex-trafficking trial in Manhattan federal court. Alessis’s words painted a portrait of extreme privilege, as well as strict control, and appeared to corroborate some accusers’ allegations against Epstein and Maxwell. Epstein, a mega-rich financier who counted Prince Andrew and Bill Clinton among his associates, killed himself at a New York City jail in August 2019, pending trial. Maxwell, 59 and the daughter of the deceased British publishing titan Robert Maxwell, was arrested in July 2020 at a sizable New Hampshire estate. The former British socialite is now on trial on charges related to her alleged participation in Epstein’s sexual abuse of minor girls, some as young as 14. Maxwell has pleaded not guilty. Prosecutor Maurene Comey’s questioning of Alessi sought to bolster the government’s position that Maxwell was deeply involved in all aspects of Epstein’s life. Prosecutors have alleged that Maxwell was Epstein’s “best friend and right hand” – and that they were “partners in crime”. “Other than Mr Epstein, who else, if anyone, gave you instructions about your job responsibilities during your employment?” Comey asked. “Ms Maxwell,” said Alessi, 71. Alessi said that when he first met Maxwell, she was a “pretty girl, a tall brunette”. “Ms Maxwell was the girlfriend of Mr Epstein; I understand she was the lady of the house,” Alessi recounted. “From the day she came to the house, she right away took over, and she mentioned to me she was going to be the lady of the house. Also, she was in charge of other homes, other properties.” Epstein – who had hired Alessi full-time after convincing him to leave his other clients – started acting differently toward him. “It changed gradually from being cordial to more just, uh, professional,” he recalled. “Our conversations with him were less and less.” “What, if anything, did Ms Maxwell tell you about whether you could speak directly with Mr Epstein?” Comey asked. “Only I was supposed to speak with Mr Epstein when he asked me questions. “At the end of my stay, there was a time when she says: ‘Jeffrey doesn’t like to be looked at [in] his eyes.’” Maxwell allegedly told him: “‘You should never look at his eyes. Just look at another part of the room and answer to him,’” Alessi said. Alessi said that he was tasked with tidying up after Epstein’s massages. “I would clean the table, and I would put the table away,” he said. Asked whether there were “any instances that stood out in your mind”, he said, “Yes.” “I remember finding a large dildo,” he said after additional questioning. He claimed to have also seen pornographic tapes and a “black vinyl or leather costume” in a basket. Alessi also said that, on several occasions he found massagers in Epstein’s room after massages. Some of Epstein and Maxwell’s accusers have said that they were sexually abused under the guise of giving him a massage. Some have said that they were abused with sex toys. Alessi said that he saw two females at Epstein’s house who looked to him to be minors. One was “Jane” – the woman who testified against Maxwell earlier this week. The other was Virginia Giuffre, a longtime Epstein and Maxwell accuser, he said. Giuffre has alleged that Maxwell and Epstein coerced her into sexual activity with Prince Andrew when she was 17, a claim that the Duke of York denies. Alessi provided details on how Maxwell met Giuffre that seemed to corroborate her recollections of her first encounter when she was 15. Giuffre has claimed that Maxwell approached her at Mar-a-Lago, where she was working as a locker room attendant. Alessi said that he saw Giuffre on other occasions at Epstein’s home. “At the end of my stay there, I saw her bring in two other girls,” Alessi said. He said he never saw their faces. Toward the end of Alessi’s tenure at Epstein’s home, he said Maxwell gave him a booklet with rules on managing Epstein’s houses – with pages upon pages of time-consuming checklists, as well as requirements for his comportment. “It was very degrading to me,” he said. “Most of the pages were just unbelievable to me.” Alessi was presented with a copy of these instructions to read aloud in court. “Try and anticipate the needs of Mr Epstein, Ms Maxwell, and their guests,” was one instruction. “Do not discuss personal problems with guests. “Remember that you see nothing, hear nothing, say nothing, except to answer a question directed at you. Respect their privacy.” Information and support for anyone affected by rape or sexual abuse issues is available from the following organisations. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support on 0808 802 9999. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.htmlThat’s it from me, Samantha Lock, reporting from Sydney, Australia. Thanks for following along – this blog is now closed. You can catch up with the latest coronavirus coverage by following our new blog here. New York state has just recorded 5 cases of the Omicron variant, local news outlet WABC reports. The news comes after a man who attended an anime convention in New York City in late November tested positive for the Omicron variant when he returned home to Minnesota. UK drugs watchdog approved new Covid treatment Xevudy. US president Joe Biden announced a new nationwide coronavirus battle plan. Scientists believe they may have found the trigger behind the extremely rare blood clot complications stemming from the AstraZeneca Covid vaccine. South African officials say the Omicron variant is fuelling an “exponential” rise in Covid cases across the country. The variant was found to account for three-quarters of all the virus genomes sequenced last month. Indonesia tightened border curbs, extended quarantine and will limit movement on strategic toll roads, in a preemptive move to limit the spread of the Omicron Covid variant. Sweden warned it could impose new restrictions as soon as next week. Germany imposes restrictions on unvaccinated and mandatory Covid vaccinations from February, outgoing chancellor, Angela Merkel, announced. German health authorities reported the first confirmed case of the new Omicron variant of the coronavirus in the capital Berlin. India detected two cases of the new Omicron coronavirus variant in the southern state of Karnataka. Finland detected its first case of the Omicron variant in a person who had travelled from Sweden. Greece detected its first case of the Omicron coronavirus variant on the island of Crete. The European Union’s public health agency predicts the Omicron variant could be responsible for more than half of all Covid infections in Europe within a few months. Omicron may cause more Covid reinfections, South African health experts say. New US rules requiring international air travellers to obtain a negative Covid-19 test within one day of travel will take effect Monday. New US rules requiring international air travellers to obtain a negative Covid-19 test within one day of travel will take effect Monday at 12:01am ET (0501 GMT), sources briefed on the matter said, Reuters reports. Under current rules, vaccinated international air travellers can present a negative test result obtained within three days from their point of departure. Unvaccinated travellers currently must get a negative Covid-19 test within one day of departure. German health authorities reported the first confirmed case of the new Omicron variant of the coronavirus in the capital Berlin, only days after several cases were detected in southern states. Dilek Kalayci, health senator in the state government of Berlin, said there were also several more suspected cases of the new Omicron strain in the city of 3.6 million people. So far, little is known about the new variant, but there is a risk of a further spike in infections due to a faster spread of the virus, Kalayci said in a tweet. “My plea: Reduce contacts! Keep distance! Wear a mask!”, she added. On Wednesday, the public health office in the southern state of Baden-Wuerttemberg said four people had tested positive for the Omicron variant even though they were fully vaccinated against the coronavirus. They had only mild symptoms. New York state has just recorded 5 cases of the Omicron variant, local news outlet WABC reports. We’ll have more on this as the story develops. The news comes after a man who attended an anime convention in New York City in late November tested positive for the Omicron variant when he returned home to Minnesota, marking the second case of the variant in the US and leading officials Thursday to urge thousands of convention attendees to get tested. The Anime NYC 2021 convention Nov. 19-21 drew about 50,000 people, according to event organisers, and attendees were required to wear masks and show proof of having received at least one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine. Hi everyone, it’s Samantha Lock here, ready to take you through all the Covid news this Friday. As usual, some numbers out of Australia for you. The state of New South Wales has recorded 337 new locally acquired Covid cases today and no deaths. Numbers are also out in Victoria, which has recorded 1,188 new locally acquired cases, a drop on yesterday’s numbers. The state also recorded 11 deaths overnight. Federal health minister Greg Hunt has said all the Omicron cases in Australia have been “asymptomatic or very mild”. Hunt was on the TV morning programme Sunrise, saying authorities were “cautiously optimistic”. Senior NHS leaders have warned the only way to meet the UK government’s January booster vaccine deadline will be to reduce or cancel routine care, The Independent reports. Plans to invite all adults for a booster jab by the end of January were announced on Monday, but healthcare providers have yet to be told how the NHS is expected to ramp up vaccination services. One NHS trust leader said the only way to hit the deadline would be “to stop less essential and more routine work” at a time when waiting lists are already at records levels. The National Audit Office (NAO) warned on Wednesday that the backlog for NHS care could reach anywhere between 7 million and 12 million by early 2025. Another senior trust leader said: “We don’t have enough staff to manage the vaccination we have now, it will lead to a massive additional load of work. The chances are it will take staff away from the services we’re still struggling to get running.” Ministers in the UK have clashed repeatedly over advice on festivities and mistletoe, with Home Office staff being urged to limit numbers attending Christmas parties in the office and the health secretary contradicting a cabinet colleague to insist “people can snog who they wish”. Amid concerns over the Omicron variant, the government was accused of sending mixed messages about whether people should change their behaviour in the festive period despite no laws prohibiting social contact between healthy people. Sajid Javid became the latest to weigh in, contradicting the work and pensions secretary Thérèse Coffey’s warning against kissing strangers under the mistletoe. Meanwhile, guidance issued to civil servants in the Home Office on Wednesday, seen by the Guardian, said they could celebrate with colleagues, but urged people to “take sensible precautions”. Read the full report here: The Omicron variant appears to be reinfecting people at three times the rate of previous strains, experts in South Africa have said. According to new evidence collected by the country’s National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD), the latest epidemiological evidence suggests that Omicron can evade immunity from infection with earlier variants and is causing reinfections at three times previous rates. “We believe that previous infection does not provide protection from Omicron,” said Anne von Gottberg, an expert at the NICD. Scientists from the same institute have said initial data suggests that Omicron may provoke less severe illness than previous variants although that may be skewed by the fact that many of the first Omicron cases have been identified in younger individuals or detected in very recently screened travellers. In mid-November South Africa was reporting about 300 Covid cases a day. On Wednesday, it reported 8,561 new cases, up from 4,373 the day before and 2,273 on Monday. Read the full story here: Health officials in the state of Colorado have identified a case in a woman who recently travelled to southern Africa, according to local media. The Colorado department of public health and environment reported that the patient had been vaccinated, had mild symptoms and was recovering at home, KKTV reports. Colorado is the third state in the US to identify an Omicron case, after California on Wednesday and Minnesota earlier today. Here’s more on the second confirmed Omicron case in the United States, after the first was recorded in California on Wednesday. Health officials said a case had also been found in an adult man who attended an anime convention in New York City in late November. The man, who had been vaccinated, tested positive after returning home to Minnesota and sought Covid testing after showing mild symptoms on 22 November. Officials in New York said they were working to trace those who attended the Anime NYC 2021 convention, held from 19 to 21 November at the city’s Jacob K Javits convention centre. Vaccinations were required for the event. Governor Kathy Hochul said there were no confirmed Omicron cases among New York residents, but mayor Bill de Blasio said in a statement that “we should assume” there is community spread of Omicron in the city. Two more cases of the Omicron variant have been recorded in Brazil, the ministry of health said, bringing the total number of confirmed cases to five. The two new cases are two people who boarded in South Africa, passed through Ethiopia, landed in Guarulhos, and finally arrived in Brasilia. One individual has mild symptoms of the disease and the other is asymptomatic. There are still eight investigations in progress. Google is pushing back its return-to-office date for offices in Europe, the Middle East and Africa because of concerns over the Omicron variant, Business Insider reports, citing a memo it obtained. Employees were previously told they would be expected in offices on 10 January in a new hybrid work format, with offices in different countries and locations to determine for themselves when to return beyond that date depending on local conditions. In the memo, Google’s president for the EMEA region, Matt Brittin, reportedly said the company would postpone that deadline beyond 10 January. No guidance has yet been issued to US or North American employees regarding changes in the return-to-office plan. Israel will halt the use of a controversial phone tracking technology to trace the phones of people who contracted the Omicron coronavirus variant, prime minister Naftali Bennett has said. The move comes just days after ministers approved a package of emergency measures to contain the variant that included authorising the country’s internal security agency to use invasive phone monitoring technology for contact tracing. But following intense public criticism, the PM’s office said the “cellular monitoring” would expire at midnight Thursday and not be extended, Associated Press reports. The surveillance programme, which was first rolled out last year during the early months of the pandemic, has been criticised by civil liberties groups and challenged in court. Israeli rights groups have decried the use of the technology as a violation of privacy rights, and the Supreme Court ruled earlier this year that its use be limited. The Association for Civil Rights in Israel welcomed today’s announced and expressed “hope that this is the last time the secret service will be used to monitor the citizens of the State of Israel.” Good evening from London. I’m Léonie Chao-Fong, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next few hours. And a lovely image to kick things off: UK health secretary Sajid Javid has confirmed he will be “snogging” his wife under the mistletoe this Christmas. Javid has declared people should “snog who they wish” and that it was not up to the government to decide who people can kiss over the festive period. Speaking to ITV News, he said: People can snog who they wish. I’ll certainly be kissing my wife under the mistletoe, it’s a Javid family tradition and it’s got nothing to do with the government who you kiss, or anything like that. There’s guidance already out there, just be cautious and enjoy yourselves. His remarks came amid growing confusion over Covid guidance this Christmas, and just a day after another government minister warned against festive kissing this Christmas. Speaking on ITV’s Peston, the work and pensions secretary, Thérèse Coffey, said people should be “trying to enjoy the Christmas ahead of us” but added: I don’t think there should be much snogging under the mistletoe. Here is a quick recap of some of the main developments from today so far: Ten more cases of the Omicron coronavirus variant have been detected in the UK, according to the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA), bringing the total to 42. Seven new cases in England were identified in Buckinghamshire, Chiltern, Lambeth, Oxford, South Northamptonshire, Spelthorne, and Three Rivers. Three further cases were found in Scotland.Officials said the individuals who had tested positive and their contacts are all isolating. Work is underway to identify any links to travel, although public health sources told the Guardian that community transmission was now “almost certainly” occurring in the UK. A second case of the Omicron variant has been identified in the United States. The concerned Minnesota resident was an adult male, had a recent travel history to New York City, and had been fully vaccinated. He developed mild symptoms on 22 November and sought Covid testing on 24 November, the state’s health department said, adding that his symptoms have resolved. The first case was confirmed in California by US officials on Wednesday in a person who recently returned to San Francisco from a trip to South Africa. The UK recorded 53,945 new Covid cases on Thursday, the highest daily figure since 17 July, government figures showed, and a further 141 deaths within 28 days of a positive coronavirus test. Regional authorities in Madrid said they had detected Spain’s first domestic case of the Omicron variant in a vaccinated person without links to risk countries. They are investigating two other similar suspected cases.It was the fourth confirmed case of the variant in Spain, but the first proving that Omicron is already circulating in the country. The person affected in Madrid had received two doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine and had no history of travel or close contact with another person from countries where this variant has been detected, authorities said. Norway is reimposing some restrictions in order to cope with the emergence of the Omicron coronavirus variant, the government said, including testing for all travellers arriving in Norway within 24 hours of arrival, whether vaccinated or not. Norway’s health minister, Ingvild Kjerkol, says face masks should be worn in public places in Oslo and other municipalities and has said adults should practise social distancing nationwide. Earlier, authorities said that as many as 50 people could have become infected with the Omicron variant of the coronavirus after a Christmas dinner party in Oslo. Vaccination could become mandatory in Germany from February, with tough extra restrictions also applying to people who are unvaccinated, the country’s outgoing chancellor, Angela Merkel, announced. Merkel, who met Germany’s 16 state leaders on Thursday with her successor, Olaf Scholz, for emergency talks on tougher measures to stem rocketing Covid cases, said the situation was “very serious” and an “act of national solidarity” was required. Unvaccinated people will be barred from non-essential shops and events, unless they have recently recovered from Covid. Discos and clubs will have to shut if case numbers reach above a certain threshold. Merkel said the Bundestag would first vote on the proposed vaccine mandate, with the country’s ethics council due to issue formal guidance by the end of the year, and the rule – if passed – coming into force from February. The move would follow the example of neighbouring Austria, which is planning mandatory vaccinations from February. Greece has also announced mandatory jabs for the over-60s, with unvaccinated people facing fines if they fail to comply. Story here. Children in Finland aged five and over that are at risk of severe Covid infection due to weak immune systems should be given vaccinations, the Finnish Health Institute recommended, opting not to recommend the shots for all children. The government is expected to accept the recommendation. The institute said the vaccinations could start as soon as Finland obtains approved shots. The EU’s public health agency said the Omicron variant could be responsible for more than half of all Covid infections in Europe within a few months. The estimate could lend weight to preliminary information about the very high transmissibility of Omicron, above that of the Delta variant, which before Omicron was considered the most contagious of the main coronavirus variants. There is no conclusive evidence about Omicron’s transmissibility so far but the World Health Organization’s lead person on Covid-19, Maria van Kerkhove, said on Wednesday the agency expected to have data on this within days. Republicans are preparing to shut down the US government on Friday, in the latest attempt by the party to thwart White House efforts to increase vaccine take-up, by undermining vaccine mandates across the country. Clamor is growing among some conservatives for Republican senators to oppose a stopgap funding bill, which would fund the government for the next few weeks, unless Democrats agree to not direct money towards enforcing a vaccine mandate for larger companies in the US. If the disgruntled Republicans, who reportedly include Senator Mike Lee, from Utah, are successful, the government would effectively run out of money on Friday and could be forced to furlough workers and shut down some federal services. Story here. A number of countries including (mainland) France, Greece, India and Finland detected their first Omicron cases. Ten more cases of the Omicron coronavirus variant have been detected in the UK, according to the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA), bringing the total to 42. Seven new cases in England were identified in Buckinghamshire, Chiltern, Lambeth, Oxford, South Northamptonshire, Spelthorne, and Three Rivers. Three further cases were found in Scotland. Officials said the individuals who had tested positive and their contacts are all isolating. Work is underway to identify any links to travel, although public health sources told the Guardian that community transmission was now “almost certainly” occurring in the UK. The UKHSA has now identified cases of the new variant in the east Midlands, east of England, London, south-east and north-west. None have yet been identified in Wales or Northern Ireland. “It is very likely that we will find more cases over the coming days as we are seeing in other countries globally and as we increase case detection through focused contact tracing,” said Dr Jenny Harries, chief executive of the UKHSA. “That’s why it’s critical that anyone with Covid-19 symptoms isolates and gets a PCR test immediately.” Christmas parties and nativity plays may have been given the go-ahead by Boris Johnson, but a UK government minister had science on her side when she warned against festive kissing this Christmas. Speaking on ITV’s Peston, the work and pensions secretary, Thérèse Coffey, said: “We should all be trying to enjoy the Christmas ahead of us” but, “for what it’s worth, I don’t think there should be much snogging under the mistletoe.” Experts agree this would be a risky business – and not the only one. “Kissing is likely to pose a risk as you are inevitably in very close contact with each other,” said Catherine Noakes, professor of environmental engineering for buildings at the University of Leeds, and a member of Sage. “However, sharing the same air and interacting together in a poorly ventilated room with multiple people is probably a higher risk because in most events this happens far more frequently than very close contact,” she said. “Inhaling the virus is a key risk, and so taking steps to reduce the number of people in a space and ensure that it is well ventilated are likely to be of greater benefit.” Full story from Nicola Davis here: Covid: is it safe to kiss this Christmas? It’s a risk, say scientists A case of the Omicron variant was identified in Minnesota on Thursday, the US state’s health department has said. The concerned Minnesota resident was an adult male, had a recent travel history to New York City, and had been fully vaccinated. He developed mild symptoms on 22 November and sought Covid testing on 24 November, the state’s health department said, adding that his symptoms have resolved. It appears to be the United States’s second confirmed Omicron case, after the first was confirmed in California by US officials on Wednesday in a person who recently returned to San Francisco from a trip to South Africa. The Biden administration is urging all eligible Americans to get vaccines and boosters to fight Omicron, which is spreading quickly around the world, and will increase family vaccination sites and expand availability at pharmacies. Just 58.9% of the total US population, or 196 million people, have been fully vaccinated, one of the lowest rates among wealthy nations. More than 786,000 people have died from coronavirus in the United States, including 37,000 in November alone. The UK recorded 53,945 new Covid cases on Thursday, the highest daily figure since 17 July, government figures showed, and a further 141 deaths within 28 days of a positive coronavirus test. That is compared to 48,374 infections and 171 fatalities in the 24 hours prior. For more live updates from the UK, here is Andrew Sparrow’s Covid live blog: The number of people dining out across the UK has fallen to the lowest level since the reopening of indoor hospitality, according to restaurant industry figures covering the first few days since news broke about the Omicron variant. The seven-day average estimate for UK seated diners fell six percentage points in the week to 29 November, reaching the lowest point since 17 May when indoor dining reopened in England, Scotland and Wales. While the number of people eating out remained above levels recorded during the equivalent week in 2019 before the onset of the pandemic, at 111%, the figure was down from a level of 117% in the previous week, according to the figures from the booking platform OpenTable. Numbers of people eating out continued to fall on Monday and Tuesday this week, according to daily figures from OpenTable. In a potential sign of consumer caution after the news of Omicron broke, seated diner numbers fell to 4% and 7% below pre-Covid levels on the first two days of this week compared to equivalent days in 2019. Although the number of people eating out is typically lower at the start of the week, this was the weakest daily figure since July. It comes as hospitality bosses report a wave of cancellations of bookings for Christmas parties and events following the emerging news, late last week, of the Omicron variant just as pub, restaurant and hotel operators were hoping to welcome many customers during the crucial festive season. The snapshot from the ONS largely covers the week to Sunday, meaning only a handful of days since news of Omicron have been assessed so far. Boris Johnson announced measures at the weekend to limit the spread of the Omicron variant, including compulsory face coverings from Tuesday in shops and on public transport in England, though he stopped short of including the hospitality sector. However, businesses fear tougher measures could soon follow. Full story here: Dining out in UK at lowest level since May amid Omicron fears Regional authorities in Madrid said on Thursday they had detected Spain’s first domestic case of the Covid Omicron variant in a vaccinated person without links to risk countries. Reuters reports that they are investigating two other similar suspected cases. It was the fourth confirmed case of the variant in Spain, but the first proving that Omicron is already circulating in the country. On Wednesday, the north-eastern region of Catalonia said it had detected potential traces of the Omicron coronavirus variant in sewage samples from late November. The person affected in Madrid had received two doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine and had no history of travel or close contact with another person from countries where this variant has been detected, authorities said. The 62-year-old man, who has shown mild symptoms since 29 November, is isolating at home, while his closest contacts are under quarantine, authorities said. The two other cases being investigated also presented only mild symptoms, and had no history of travels to risk countries. Norway is reintroducing some restrictions in order to cope with the emergence of the Omicron coronavirus variant, the government said on Thursday, including testing for all travellers arriving in Norway within 24 hours of arrival, whether vaccinated or not. Norway’s health minister, Ingvild Kjerkol, says face masks should be worn in public places in Oslo and other municipalities and has said adults should practise social distancing nationwide. Norwegian authorities said earlier that as many as 50 people could have become infected with the Omicron variant of the coronavirus after a Christmas dinner party in Oslo. The country posted a daily record of 4,052 coronavirus cases on Monday, according to data from the Norwegian Institute of Public Health. About 88% of adults in Norway, and 71% of all Norwegians, are fully vaccinated. Some 11% of Norwegians have received a booster shot The UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, received his Covid-19 booster shot on Thursday and urged others to follow suit to help the country fend off the Omicron variant of coronavirus. “Fantastic. Thank you so much,” he said to the nurse, before receiving a badge that said: “I’ve boosted my immunity.” For more on the Covid situation in the UK, please follow the UK live blog Covid-19 case rates among the oldest age groups in England have fallen to their lowest level for nearly five months, figures show. PA Media reports that a total of 51.8 new cases for every 100,000 people aged 80 and over were recorded in the week to 28 November, while 66.8 for every 100,000 were recorded for 70- to 79-year-olds. For both age groups they are the lowest rates of new cases since the week to 11 July. It is the fifth week in a row that rates for these groups have fallen. The figures, from the Health Security Agency, may reflect the impact of booster doses of the Covid-19 vaccine, which began to be rolled out to double-jabbed people in the oldest groups from the end of September. Rates have also fallen among all other age groups, including schoolchildren. Among five- to nine-year-olds, 873.8 cases for every 100,000 people were recorded in the latest week, down from 949.8 a week earlier, while the figure for 10- to 19-year-olds has dropped from 830.4 to 758.3. Rates for both these groups had risen in the previous two weeks, which coincided with the return of pupils to school following the half-term holiday. Across England, rates have dropped in all regions except London, where they have risen slightly from 325.9 to 331.3. The south-east has the highest rate, at 517.7 cases for every 100,000 people, while Yorkshire and Humber has the lowest, at 308.9. Here is more on that announcement from the Guardian’s Europe correspondent, Jon Henley. Vaccination could become mandatory in Germany from February, with tough extra restrictions also applying to people who are unvaccinated, the country’s outgoing chancellor, Angela Merkel, has announced. Merkel, who met Germany’s 16 state leaders on Thursday with her successor, Olaf Scholz, for emergency talks on tougher measures to stem rocketing Covid cases, said the situation was “very serious” and an “act of national solidarity” was required. She said Germany’s parliament, the Bundestag, would first vote on the proposed vaccine mandate, with the country’s ethics council due to issue formal guidance by the end of the year, and the rule – if passed – coming into force from February. The move would follow the example of neighbouring Austria, which is planning mandatory vaccinations from February. Greece has also announced mandatory jabs for the over-60s, with unvaccinated people facing fines if they fail to comply. New daily infections in Germany have broken records in recent weeks, with many hospitals operating at or over capacity and forced to send patients elsewhere for treatment. Authorities said 73,209 new cases were recorded in the past 24 hours. Experts have blamed the fourth wave on the country’s relatively low vaccination rate of around 68% compared with several other EU countries such as Spain, which has fully vaccinated 79% of its population, and Portugal, which is 86% vaccinated. Merkel’s outgoing government had previously ruled out mandatory vaccination, but the measure has since won broad political backing. “We don’t have enough vaccinated people,” Scholz said after the meeting. “We now know that this has consequences.” Read the full report here: Germany could make Covid vaccination mandatory, says Merkel I have just clarified in my post from 1.58pm that a nationwide vaccine mandate could come into effect in Germany from February. The measure first has to be debated in the Bundestag and approved by Germany’s Ethics Council. You may have to refresh the page in order to see the updated post. Children in Finland aged five and over that are at risk of severe Covid infection due to weak immune systems should be given vaccinations, the Finnish Health Institute recommended on Thursday, opting not to recommend the shots for all children. The government is expected to accept the recommendation. The institute said the vaccinations could start as soon as Finland obtains approved shots. Vaccination could become mandatory in Germany from February, the outgoing chancellor, Angela Merkel, has announced. Germany will also impose sweeping nationwide restrictions on social contact for unvaccinated people, in what local media is describing as a “lockdown for the unvaccinated”. Unvaccinated people will be barred from non-essential shops and events, unless they have recently recovered from Covid. “Culture and leisure nationwide will be open only to those who have been vaccinated or recovered,” Merkel said. Discos and clubs will have to shut if case numbers reach above a certain threshold, the chancellor also announced. The Covid situationwas “very serious”, Merkel warned, with cases at very high levels and vaccine take-up still lower in Germany than in many other European countries. “We have understood that the situation is very serious and that we want to take further measures in addition to those already taken,” Merkel told a news conference. “To do this, the fourth wave must be broken and this has not yet been achieved,” she said, adding that a nationwide vaccination mandate could take effect from February 2022 after it is debated in the Bundestag and after guidance from Germany’s Ethics Council. Austria became the first western country to make vaccines mandatory in recent days, while Greece said it would make jabs obligatory for over-60s. Merkel and her successor, Olaf Scholz, met German regional leaders today to agree a path forward for the country. This is from Sky News’s Europe correspondent Adam Parsons More on this as we get it. Earlier, we reported here that Norwegian authorities were investigating a cluster of 50 cases possibly linked to the Omicron variant. Reuters is now reporting that an outbreak of Omicron has been confirmed to have occurred in Oslo, the city’s authorities said on Thursday. One person was confirmed positive for the Omicron variant, following a company Christmas party in the Norwegian capital. “At the moment one person is confirmed as infected with Omicron but more cases are expected,” the city said in a statement. “We are working actively with contact tracing to limit the spread and prevent bigger outbreaks.” Norway detected its first two cases of the new Omicron coronavirus variant on Wednesday. The prime minister, Jonas Gahr Støre, is expected to hold a news conference later on Thursday. For more on this please see 10.39am. The European Union’s public health agency said on Thursday that the Omicron variant could be responsible for more than half of all Covid infections in Europe within a few months. The estimate could lend weight to preliminary information about the very high transmissibility of Omicron, above that of the Delta variant, which before Omicron was considered the most contagious of the main coronavirus variants. “Based on mathematical modelling conducted by ECDC, there are indications that Omicron could cause over half of all SARS-CoV-2 infections in the EU/EEA within the next few months,” the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control said in a statement. There is no conclusive evidence about Omicron’s transmissibility so far but the World Health Organization’s lead person on Covid-19, Maria van Kerkhove, said on Wednesday the agency expected to have data on this within days. Europe has so far recorded a few dozen infections of people with the Omicron variant, which was first detected last month. The European Union and European Economic Area (EEA) include the 27 EU member states plus Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway. Earlier on Thursday, the French government’s top scientific adviser Jean-François Delfraissy said that Omicron could take Delta’s place already by the end of January. Republicans are preparing to shut down the American government on Friday, in the latest attempt by the party to thwart White House efforts to increase vaccine take-up, by undermining vaccine mandates across the country. Clamor is growing among some conservatives for Republican senators to oppose a stopgap funding bill, which would fund the government for the next few weeks, unless Democrats agree to not direct money towards enforcing a vaccine mandate for larger companies in the US. If the disgruntled Republicans, who reportedly include Senator Mike Lee, from Utah, are successful, the government would effectively run out of money on Friday and could be forced to furlough workers and shut down some federal services. The need for vaccine mandates, which have been introduced by Joe Biden, has taken on additional importance as the US braces for the impact of the Omicron coronavirus variant. The plot by the right comes after some Republican states have already sought to diminish mandates, by expanding unemployment benefits for employees who have been fired or quit over the requirement to get the vaccine. Read more of Adam Gabbatt’s report here: Republicans threaten government shutdown to undermine vaccine mandates Ukraine will bar the entry of foreigners travelling from several African countries where the Omicron variant has been detected, the prime minister, Denys Shmyhal, said at a televised government meeting on Thursday. The health ministry earlier this week ordered mandatory 14-day self-isolation for Ukrainians returning from those countries. Similar rules will apply to foreigners with a permanent residence permit in Ukraine. Ukraine has recorded 3.5 million coronavirus cases and 87,057 deaths. It has not registered a case of the Omicron variant yet. Greece has detected its first case of the Omicron coronavirus variant, in a Greek citizen on the island of Crete who had returned from South Africa last month, its health minister Thanos Plevris told reporters on Thursday. The man has mild symptoms and all his contacts have been quarantined, the head of Greece’s public health agency EODY, Theoklis Zaoutis, said. His contacts have tested negative so far and have been closely watched by Greek authorities, he added. As we’ve been reporting here, increasing numbers of countries are reporting cases of the variant, including in the last couple of hours India and Finland. While experts are rushing to determine the level of protection afforded by vaccines, the World Health Organization has said Omicron carries a very high global risk of causing surges of infection. *I’m grateful to reader George for flagging this to me. The first case of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus has been discovered in Finland, the Finnish Health Institute said on Thursday. The variant was found in a person who had travelled to Finland from Sweden, the institute added and said it was still investigating samples from other people travelling in the same group that now were sick with Covid-19. Tesco’s festive TV campaign featuring Santa Claus bearing a Covid vaccine passport has been cleared by the UK ad watchdog despite anti-vaccination campaigners making it the second most complained about advert of all time. The advert, titled “This Christmas, Nothing’s Stopping Us”, prompted more than 5,000 complaints to the Advertising Standards Authority (ASA), which determines whether marketing campaigns have broken the UK advertising code. The ad shows the public determined to enjoy a proper Christmas with family and friends after lockdown restrictions prevented gatherings last year. However, in one scene a reporter appears on TV with “breaking news” telling viewers that “Santa could be quarantined”. Father Christmas is then shown presenting his Covid pass at border control, proving he has been vaccinated to a customs official so he can enter the country without restriction. “Having carefully assessed the 5,000 complaints we received about the Tesco Christmas ad campaign, we have concluded it doesn’t break our rules and there are no grounds for further action,” a spokesman for the ASA said. “We consider that the depiction of Santa displaying a proof of vaccine status in an airport is likely to be seen as a humorous reference to international travel rules people have experienced this year. It is unlikely to be interpreted as a message about these rules or the Covid-19 vaccine more widely.” The scene sparked controversy on social media, attracting criticism from those in the anti-vaccination movement. The ASA received 5,009 complaints from members of the public who felt that the scene encouraged medical discrimination and the need to be vaccinated. The full story is here: Tesco ad featuring Santa with Covid vaccine passport cleared by watchdog A man currently in the coronavirus ward of Landspítali hospital in Reykjavík, Iceland, with the Omicron variant is fully vaccinated and had recently received a booster dose, Iceland’s national broadcaster RÚV reports. Iceland reported the man’s diagnosis, the country’s first Omicron case, on Wednesday. It has not yet been determined whether his infection is linked to travel. *I’m grateful to readers Lilja and Angela for flagging this. As we reported earlier, the first two cases of Omicron have been detected in India, with two people in the southern state of Karnataka testing positive for the new variant. The government confirmed that both were foreigners, aged 46 and 66, who had recently travelled from South Africa. Both were reporting only mild symptoms and the government said that all people they had come into contact with had been traced and tested. The detection of Omicron triggered alarm in India, which suffered a devastating second wave of the virus driven by the Delta variant. Covid-19 cases are currently at historic lows but there has also been a marked decline in testing. Just over 30% of people have had both their vaccine doses. After news of the emergence of the Omicron variant broke this week, India introduced strict new rules for international travellers coming into the country, including testing on arrival and having to wait for the results before leaving the airport, and seven-day home quarantine. In the state of Maharashtra, which was hit hard by previous waves of the virus, institutional quarantine has been mandated for travellers arriving from six countries in Africa deemed “high risk”. Plans for India to resume all commercial flights in mid-December have also now been put on hold. The Indian health ministry’s joint secretary Lav Agarwal said there was “no need to panic”. “There will be no drastic curbs any time soon. The situation is well under control,” said Dr VK Paul, chief of the government’s Covid-19 task force. England’s biggest theatres including the Royal Opera House, the National and Andrew Lloyd Webber’s sites in the West End have implemented mandatory mask-wearing as owners respond to the threat of the spread of Omicron. Theatre-goers have not been required to wear masks but owners are moving to make them a compulsory requirement after the government’s decision to make face coverings mandatory in shops and on public transport this week. The Royal Shakespeare Company was the first to make the move, announcing on Monday that face coverings are now required at its theatre in Stratford-upon-Avon, except for those under 12 years of age or who are medically exempt. Other theatres followed, with announcements from the National, which requires masks to be worn in all areas of its building on London’s South Bank, the Royal Opera House, the English National Opera and the Old Vic. Lloyd Webber’s West End theatres also moved to mandatory mask-wearing, having previously operated a policy of requesting, but not enforcing, that theatre-goers use face coverings. Theatre owners are set to keep the policy in place until at least 19 December, the date the government has set for a review of its guidance on face masks. People who are not wearing a face coverings in certain settings can potentially be fined in the form of a fixed penalty notice and ordered to pay £200. More on this story here: England’s biggest theatres make mask-wearing mandatory The Omicron variant has fuelled a “worrying” surge in coronavirus cases in South Africa and is rapidly becoming the dominant strain, local health officials have said, as more countries including the United States detected their first cases. The United Arab Emirates and South Korea – which is already battling a worsening outbreak and record daily infections – also confirmed cases of the Omicron variant. Dr Michelle Groome of South Africa’s National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) said there had been an “exponential increase” in infections over the past two weeks, from a weekly average of around 300 new cases per day to 1,000 last week, and most recently 3,500. On Wednesday, South Africa recorded 8,561 cases. A week earlier, the daily tally was 1,275. “The degree of increase is worrying,” Groome said. The NICD said 74% of all the virus genomes it had sequenced last month had been of the new variant, which was first found in a sample taken on 8 November in Gauteng, South Africa’s most populous province. While key questions remain about how transmissible the Omicron variant is, which has been detected in at least two dozen countries around the world, experts are rushing to determine the level of protection afforded by vaccines. World Health Organization (WHO) epidemiologist Maria van Kerkhove told a briefing that data on how contagious Omicron was should be available “within days”. The NICD said early epidemiological data showed Omicron was able to evade some immunity, but exisiting vaccines should still protect against severe disease and death. BioNTech’s chief executive, Uğur Şahin, said the vaccine it makes in a partnership with Pfizer was likely to offer strong protection against severe disease from Omicron. Read the full story here: Omicron variant fuelling ‘exponential’ rise in Covid cases, say South Africa officials India has detected its first two cases of the Omicron variant, both in the southern state of Karnataka, a health ministry official said on Thursday, as the government urged more widespread testing. “All primary contacts and secondary contacts of both the cases have been traced and are being tested,” the health ministry’s joint secretary Lav Agarwal told a news briefing. The two patients were displaying mild symptoms, officials said. India was set to restart scheduled commercial international flights on 15 December, but scrapped that plan on Wednesday amid rising concerns over Omicron and said a resumption date would be announced in due course. The government has advised states to ramp up testing, a week after the health ministry said a recent fall in testing could undermine the country’s efforts to contain the pandemic. After battling a record surge in infections and deaths in April and May, coronavirus cases have come down substantially in India, where the Delta variant – as in other parts of the world – is the dominant strain. The country reported 9,765 new cases on Thursday, taking its total to 34.61 million. Only the United States has reported more. As we reported earlier, the first case of the coronavirus Omicron variant in mainland France has been confirmed in the Île-de-France region that includes Paris, authorities have said. The regional health authority said a man aged between 50 and 60, showing no symptoms of infection, had been tested on 25 November on his return from a trip to Nigeria. Subsequent sequencing identified the mutation, it said. The man’s wife, who accompanied him on the journey, has also tested positive for the virus but the sequencing that will determine if she is also infected with the variant has not yet been completed, the authority said. A third member of the couple’s household was tested on Thursday and is awaiting the result. The health authority said none of the three had been vaccinated. Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ Germany is expected later today to announce it will impose restrictions on the unvaccinated as it seeks to break a surge in daily coronavirus infections. Outgoing Chancellor Angela Merkel and her successor, Olaf Scholz will discuss with leaders of Germany’s 16 states restricting the unvaccinated from access to all but the most essential businesses, such as grocery stores, pharmacies and bakeries. Sweden’s Public Health Agency said it could impose new restrictions to fight the coronavirus pandemic and a rising tide of infections in the coming days. “We may have to take measures already next week,” Director General Karin Tegmark Wisell told a news conference. The heavily mutated Omicron variant has propelled a sharp rise in Covid cases in South Africa as health experts describe the degree of increase as “worrying”. The variant now accounts for 74% of all the virus genomes sequenced in the nation last month. A microbiologist from South Africa’s National Institute for Communicable Diseases has said the country is seeing an increase in Covid-19 reinfections in patients contracting Omicron in a way that it did not experience with previous variants. A tenth case of the Omicron variant identified in Scotland has no direct link to the previous nine cases which were connected to one event, the Scottish Government has said. The Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) in the UK has approved a new Covid-19 treatment, known as Xevudy (sotrovimab). Scientists believe they may have found the trigger behind the extremely rare blood clot complications stemming from the Oxford/AstraZeneca’s Covid vaccine. Authorities in Norway have said as many as 50 people could have become infected with the omicron variant of the coronavirus after a Christmas dinner party in Oslo. Health authorities in the Netherlands say that more than 20 passengers who have been in quarantine since testing positive for Covid-19 after flying from South Africa on 26 November will be allowed to leave on Thursday. Due to privacy laws, they would not give details of whether this included those who had been identified with the Omicron variant. The wave of coronavirus infections in Portugal is expected to worsen and new daily cases could double to around 9,000 during the Christmas period, the health authority DGS chief Graca Freitas told broadcaster RTP. Pupils and parents in Northern Ireland have been warned to prepare for part-time education in the new year as schools try to cope with staff shortages due to Covid-related absences. More than a third of pregnant women in the UK fear losing their jobs due to safety concerns about Covid in the workplace, according to a survey. Joe Biden is set to announce new actions in the US to combat the coronavirus, including a nationwide campaign encouraging vaccine boosters, an expansion of at-home tests and tighter restrictions on international travel. Authorities in Indonesia have tightened border curbs, extended quarantine and limited movement on strategic toll roads, in a preemptive move to limit the spread of the Omicron Covid variant. South Korea has reported a new daily record in Covid cases with 5,266 cases recorded on Wednesday, the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency (KDCA) It is no doubt going to continue to be a very busy day with Covid developments. Andrew Sparrow has our combined UK Covid and politics live blog. Lucy Campbell will be here shortly to take over from me, and to carry on bringing you the latest global coronavirus news. And I am off to host the comments on the Thursday Quiz. I will see you here again tomorrow. If you missed it earlier and fancy something to listen to, our Today in Focus podcast for Thursday is asking will the Omicron Covid variant cancel Christmas? The Guardian’s science correspondent Nicola Davis tells Hannah Moore the variant is so new to scientists there is not enough data to predict how serious a threat it could pose, but the next two weeks will be crucial. Norwegian authorities have said as many as 50 people could have become infected with the omicron variant of the coronavirus after a Christmas dinner party in Oslo. National news agency NTB cited local media as saying 41 Oslo residents who attended the dinner last Friday had since tested positive for Covid-19, as well as nine guests living in neighbouring municipalities. “We do not yet have full confirmation, but there are very strong indications that this outbreak involves the omicron variant,” Jorun Thaulow, head of the Oslo West test and trace team said. Oslo city hall on Wednesday asked anyone who had been at the restaurant, Louise Louise in the central Aker Brygge district, between 10.30pm and 3am last Friday to get tested urgently. People who were in an Irish pub in the city the following day are also being asked to take a test after one of the dinner guests who subsequently tested positive said they had been drinking there on Saturday evening. Esperanza Martinez, the head of the Covid-19 crisis management team at the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has issued a statement today warning the world of the consequences if there is not a concerted effort to distribute vaccines into conflict zones. She says Vaccine inequity impacts us all. Omicron highlights how vulnerable we all are when large parts of the world aren’t vaccinated. Vaccinating the tens of millions of people living in conflict zones and other hard-to-reach areas is an absolute necessity if we are to resolve the Covid-19 pandemic. Only a small sliver of vaccines has so far reached conflict zones, where families and entire communities often live without access to basic health care services. The ICRC estimates that more than 100 million people now live in areas under full or fluid control of non-state armed groups, often leaving communities out of reach of vaccination campaigns run by ministries of health. The ICRC is calling for a “global, decisive and collective effort” to get vaccines into those conflict zones, warning that vaccination rates in countries experiencing conflict are disturbingly low – citing figures for Ethiopia, South Sudan, Yemen, Somalia and Syria. The latter has reached a 4% vaccination rate, with the others lower than that. It is still going to take a few weeks for scientists to gather all the data they need to understand how the Omicron variant behaves. That means until then we will probably see conflicting reports about how transmissible and severe it is. Certainly Covid-lockdown sceptics have seized on reports that symptoms are very mild with this variant to suggest that the world has been over-reacting to its emergence. However, a lot of people ill simultaneously – even with mild symptoms – would be incredibly disruptive to society, so the transmissibility of the variant is a metric scientists are interested in. As is whether it can reinfect people who have already contracted a different strain of Covid-19 previously. Reuters report this morning that a microbiologist from South Africa’s National Institute for Communicable Diseases has said the country is seeing an increase in Covid-19 reinfections in patients contracting Omicron in a way that it did not experience with previous variants, “Previous infection used to protect against Delta but now with Omicron that doesn’t seem to be the case,” said Professor Anne von Gottberg during an online briefing organised by the World Health Organization. Joe Biden is set to announce new actions in the US to combat the coronavirus, including a nationwide campaign encouraging vaccine boosters, an expansion of at-home tests and tighter restrictions on international travel. Buffeted by the emergence of the Omicron variant and a political backlash from Republicans, the US president will visit the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland, on Thursday and lay out a pandemic battle plan for the winter months. Biden will announce steps to ensure that the nearly 100 million eligible Americans who have not yet received their booster shot do so as soon as possible, the White House said. There is new urgency to the effort after the first US case of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 was identified in California on Wednesday. The president will pledge to expand pharmacy availability during December while pharmacy partners send millions of texts, calls, and emails to eligible customers with information on how to schedule an appointment or walk in for a booster shot. Read more of David Smith’s report from Washington: Joe Biden to announce nationwide coronavirus battle plan Germany is expected later today to announce it will impose restrictions on the unvaccinated as it seeks to break a surge in daily coronavirus infections. Reuters report that outgoing Chancellor Angela Merkel and her successor, Olaf Scholz will discuss with leaders of Germany’s 16 states restricting the unvaccinated from access to all but the most essential businesses, such as grocery stores, pharmacies and bakeries. Eager to avoid lockdowns, they are expected to keep businesses open to the almost 69% of the population that is fully vaccinated as well as those who have recovered from the coronavirus. Germany’s vaccination rate at just under 70% is around the EU average but lower than countries such as Portugal and Ireland. Making vaccination compulsory and restricting the number of people at large events such as soccer matches are among the measures to be discussed. There have been signs the curve is starting to flatten in Germany. The seven-day incidence among 100,000 residents fell for the third consecutive day to 439.2. Andrew Sparrow is up and running with our live blog for the day carrying UK Covid and politics news. He is leading with ministers getting tangled up in whether we should be having Christmas parties or not. You can find that here. I will be carrying on with global coronavirus news on this live blog, so stay tuned. The advertising boss Sir Martin Sorrell has said clients are cancelling Christmas events in response to Omicron, and criticised the UK government for failing to give sufficient guidance on masks. Sorrell, the executive chairman of S4 Capital and founder and former chief executive of WPP, said event cancellations had gathered pace since the new Covid variant was identified. “What we are seeing our clients doing and other people [doing], the answer is they are … cancelling,” Sorrell told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “There has been quite a sharp series of cancellations since this happened just three, four, five days ago.” Read more of Mark Sweney’s report here: Ad boss Martin Sorrell criticises lack of masks guidance as events cancelled The Belfast Telegraph this morning are reporting that pupils and parents have been warned to prepare for part-time education in the new year as schools try to cope with staff shortages due to Covid-related absences. Mark Bain writes: St Malachy’s High School in Castlewellan has now written to parents informing them that their children will be facing some time out of class in from January unless the situation improves. The school is the latest to inform parents that a decision had been taken to plan for students to attend on a rotational basis after the Christmas holidays. “All schools are under pressure with staff absent, including ourselves,” Principal Orla O’Neill informed parents. “We in St Malachy’s have reached a point where staff absence is becoming a health and safety concern as the number of staff absent is increasing day by day. Today we have 15 teachers off. That equates to a quarter of our teaching staff.” While teaching union the NASUWT said that a circuit break closure before Christmas should be on the table, Helena Macormac, director of the National Association of Head Teachers said: “I think contingency plans need to be put in place, but we do not want to see a circuit breaker. We would prefer it if that could be avoided, but safety has to be paramount. “Be prepared is what we’re saying, but we really don’t want this to happen,” she added. If you were worried there hadn’t been enough Christmas party chatter on the live blog today, fret no more. On the BBC Radio 4 Today programme UK science minister George Freeman has suggested that large businesses might consider cancelling their party plans. PA Media quote him saying: Individual businesses, in the end, have to make judgments on what is appropriate internally. It slightly depends on the nature of the business. For many small businesses, four or five staff, who are working together every day anyway, gathering to have a drink isn’t a big step up in risk. But some companies might normally bring hundreds of people in from around the world to a big party, and they may decide, this year, is that sensible given the pandemic and given where we are? In the end, I think business people know how to make those decisions. The Government has set out clear guidance.” This adds to what the work and pensions secretary, Thérèse Coffey, told ITV’s Peston programme that Britons should avoid “snogging under the mistletoe” this Christmas. She said “I think we should all be trying to enjoy the Christmas ahead of us, and that’s why we’re working so hard to get the deployment of as many vaccines as possible.” Coffey said kissing should be avoided with “people you don’t already know”. There’s some news – although not much to be honest – coming out of the Netherlands. Reuters report that Dutch health authorities say that more than 20 passengers who have been in quarantine since testing positive for Covid-19 after flying from South Africa on 26 November will be allowed to leave on Thursday. A spokesman for the health authority for Kennemerland, in which Schiphol airport is situated, said authorities will not disclose whether any of the 14 passengers found to be infected with the Omicron variant of the virus are being released, citing privacy reasons. They will also not disclose or discuss the seriousness of those patients’ symptoms, the spokesman added, also citing privacy reasons. Results of follow-up tests mean that more than half of those who had been held at the hotel are now free to continue their travels, a GGD statement said. “Persons that tested positive will remain in isolation. Their situation varies. Some have symptoms, others don’t or barely,” GGD Kennemerland director Bert van Velden said in a statement. Scientists believe they may have found the trigger behind the extremely rare blood clot complications stemming from the Oxford/AstraZeneca’s Covid vaccine. According to a team of researchers from Cardiff and the US, the reaction can be traced to the way the adenovirus used by the vaccine to shuttle the coronavirus’s genetic material into cells binds with a specific protein in the blood, known as platelet factor 4 (PF4). Researchers think this may spark a chain reaction in the immune system that can culminate in the development of blood clots – a condition known as vaccine-induced immune thrombotic thrombocytopenia (VITT). Prof Alan Parker, from Cardiff University’s School of Medicine, said: “We hope our findings can be used to better understand the rare side effects of these new vaccines and potentially to design new and improved vaccines to turn the tide on this global pandemic.” Read more here: Scientists find possible trigger for AstraZeneca jab blood clots A very quick Reuters snap: A case of the Omicron variant has been found in the greater Paris/Ile-de-France region, reported BFM TV, citing the local health authority. The infected person had recently returned from Nigeria. The wave of coronavirus infections in Portugal is expected to worsen and new daily cases could double to around 9,000 during the Christmas period, the health authority DGS chief Graca Freitas told broadcaster RTP. Reuters note that the country of just over 10 million reported a total of 4,670 new infections on Wednesday, the highest daily jump since the beginning of February. However, Freitas said vaccination levels - among the highest in the world at around 87% of the population - should mean hospitalisations and deaths remain far below levels seen during previous waves of the pandemic. “It is very different to have new cases than to have lethal cases,” she said late on Wednesday. Already in response to the rise in cases and the new Omicron variant, Portugal on Wednesday reimposed some restrictions, and Prime Minister Antonio Costa also said the government would increase restrictions further if needed to control cases. In the UK, Prof Adam Finn, a member of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI), has been on BBC Breakfast, and there were three main points worth pulling out. On whether people will need continual booster shots, PA Media quote him saying: It’s hard to say whether we’ll all need boosters indefinitely - it really does depend on how much further this virus can evolve. Just as with flu, the flu virus changes every year and we have to reformulate the vaccine and reimmunise people who are at risk. So, that could happen with coronavirus but whether it will require everybody to get boosters every year, well I think that’s really unclear at this point in time. On vaccinations for children in the five to 11-year-old bracket, he said The extent to which we can do that and protect adults by avoiding them being infected by children with the current vaccines is still quite uncertain. So, that’s the balance - we clearly want to protect children as much as possible and we’ve got good evidence now that this vaccine, even at a low dose, produces a really good protective immune response in children and produces many fewer side effects because of the lower dose. The question really is that should that be our focus right now or should we really be focusing on adults who are the ones that much more commonly get seriously ill. On vaccine supply and vaccine equity, he said: Increasingly, as time goes by, it’s not so much the supply of vaccine that is limiting vaccine equity, but the ability to actually deliver those vaccines, so during the course of next year we should expect the number of doses available to countries around the world to really go up really very rapidly. But that doesn’t mean that they’ll necessarily be able to provide those vaccines to people as quickly as we would like. Agence France-Presse have this to tee-up expected events in Germany today. They write that Chancellor Angela Merkel and her designated successor Olaf Scholz will meet German regional leaders later today to finalise new measures to tackle surging Covid cases, with compulsory jabs among the options on the table. Though the seven-day incidence rate in Germany has fallen slightly this week, it still stood at 442.9 new infections per 100,000 people on Wednesday, with 67,186 new cases recorded in the past 24 hours. Restrictions were tightened just two weeks ago, but the leaders came together on Tuesday to discuss tougher measures and are now expected to fine tune the plans. After Tuesday’s meeting, Scholz said he was in favour of compulsory vaccination for all Germans and wants parliament to vote on the matter before the end of the year. “Too many people have not got vaccinated,” he told Bild television. Making jabs compulsory is justified “to protect us all”, he said. Compulsory jabs should be in force “in the beginning of February or March so we must move quickly now,” Scholz said, promising that lawmakers would be allowed to vote according to their conscience. Germany already announced plans earlier this month to require health workers and soldiers to get inoculated against Covid-19. Expanding that to the general public would see the country follow the example of neighbouring Austria, which is planning mandatory vaccinations from February. Just back to UK science minister George Freeman for a moment. On Sky News he was asked about plans to vaccinate children in the 5-to-11 age range. He didn’t really have an answer beyond saying that they are waiting for further scientific advice. He said: We are looking at the science on that and the balance of the rollout. Patrick Vallance, our chief scientist, and Chris Whitty are advising on that. It is their advice that guides us. The urgent priority now is to make sure that we roll out the jab programme through the population and, with Christmas coming, we want to make sure that as many people as possible are double jabbed. In due course, we would like to make sure that all of those who are vulnerable have the right level of protection. Data at the moment suggests that young children are much less vulnerable but, as and when that data changes, we are guided by the science and we stand ready, which is partly why we have procured the vaccines - to make sure we can deliver what our citizens and patients need. A quick snap from Reuters here that the Swedish Public Health Agency said it could impose new restrictions to fight the coronavirus pandemic and a rising tide of infections in the coming days. Sweden, which introduced vaccine passes for indoor events with more than 100 people at the beginning of this month, had flagged potential additional measures might be needed to curb the spread of the virus. “We may have to take measures already next week,” Karin Tegmark Wisell, Director General at Sweden’s Public Health Agency, told a news conference. A tenth case of the Omicron variant identified in Scotland has no direct link to the previous nine cases which were connected to one event, the Scottish Government has said. Authorities have said the nine cases across Lanarkshire area and Greater Glasgow and Clyde identified earlier in the week were connected to an event on 20 November. Public Health Scotland recorded an additional confirmed case of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 on Wednesday in the same area. A Scottish Government spokesman said: “The individual affected is in the NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde health board area and while there is no direct link with the event on the 20 November which connected the previous nine cases, investigations are ongoing. “As First Minister Nicola Sturgeon told parliament on Tuesday, it was already suspected that some degree of community transmission of this variant was taking place in Scotland. “However, there is no indication as yet that transmission of the new variant is either sustained or widespread.” The Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) in the UK has approved a new Covid-19 treatment, known as Xevudy (sotrovimab). A statement this morning says that: Another Covid-19 treatment, Xevudy (sotrovimab), has today been approved by the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) after it was found to be safe and effective at reducing the risk of hospitalisation and death in people with mild to moderate Covid-19 infection who are at an increased risk of developing severe disease. Developed by GSK and Vir Biotechnology, sotrovimab is a single monoclonal antibody. The drug works by binding to the spike protein on the outside of the Covid-19 virus. This in turn prevents the virus from attaching to and entering human cells, so that it cannot replicate in the body. In a clinical trial, a single dose of the monoclonal antibody was found to reduce the risk of hospitalisation and death by 79% in high-risk adults with symptomatic COVID-19 infection. Science minister George Freeman has defended the UK government over criticism that it has procured more vaccines to the detriment of efforts to vaccinate globally. It was announced overnight that the UK has secured new contracts to buy 114m more Covid-19 vaccines for the next two years. Asked on Sky News about how many of the promised 100m vaccines the UK had delivered to the Covax vaccine-sharing programme, he said: The problem with Covax actually has been the global manufacturing supply chains. One of the things we set out in our G7 summit in the summer, which is partly what we’re picking up today, is to make sure that we’ve got those global supply chains. So Britain has put the funding in. We’ve procured the vaccines. The key is getting the roll out internationally into those hard to reach countries in Africa, in the Southern Pacific island states. And that is a global challenge. That’s why we’re one of the biggest contributors to Covax who are doing a brilliant job. We’ve put the vaccines in. We’ve got to make sure that we support them in rolling them out internationally. Because as I say, we’re not safe. The global economy isn’t safe until we’ve defeated this pandemic across the whole world. Questioned on how many of the promised 100m vaccines the UK had actually delivered to Covax, Freeman said “We’ve supported that 100 million. They’re in the pipeline. That isn’t the issue.” Asked why the UK was ordering more vaccines, he defended the move saying: It’s a balanced game. I mean, we’ve got another variant. I think the British public would expect us to make sure that we’re providing the supply here in the UK. This is a balance. We’ve got to make sure that our citizens are safe, and that the global vaccine rollout through Covax is supported, and that is what we’re committed doing. George Freeman, science minister for the UK, has just endured a torrid time on Sky News being interviewed by Kay Burley. He was initially bullish on the performance of the UK’s vaccination booster jab rollout, saying: This pandemic isn’t over and the UK is leading in both the science of defeating this virus, and in the rollout for vaccines here in the UK. We’re in a global race to make sure we defeat this pandemic. This summer we led the charge on how we support rollout. Here in the UK, our vaccine rollout programme is setting the benchmark. And that’s why we’re able this year to not impose the very tough, quite draconian regulations we had to last year, in a way that other countries aren’t. So this is UK science leadership. However, Burley repeatedly pressed him on when people in their twenties would be able book a booster jab. Freeman insisted the NHS and GP practices were rolling them out now. Burley eventually said to him, rather exasperatedly “If you are in your twenties, you don’t know when you can have the jab. Just admit to that because that is fundamentally the case, isn’t it?” Freeman replied “The case is that the NHS is rolling out the vaccine programme and if you contact your GP and book it, you will get your jab.” To which Burley said: “It’s just not true. It’s just not true, minister.” More than a third of pregnant women fear losing their jobs due to safety concerns about Covid in the workplace, according to a survey. Research from Maternity Action shows 36% are concerned about their work if they take time off or ask their employer to do more to protect them from Covid. The charity is urging ministers to immediately overhaul health and safety rules for pregnant women in the workplace, which it says are “not fit for purpose”. Ros Bragg, director of Maternity Action, said: “The situation for pregnant women is dire and is only getting worse as the pandemic progresses. “They are frankly right to be worried – because the system that is supposed to protect them is not fit for purpose. There is a vast gap between what the law says and actual employer practice, leaving women under huge pressure to work in unsafe conditions.” Bragg said officials and organisations given the responsibility of enforcing workplace health and safety had “shown themselves wholly inadequate to the task”. Women are being left with an “unenviable choice” of either taking their employer to a tribunal to get basic health and safety protections or “carrying on working in an unsafe environment”. Read more from our health editor Andrew Gregory’s report here: Pregnant women fear losing jobs over Covid safety worries, survey finds Hello, it is Martin Belam here, taking over from Samantha Lock. It is science minister George Freeman doing the media round for the government in the UK this morning. I’ll bring you any lines that emerge from that in due course. Here’s a quick snapshot of developments from the past few hours: Ukraine has recorded 13,531 new cases of Covid-19 for Wednesday. Authorities in Indonesia have tightened border curbs, extended quarantine and limited movement on strategic toll roads, in a preemptive move to limit the spread of the Omicron Covid variant. Thailand reported another 4,971 new Covid cases. Hong Kong’s quarantine is pushing Cathay Pacific pilots to “breaking point” as many seek work elsewhere, AFP reports. India has recorded another 9,765 daily Covid cases and 277 for Wednesday, according to an update from the health ministry. Germany has reported another 73,209 new Covid cases for Wednesday and 388 deaths, according to data from the Robert Koch Institute. China is reporting 73 new Covid cases for Wednesday, a decrease from the 113 reported Covid cases a day earlier, Reuters reports. South Korea has reported a new daily record in Covid cases with 5,266 cases recorded on Wednesday, the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency (KDCA) said. A large number of temporary and bridging Australian visa holders will be cut off from their families this Christmas despite the planned easing of border restrictions, causing further agony and uncertainty for those stuck in the country. The heavily mutated Omicron variant has propelled a sharp rise in Covid cases in South Africa as health experts describe the degree of increase as “worrying”. The variant now accounts for 74% of all the virus genomes sequenced in the nation last month. The pandemic has seen a shift towards recreational drug users taking tiny doses of psychedelics, such as LSD and magic mushrooms, to improve their wellbeing and mental health, a leading addiction expert has said. People were microdosing to self-medicate rather than following the trend, popularised in Silicon Valley, of consuming small amounts of psychedelics to enhance creativity, Prof Adam Winstock, the founder and director of the Global Drug Survey, said. The 2021 survey found that among those respondents who both microdosed and took psychiatric drugs almost half reported reducing or stopping their prescribed medication. Winstock, a London-based consultant psychiatrist and addiction medicine specialist, said the findings suggested people had been experimenting with microdosing during the pandemic, perhaps due to increased waiting times for mental health services. Our reporter, David Batty, has the full story here. Pakistan has also released their Covid figures for the last 24 hours. An additional 377 people are confirmed to have tested positive for Covid-19, the ministry of national health services said in an update today. There were eight deaths also recorded and 904 patients in critical care. Ukraine has just released their daily Covid numbers. The European nation recorded 13,531 new cases of Covid-19 for Wednesday. The figure included 1,346 children and 240 health workers, according to an update from the ministry of health. Here’s a fun story from our reporter Amy Fleming on the ‘pandemic body’ and how the Covid era changed us. From hair loss to weight gain, decaying teeth and sore eyes – the strange, difficult years of coronavirus have changed us physically. Will we ever get back to our former selves? Read the full story here. Authorities in Indonesia have tightened border curbs, extended quarantine and limited movement on strategic toll roads, in a preemptive move to limit the spread of the Omicron Covid variant, Reuters report. The southeast Asian nation has also extended mandatory quarantine for arrivals from seven days to ten. “This policy... will be evaluated every now and then as we understand and continue digging more information about this new variant,” senior minister Luhut Pandjaitan said in a statement on Wednesday. Travel to Indonesia from 11 countries, including South Africa, Botswana, Namibia and Nigeria, will not be allowed, except for returning Indonesians, who will be subjected to 14 days of isolation. New domestic travel measures include limiting the volume of traffic on toll roads to reduce people movement, according to the transport minister. Official data in Indonesia shows a sharp reduction in new daily infections, with a daily average of about 400 last month compared to about 40,000 in July. More than a third of its 270 million population are vaccinated. Canada has reported it’s first case of wildlife found infected with Covid-19 after three wild white-tailed deer were identified with the virus. The National Centre for Foreign Animal Disease (CFIA) confirmed reports, saying the deer were sampled earlier in November in the Estrie region of Quebec. However, the deer showed “no evidence of clinical signs of disease” and were all apparently healthy, according to a recent Environment and Climate Change Canada report. Thailand has just released their daily Covid report. The southeast Asian nation reported another 4,971 new Covid cases, bringing the cumulative total to 2,125,729. Another 33 deaths were also reported for Wednesday, bringing the total tally to 20,847. It’s been another busy few hours as the world scrambles to make sense of the Omicron variant. Here are the most important developments so far. Hong Kong’s quarantine is pushing Cathay Pacific pilots to “breaking point” as many seek work elsewhere, AFP reports. India has recorded another 9,765 daily Covid cases and 277 for Wednesday, according to an update from the health ministry. Germany has reported another 73,209 new Covid cases for Wednesday and 388 deaths, according to data from the Robert Koch Institute. China is reporting 73 new Covid cases for Wednesday, a decrease from the 113 reported Covid cases a day earlier, Reuters reports. South Korea has reported a new daily record in Covid cases with 5,266 cases recorded on Wednesday, the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency (KDCA) said. A large number of temporary and bridging Australian visa holders will be cut off from their families this Christmas despite the planned easing of border restrictions, causing further agony and uncertainty for those stuck in the country. The heavily mutated Omicron variant has propelled a sharp rise in Covid cases in South Africa as health experts describe the degree of increase as “worrying”. The variant now accounts for 74% of all the virus genomes sequenced in the nation last month. Hong Kong’s quarantine is pushing Cathay Pacific pilots to “breaking point” as many seek work elsewhere, Agence France-Presse reports. The airline has been hit by a wave of pilot resignations in recent weeks as resentment over Hong Kong’s strict quarantine regime boils over and crew scramble for emerging opportunities overseas. Hong Kong’s leaders are closely following Beijing’s closed-border zero-Covid strategy and say normalising travel with China must come before the rest of the world. “Things are horrible, resignations are through the roof,” one pilot, who has more than 20 years’ flying experience and has applied to two rival airlines, told AFP. There are a lot of guys at their breaking point. It’s actually amazing that we haven’t had an accident yet.” For much of the pandemic Hong Kong has restricted inbound travel with as much as three weeks mandatory quarantine. Resentment built throughout the pandemic but exploded last month when more than 270 people - made up of some 120 crew plus their families - were ordered into a government quarantine camp after three pilots tested positive on return from Germany. The trio were later fired when Cathay said they had left their hotel rooms during their layover. In a recording obtained by AFP, Cathay’s director of flight operations Chris Kempis told employees this week that there was “a higher resignation rate among pilots right now”. In a statement, Cathay Pacific said it had to abide by Hong Kong’s regulations. Western Australia is pitching itself to travellers as the “safest place” in the world from the Covid-19 pandemic, despite being a state almost no one can visit. State premier Mark McGowan unveiled the $185m transition plan to reopen WA to the world at a state address on Wednesday. He said WA was now in the position to market itself internationally as the safest place from the Covid-19 pandemic. “The virtue of our careful and cautious approach, means Western Australia now has a new brand – of safety, stability and strength, and we will use that brand to market ourselves to the world,” he said. The state has taken a hard-line stance to border control during the pandemic with the emergence of the Omicron variant prompting the federal government to reintroduce quarantine for some international travellers. Read the full story here. India has recorded another 9,765 daily Covid cases for Wednesday, bringing the cumulative total to 34.61m, according to an update from the health ministry. Another 477 deaths were also recorded, bringing the total death toll to 469,724. Will the Omicron Covid variant cancel Christmas? The Guardian’s science correspondent Nicola Davis tells Hannah Moore the variant is so new to scientists there is not enough data to predict how serious a threat it could pose, but the next two weeks will be crucial. Listen to our latest podcast episode below. Here’s an analysis piece by our reporter Jo Chandler as to why Papua New Guinea’s Covid strategy went so wrong. Public confusion and distrust over vaccination have been fuelled by what experts say are crippling failures in authorities’ response to the pandemic in the Pacific island nation. Vaccine hesitancy has been a major issue and cause for concern in PNG, where just over 2% of the population has been fully vaccinated. Some health experts predict that Papua New Guinea will take five years to vaccinate just one-third of its population. Other countries in the Pacific are also significantly lagging behind in vaccination rates with experts predicting a handful of nations will have less than a quarter of adults vaccinated by the end of the year. Some Covid numbers from Germany are now in. The European nation reported another 73,209 new Covid cases for Wednesday and 388 deaths, according to data from the Robert Koch Institute. The figures bring the total confirmed cumulative coronavirus cases in the nation to 5,977,208 with 102,178 deaths. Japan is reportedly urging airlines to accommodate the needs of returning Japanese. The country’s transport ministry has cancelled its blanket ban on accepting new reservations for inbound flights and asked airlines to accommodate the needs of returning Japanese, Reuters reports. Chief Cabinet Secretary Hirokazu Matsuno added that Prime Minister Fumio Kishida had asked the transport ministry to be mindful of returning Japanese given the confusion a suspension of new bookings installed on Wednesday had caused. Shares in Asia have seen mixed fortunes so far in Thursday’s session after a volatile day of trading in the US on Wednesday. The Nikkei was down 0.6% in Tokyo and the ASX200 was off 0.1% in Sydney as investors waited for clearer signals about the economic impact of the Omicron variant. However, Hong Kong was up 0.18% and the Kospi in Seoul was riding a surge of 0.9%. American multinational pharmaceutical company, Bristol Myers Squibb Co, was sued on Wednesday by four employees who said the drugmaker refused to grant them religious exemptions from its Covid-19 vaccination requirement, and threatened to fire them on 6 December for remaining unvaccinated, Reuters reports. The plaintiffs in the proposed class action filed in Manhattan federal court accused Bristol Myers of violating a federal civil rights law known as Title VII by “systematically manufacturing” reasons to refuse religious accommodations. The plaintiffs - reported by Reuters to be Carrie Kefalas, a physician overseeing clinical trial risk management for drug development; biotechnologist John Lott; data integrity manager Jeremy Beer, and biologist Kamila Dubisz - allege that Bristol Myers is concluding their politics is the real reason they won’t be vaccinated, regardless of whether they have sincere religious beliefs that independently would justify exemptions. They objected to the company requiring they fill out “inquisitorial” questionnaires about their reasons for religious exemptions. Bristol Myers said its priority during the pandemic has been the health and safety of communities, employees and patients. “Our policy that all eligible employees in (the) US and Puerto Rico be vaccinated against Covid-19 is consistent with this safety priority,” the New York-based company said in a statement to Reuters. The complaint said Bristol Myers rejected Kefalas’ request because it thought her beliefs were insincere and she might not accept mask-wearing or regular Covid-19 testing. The company offered no reasons for the other rejections, the complaint said. Bristol Myers referred in Kefalas’ rejection letter to several statements it said she made publicly, including that its vaccine requirement was a “communist, unamerican practice.” The lawsuit seeks a permanent injunction against Bristol Myers’ firing the plaintiffs or similarly situated employees. A recent study out of the US has found that roughly one in every 100 patients hospitalised with Covid-19 will likely have central nervous system complications. Researchers from the Radiological Society of North America (RSNA) - an association of radiologists, radiation oncologists, medical physicists and related scientists - reported the findings on Tuesday. “Much has been written about the overall pulmonary problems related to Covid-19, but we do not often talk about the other organs that can be affected,” said study lead author Scott H. Faro, M.D., FASFNR, professor of radiology and neurology and director of the Division of Neuroradiology/Head &amp; Neck Imaging at Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia, said. Our study shows that central nervous system complications represent a significant cause of morbidity and mortality in this devastating pandemic.” Among nearly 38,000 patients hospitalised with Covid-19 in the United States and Europe, symptoms led doctors to suspect brain complications in about 11%. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) exams confirmed central nervous system abnormalities that were most likely associated with the virus in 10% of those patients, for an overall incidence of 1.2%. The most common finding was stroke due to clogged arteries, but the researchers also saw bleeding in the brain, inflammation of the brain, and other potentially fatal complications. China is reporting 73 new coronavirus cases for Wednesday, 1 December, Reuters reports. This is a decrease from the 113 reported Covid cases a day earlier, its health authority said. Of the new infections, 53 were locally transmitted, according to a statement by the National Health Commission, compared with 91 a day earlier. All of the new locally transmitted cases were in Inner Mongolia. There were no new deaths, leaving the death toll at 4,636. South Korea has reported a new daily record in Covid cases on Thursday, amid concerns over a sharp rise in patients with severe symptoms. The Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency (KDCA) reported 5,266 cases for Wednesday, a day after the daily tally rose above 5,000 for the first time. Authorities will require a 10-day quarantine for all inbound travellers for two weeks starting Friday, halting exemptions given earlier to fully vaccinated people, the KDCA said. The measure came after South Korea confirmed its first five cases of the Omicron variant late on Wednesday, including a fully vaccinated couple who arrived last week from Nigeria, followed by two of their family members and a friend. The country has fully inoculated nearly 92% of adults and is now focusing on vaccinating children and a booster programme, but experts have warned that cases could continue to rise due in part to the spread of the potentially more transmissible variant. Total infections rose to 457,612, with 3,705 deaths. A large number of temporary and bridging Australian visa holders will be cut off from their families this Christmas despite the planned easing of border restrictions, causing further agony and uncertainty for those stuck in the country. Restrictions are set to ease for some temporary visa holders in time for Christmas, including those on international skilled, student, humanitarian, working holiday and provisional family visas. This will allow them to leave and re-enter Australia without exemptions from 15 December. But for holders of other types of temporary visas there is still no end in sight. Read the full story here. The heavily mutated Omicron variant has propelled a sharp rise in Covid cases in South Africa as health experts describe the degree of increase as “worrying”. The variant now accounts for 74% of all the virus genomes sequenced in the nation last month after it was first found in a sample taken on 8 November in Gauteng, South Africa’s most populous province. Covid cases have risen from a weekly average of around 300 new cases per day to 1,000 last week and most recently to 3,500. A total of 8,561 new cases were reported on Wednesday alone - double the number of new cases recorded the day before, according to data from the National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD). Dr Michelle Groome, head of the NICD, said the increase was “exponential” adding that the “rapidly increasing number of new daily cases” was “fuelled by the variant” known as Omicron, Agence France-Presse reports. South Africa’s National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) said early epidemiological data suggested Omicron was able to evade some immunity, but existing vaccines should still protect against severe disease and death. World Health Organization (WHO) epidemiologist Maria van Kerkhove told a briefing that data on how contagious Omicron was should be available “within days.” Hello everyone, it’s Samantha Lock here, ready to take you through all the Covid news this Thursday. It’s been a very busy few days on the Covid front as countries swiftly respond to the emergence of the Omicron variant. Let’s start with the news that the Omicron variant has propelled a sharp rise in Covid cases in South Africa as health experts describe the degree of increase as “worrying”. Covid cases have risen from a weekly average of around 300 new cases per day to 1,000 last week and most recently to 3,500. A total of 8,561 new cases were reported on Wednesday alone, according to data from the National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD). Dr Michelle Groome, head of the NICD, said the increase was “exponential” adding that the “rapidly increasing number of new daily cases” was “fuelled by the variant” known as Omicron. Here’s a quick rundown of everything you might have missed over the past 24 hours. The US reported its first Omicron case identified in California and discovered in a traveller who returned from South Africa on 22 November and tested positive on 29 November. The World Health Organization has urged countries to prioritise getting the unvaccinated vaccinated, both nationally and globally, rather than boosters. Ministers in the UK have secured new contracts to buy 114m more Covid-19 vaccines for the next two years. The US will extend requirements for travellers to wear masks on aeroplanes, trains and buses and at airports and train stations through mid-March. Greek lawmakers approved legislation making vaccination for Covid mandatory for all residents aged over 60. Some 17% of Greeks aged over 60 have not yet been vaccinated. They have until 16 January to get their first jabs, or will be fined 100 euros for every month they remain unvaccinated. The United Arab Emirates announced its first known case of the new Covid variant Omicron. Moderna could have a Covid booster shot targeting the Omicron variant tested and ready to file for US authorisation as soon as March, the company’s president said. The EU must consider mandatory vaccination, European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen said. One-third of Europe’s 150-million population are not vaccinated. The UN condemned the travel bans implemented in response to Omicron as “unfair, punitive and ineffective”.The prime minister, Scott Morrison, has denied misleading Australians over Alex Antic’s Covid-19 vaccination status but accepted his assumption the Liberal senator was fully vaccinated has “proved to be incorrect”. Antic was taken into hotel quarantine in Adelaide on Thursday night, calling into question the prime minister’s assurances the senator had been double vaccinated. Morrison told ABC Adelaide on 26 November that Antic was “double-dose vaccinated” in an interview addressing the senator’s threat to withhold his vote unless the government did more to override state vaccination mandates. On Friday, Morrison explained he had been advised Antic was fully vaccinated, adding that he was “disappointed” that he “wasn’t corrected” when he put that to Antic. The Adelaide Advertiser revealed that Antic was taken into hotel quarantine after returning to South Australia at the conclusion of the parliamentary sitting fortnight on Thursday. Antic repeatedly refused to disclose his vaccination status when questioned at Adelaide airport on Thursday evening – and again when contacted by Guardian Australia. On Friday, Antic told ABC Adelaide he had “no idea” why he was taken to hotel quarantine and suggested questions should be directed to “bureaucratic overlords at SA Health”. “All of a sudden I’ve been singled out in what appears to be a political stunt, and the only inference you can draw from this is that it’s been quite premeditated,” he said. Asked about his discussions with Morrison on his vaccination status, Antic said: “My conversations with the prime minister are, as you would believe, private. I don’t believe I’d ever misled the prime minister about anything.” “I’ve been very clear about my medical history, my medical care, it’s a matter for myself, my family, my wife,” the senator said. Antic has regularly travelled to Canberra for sittings of parliament and said until now he had been allowed to quarantine at home for two weeks on returning to South Australia. Under changes which took effect on 23 November, all unvaccinated travellers into South Australia must quarantine in a medi-hotel for 14 days on arrival. The Advertiser reported that Antic had applied for an exemption to return to South Australia, was initially denied, but on appeal was granted entry on the condition he complete 14 days quarantine in a medi-hotel. On Friday, Morrison addressed the apparent contradiction at a press conference in Cooma, explaining he had been advised Antic was double vaccinated and “wasn’t corrected” in a subsequent conversation with the senator. “That was certainly my understanding that he had been double vaccinated and I had discussed vaccinations and made it very clear that that’s what I understood ... So I was surprised to learn that.” On 22 November, Antic was one of five Coalition senators who crossed the floor to vote for a One Nation bill attempting to override state health orders requiring workers in particular industries be vaccinated, including the aged care sector where the mandates were proposed by the Morrison government. Antic refused to vote for government legislation in the final sitting fortnight in protest against vaccine mandates, along with Senator Gerard Rennick who did the same to protest what he claimed were flaws with the vaccine adverse event indemnity scheme. On Friday, the government leader in the Senate, Simon Birmingham, said Liberal and National senators were free to cross the floor, if they did so “seriously” and “sparingly”. “But this sort of blanket idea that you’re just not going to turn up to any votes, is not really holding out on the principles of individual bills, it’s conflating everything that’s on the legislative agenda with whatever issue you’re demanding action be taken on,” he told Sky News. Birmingham said the government had been clear it would not be “dictated to on changing positions on vaccinations or the like”. “The actions of those two senators achieved nothing during this fortnight other than to frustrate reforms on voter integrity, on voter ID, and litigation funding reform.” Guardian Australia has contacted Morrison, Antic and South Australia Health for comment.A government shutdown is still imminent. The House has passed a stopgap measure to continue funding the government through mid-February and the Senate is poised to vote on the bill tonight. Some Republican senators have threatened to oppose the bill unless an amendment is added to defund vaccine mandate efforts. Joe Biden outlined the federal government’s plan to respond to the coronavirus pandemic in light of the spread of the Omicron variant, emphasizing vaccinations. The government will renew its push to get people vaccinated, including launching “hundreds of family vaccination clinics” across the country where people of all ages can get their booster shots and vaccinations. Symone Sanders, chief spokesperson and senior adviser to Kamala Harris, said that she is leaving her post at the end of the year. The news has raised questions of embattlement in the vice president’s office. The Biden administration is set to reintroduce the Trump-era “Remain in Mexico” policy. The policy requires those who are seeking asylum in the US to await the decision on their application outside of the US. The supreme court ruled that the federal government must reinstate the policy as it places an undue burden on states at the border. – Lauren Aratani and Maanvi Singh “It is looking good” that the Senate will pass the resolution to keep the government funded through February tonight, said Senate Leader Chuck Schumer. “It’s looking very good.” Discussions are ongoing in the Senate over an amendment to defund vaccine mandates, which Republican Senators have demanded in exchange for their support in scheduling a vote on the stopgap spending legislation. But with several Republicans missing from the Senate today, and Democrats unlikely to support the amendment, it’s almost certain to fail even if it is taken up. Due to certain Senate rules, all 100 senators would need to get on board to schedule a vote in order to quickly pass the stopgap spending plan before the Friday deadline. So, a threat by even a few Republicans to oppose legislation to fund the government over objections to vaccine and testing mandates for businesses has real teeth at the moment. Although it seems likely that a prolonged shutdown will be averted, a brief shutdown is possible as GOP Senators insist on adding an amendment barring funding for vaccine mandates. The House Freedom Caucus, a group of rightwing Republicans in the House, urged Senate colleagues to oppose the stopgap bill “unless it prohibits funding – in all respects – for the vaccine mandates and enforcement thereof”. The House voted 221 to 212 to keep the government funded through mid-February, a day before is scheduled to run out of money. Representative Adam Kinzinger was the only Republican to vote for the resolution. But a shutdown is still looming, with some Senate Republicans threatening to vote against legislation to keep funding the government over the White House’s vaccine and testing mandate for employers. Some senators say they will not vote for the bill to keep the government open without an amendment barring funding for the mandate. In the latest attempt by the party to thwart White House efforts to increase vaccine take-up, Republicans are preparing to shut down the American government on Friday unless Democrats agree to not direct money towards enforcing a vaccine mandate for larger companies in the US. If the disgruntled Republicans, who reportedly include Senator Mike Lee, from Utah, are successful, the government would effectively run out of money on Friday and could be forced to furlough workers and shut down some federal services. The need for vaccine mandates, which have been introduced by Joe Biden, has taken on additional importance as the US braces for the impact of the Omicron coronavirus variant. The plot by the right comes after some Republican states have already sought to diminish mandates, by expanding unemployment benefits for employees who have been fired or quit over the requirement to get the vaccine. On Wednesday, the House Freedom Caucus, a group of rightwing Republicans in the House of Representatives, urged their Senate colleagues to block the funding bill, also known as a continuing resolution, “unless it prohibits funding – in all respects – for the vaccine mandates and enforcement thereof”. In a letter to Mitch McConnell, the Senate minority leader, the Freedom Caucus said the Democratic-dominated House was set to vote in favor of the stopgap funding bill on Wednesday. The bill will then go to the Senate, where Democrats need Republican votes to pass the bill by Friday night. The House Freedom Caucus said that deadline gave their Senate colleagues “important leverage” to prevent funding for mandates. Biden introduced vaccine mandates, which require employees to be vaccinated or submit to weekly testing, for federal workers and contractors in July. In September, Biden ordered healthcare workers to be vaccinated and companies with 100 workers or more to require Covid-19 vaccines or testing, which the government said would cover more than 100 million employees. Those measures have been put on hold by court rulings, after Republican state attorneys general, conservative groups and trade organizations have sued to stop the regulations. The appeal by House Republicans came after Politico reported that some Republicans in the Senate were open to blocking the stopgap funding bill. “I’m sure we would all like to simplify the process for resolving the [continuing resolution], but I can’t facilitate that without addressing the vaccine mandates,” Lee told Politico. Read more: Here’s a quick summary of what’s happened so far today: A government shutdown is still imminent as leaders in Congress struggled today to agree on a bipartisan stopgap measure. House leaders said they had reached an agreement on a bill that would extend current government spending levels until mid-February, though the House has yet to vote on the bill. Some Republican Senators are saying they will not agree to a stopgap bill unless Democrats agree to defund enforcement of the federal vaccine mandate. Joe Biden gave remarks on new actions the federal government is taking to address the pandemic, including expanding access to boosters for Americans and launching a new campaign to encourage people to get their booster shots. Symone Sanders, chief spokesperson and senior adviser to Kamala Harris, said that she is leaving her post at the end of the year, further prompting questions of embattlement in the vice president’s office. The Biden administration is set to reintroduce a Trump-era policy that requires those who are seeking asylum in the US to await the decision on their application outside of the US. The supreme court ruled that the federal government must reinstate the policy as it places an undue burden on states at the border. Stay tuned for more live updates. Donald Trump is asking a federal judge to dismiss a lawsuit against him filed by writer E Jean Carroll, who has accused the former president of sexual assault, on the ground of a state law meant to protect free speech, according to the Washington Post. The law allows for the quick dismissal of lawsuits against wealthy companies and people if they can prove the claims against them have no substantial basis. If a lawsuit is dismissed under this law, the person who brought forth the lawsuit must pay the defendant’s legal fees. Carroll has sued Trump for defamation in 2019 after Trump said that she made up her sexual assault accusation to sell her new book. Roberta Kaplan, Carroll’s attorney, said in a statement that Trumps’ request is a “transparent effort to delay” the lawsuit from going to court. Two former Georgia election workers are suing a far-right conspiracy website for defamation saying that the site knowingly published false stories about them, which led to harassment and threats. The lawsuit, which was filed on Thursday, says that Gateway Pundit published multiple false stories about them after a Trump attorney said at a hearing in George that he saw a video of several poll workers stuffing ballots from suitcases under a table. He gave the first name of one of the women – Ruby Freeman – which ultimately led to targeting reporting from Gateway Pundit, the women allege. Freeman is joined in the lawsuit by her daughter, Shaye Moss, who is also accusing the site of defamation. The women say that the false stories “have not only devastated their personal and professional reputations but instigated a deluge of intimidation, harassment and threats that has forced them to change their phone numbers, delete their online accounts and fear for their physical safety.” The suit says that the FBI recommended Freeman leave her home for two months because of threats. A Minnesota man who traveled to New York City and attended an anime convention has tested positive for the Omicron variant, New York governor Kathy Hochul said earlier today. This is the second confirmed case of the variant in the US. The convention was held in mid-November and took place in the city’s main convention center. Hochul said the state is anticipating more cases though “this is not a cause for alarm”. New York City mayor Bill de Blasio also said that there will likely be community spread and that the city will reach out to conference attendees to be tested. The Republican governor of Missouri commissioned an analysis of whether mask mandates helped to save lives and prevent Covid-19 in the state but never made the findings of the analysis public, according to the Kansas City Star. The analysis was conducted in early November, but its findings were not made public until news outlets made a public records request for the results. The study found that mask mandates in the state’s largest cities were effective in helping to prevent higher Covid-19 cases. Mask mandates have been a controversial issue in Missouri, with the state’s governor Mike Parson criticizing them and conflicts within local jurisdictions over mandates happening across the state. Georgia governor Brian Kemp is already taking pointed jabs at Stacey Abrams, who announced yesterday she will be running for governor next year. In a tweet thread yesterday, Kemp criticized Abrams’ “far-left agenda” and said that she hurt the state because of her “ultimate ambition of becoming president”. Kemp spoke on Abrams again today saying that her announcement is “a rallying point for Republicans. Because we know it’s not just the Georgia radicals we’re facing. It’s going to be the Hollywood crowd and everyone else flooding money in here.” Republicans in the Senate swiftly blocked an attempt to get universal background checks on the table following Tuesday’s school shooting in Michigan. “I hope many of my colleagues took a minute to watch cell phone video from the school shooting in Michigan,” Democratic senator Chris Murphy of Connecticut said on the Senate floor. “Absolutely terrifying watching children fleeing their classroom in fear that their lives were about to be ended.” Murphy pushed forward the bill that passed the House in March that expands background checks to allow an expanded 10-day review for gun purchases and transfers. Chuck Grassley, speaking in opposition of the bill, said on the Senate floor that the background checks “will not prevent crime and will turn otherwise law-abiding citizens into criminals.” As Joe Biden was walking off the stage after delivering his remarks on the federal government’s new actions to address the pandemic, he responded to a question on the squabble in Congress over the impending government shutdown. “I don’t believe that will happen,” Biden told reporters. “There’s a plan in place unless someone decides to be totally erratic.” Joe Biden just delivered a speech at the National Institute of Health outlining the federal government’s plan to respond to the coronavirus pandemic in light of the spread of the Omicron variant. “We’re going to fight this variant with science and speed, not chaos and confusion,” Biden said. Biden laid out five key points of the plan that emphasizes vaccines. The federal government will renew its push to get people vaccinated, including launching “hundreds of family vaccination clinics” across the country where people of all ages can get their booster shots and vaccinations. There will also be a national campaign encouraging the over 100m people who are eligible for booster shots but have not gotten theirs to get their shots. He also called on employers to provide paid time off to employees to get their booster shots. Biden also said that the mask mandates on airplanes, buses and trains as well as airports and stations will continue through March. At-home coronavirus tests will be reimbursed for those who have private insurance, while the government will distribute 15m tests to community health centers and rural clinics to get tests to those uninsured or who are on Medicaid. Here’s a quick summary of what has happened today so far: House leaders have reached an agreement on a stopgap bill that would extend current government spending levels until mid-February. Now it’s up to the Senate to prevent a government shutdown from happening at Friday at midnight by passing their own stopgap measure. Symone Sanders, chief spokesperson and senior adviser to Kamala Harris, said that she is leaving her post at the end of the year, further prompting questions of embattlement in the vice president’s office. The Biden administration is set to reintroduce a Trump-era policy that requires those who are seeking asylum in the US to await the decision on their application outside of the US. The Supreme Court ruled that the federal government must reinstate the policy as it places an undue burden on states at the border. Joe Biden is set to announce his plans for federal action to address the pandemic in light of the Omicron variant, so stay tuned for more live updates. Republican senator Mike Lee is speaking on the Senate floor on Republican’s threat to cause a government shutdown if Democrats don’t agree to defund the federal vaccine mandate. Lee is saying that he wants a vote on his amendment to defund the mandate. It is unclear whether Lee has the support of all his fellow Republicans, with Mitch McConnell saying earlier today that he is not a fan of holding up government funding to fight the mandate. Insiders in Washington are paying close attention to the trip Kamala Harris and transportation secretary Pete Buttigieg are taking to North Carolina together. Why? Because of a purported rivalry between the two because of their similar presidential ambitions. Here’s more from the LA Times: Donna Brazile calls the purported rivalry between Vice President Kamala Harris and Transportation Secretary Pete Buttigieg “gossip” and “manufactured BS.” “With an emphasis on the B and the S,” added Brazile, a former Democratic Party chief and current confidant to Harris. Alas, Washington is a town that thrives on hypotheticals, intrigue and — yes — gossip. So, no matter how many times people like Brazile try to bat it down, the speculation persists. Here is the theory: The pair of bold names in the Biden administration are vying to be next in line for the party’s nomination, either in 2024 should President Biden, the oldest president in U.S. history at 79, step aside — or in 2028 if he runs again. Thursday, the two protagonists in this latest Beltway drama will hit the road together. Anyone hoping for a riveting oratorical showdown in Charlotte, N.C., will have to settle for speeches about potholes and rural broadband access. The topic of the day is infrastructure. But rest assured, television analysts will provide authoritative takes on their body language as they tour the Charlotte Area Transit System Bus and Light Rail Garage. Some may note who speaks most passionately about the nation’s deteriorating bridges or who fails to capture the excitement of bus rapid transit lanes. “I’m sure that it will be dissected aplenty,” said Elaine Kamarck, a former aide to Vice President Al Gore who researches the presidential nominating process at the Brookings Institution think tank. “Whether it means anything is anybody’s guess.” White House press secretary Jen Psaki responded to questions on the departure of top Kamala Harris staffer Symone Sanders saying that departures from the White House after the first year is expected, downplaying reports that Sanders’ departure confirms reports of turmoil in the vice president’s office. “It’s a normal course of events that people are ready to do something new, they’re ready to spend time with their families, they’re ready to sleep more. That’s to be expected in the first 18 months to two years of any White House,” Psaki said.” “It’s only natural after a couple of years to be ready for something new.” In a press conference this morning, Nancy Pelosi slammed Republicans who want to threaten a government shutdown if Democrats don’t agree to defunding enforcement for the federal vaccine mandate for large employers. “We’re not going to go for their anti-vaxxing. If you think that’s how we’re going to keep government open, forget that,” she said. Pelosi also said that she doesn’t think Republicans have enough votes to shut down the federal government. “How do they explain to the public that they’re shutting down government because they don’t want people to get vaccinated?” she said. “This is so silly.” It seems like Senate Democrats will not only have to negotiate with their Republican colleagues who might try to use the impending government shutdown as a bargaining chip, but may also have to negotiate with one of their own members. Centrist Democrat Joe Manchin is “working through” whether or not he agrees that the Senate should defund funding for the mandate’s enforcement. House Republicans have been pushing their counterparts in the Senate to use the government shutdown as a way to push for exactly that, encouraging them to not pass a stopgap measure unless Democrats agree to defund the mandate. Manchin told reporters that while he supports a mandate for people who work on government payroll, he’s “less enthused” about a mandate for private companies. House leaders announced a deal settled on a stopgap measure that would avert a government shutdown and extend the current level of government funding until mid-February. The House will put the measure to a vote today, leaving it up to the Senate to deal with the impending government shutdown that will occur on Friday at midnight if a stopgap measure is not passed. Richard Shelby, a Republican senator from Alabama who is the top GOP member of the Senate appropriations committee, seemed optimistic about a potential deal in the Senate, telling reporters this morning: “I’m pleased that we have finally reached an agreement.” It is still unclear whether all 50 Republican senators have agreed to a stopgap measure. House Republicans have been pressuring their Senate colleagues to use the government shutdown as a bargaining chip against the federal vaccine mandate for large businesses, though Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell indicated he does not support that plan. “Let’s be clear, if there is a shutdown, it will be a Republican, anti-vaccine shutdown,” Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer said on the floor this morning. The Biden administration has reportedly struck an agreement with the Mexican government to resurrect the controversial “Remain in Mexico’” arrangement that requires asylum seekers to stay outside the US while their claims are considered. The US and Mexican governments will announce the resumption of the program on Thursday, according to the Washington Post, following its previous suspension by Joe Biden after he became president. It will initially begin in San Diego and in the Texas cities of Laredo, Brownsville and El Paso next week. Biden had called the arrangement inhumane after it was used by Donald Trump’s administration to return more than 60,000 asylum seekers across the border to Mexico, where they were often preyed upon by criminal gangs. Many people were left waiting for months in limbo in Mexico as their fate was determined. In October, Alejandro Mayorkas, the homeland security secretary, said that the program “had endemic flaws, imposed unjustifiable human costs, pulled resources and personnel away from other priority efforts, and did not address the root causes of irregular migration”. However, Republican officials in Missouri and Texas sued Biden’s administration in federal court to prevent the scrapping of the return to Mexico policy, claiming that it would place an undue burden on them from incoming migrants. The supreme court ultimately concurred with the states, placing an injunction on the federal government in August which forced it to resume the program. Since then, federal officials have been negotiating with their Mexican counterparts on how the scheme will resume. Donald Trump could end up with $100m in profit for selling a building he turned into a a Trump hotel that has reported millions in losses over the last four years, according to the Washington Post. Trump brought a 60-year lease to the property in 2013 for $200m and now a Miami-based investment firm is hoping to turn the building into another luxury hotel, sans the Trump name. CGI Merchant, the investment firm, has indicated its willing to pay $375m for the lease, netting Trump a profit of over $100m. Experts say that the price is in-line with what the lease could be worth, though some question whether the investment firm and Hilton Worldwide, which is hoping to turn the building into a Waldorf Astoria, will be able to make a profit from a new hotel in the building. Seems like Mitch McConnell is suggesting to reporters that he’s not a fan of the push from House Republicans to use the government shutdown as a bargaining chip against the federal vaccine mandate. McConnell is saying that the courts will likely strike down the mandate, and using a shutdown to address it will “create chaos and uncertainty”. This is the first time that McConnell has spoken about the proposition from House Republicans. News of the departure of Symone Sanders, Kamala Harris’ chief spokesperson and senior adviser, has further confirmed reports that the vice president’s office is beset with internal problems, with Sanders being the second high-profile exit over the last few weeks. Some reports from as early as this summer say that Harris’ office has been experiencing low morale and poor communication between aides and top officials. Sanders sent an email to office staff last night about her exit, with Harris’ chief of staff Tina Flournoy saying that Sanders told Harris “a couple of months ago” she would be leaving her post at the end of the year, according to Politico, which first reported her exit. Sanders has worked with Joe Biden and Harris for over three years, first working on Biden’s presidential campaign. Ashley Etienne, Harris’ chief of communications, announced her departure in November. Two others – Harris’ director of press operation and her deputy director in her communications department – have also told others that they are departing, according to the Washington Post. The House rules committee just added to their already-scheduled 9.30am meeting this morning an item to discuss a stopgap bill that would temporarily extend the current level of government funding to at least February. It seems like House Democrats are really gunning to get the ball rolling – and for good reason: the longer they stall the bill, the closer a government shutdown is. Good morning, and welcome to today’s politics live blog. Democrats in Congress are rushing today to make a deal with Republicans that would prevent a looming government shutdown. Talks between House Democrats and Republicans stalled yesterday over a stopgap spending bill that would temporarily extend the current level of government funding. Another potential stalemate popped up on Wednesday when a group of House Republicans encouraged their colleagues in the Senate to use the potential shutdown as a bargaining chip. They are encouraging Senate Republicans to block the stopgap measure unless Democrats agree not to direct money toward enforcing the federal vaccine mandate for large companies. Republican House and Senate leaders have not commented on the proposal. Here’s what else we’re keeping an eye on today: Joe Biden will unveil new federal actions to combat the coronavirus later today. Biden is expected to extend the federal mask mandate as well as require international travelers to be tested before entering the US. Symone Sanders, a senior adviser and chief spokesperson for Kamala Harris, is reportedly planning to depart from her role at the end of the year. Her exit will be the second in Harris’ communication team in recent weeks. Stay tuned for more live updates.Multiple cases of the Omicron coronavirus variant have been detected in New York, health officials said Thursday, including a man who attended an anime convention in Manhattan in late November and tested positive for the variant when he returned home to Minnesota. In addition to the conventioneer, health officials said tests showed five other people recently infected with Covid-19 had the variant. They included a person in the city’s Long Island suburbs who had recently traveled to South Africa, residents of Brooklyn and Queens and another case possibly linked to travel. “No cause for alarm. We just want to make sure that the public is aware of information when we receive it,” said the state’s governor, Kathy Hochul. New York City’s mayor, Bill de Blasio, said the geographic spread of the positive tests suggested the variant was undergoing “community spread” in the city, and wasn’t linked to any one event. The news came a day after the US announced its first case of the variant had been detected in California, in a person who had recently traveled to South Africa. Officials reported another case Thursday in a Colorado woman who had recently traveled to southern Africa. Omicron is classified as a “variant of concern” by the World Health Organization but much still remains unknown, including whether it is more contagious, as some health authorities suspect, whether it makes people more seriously ill, and whether it can thwart the vaccine. Officials in the city of 8.8 million said they expected it would be only a matter of time before the new variant was reported in the city. “We should assume there is community spread of the variant in our city,” said Mayor Bill de Blasio. The newly reported cases came as Joe Biden unveiled new efforts to combat Covid in the US, including a nationwide campaign encouraging vaccine boosters, an expansion of at-home tests and tighter restrictions on international travel. His announcement Thursday amounted to a winter battle plan as the Omicron variant adds urgency to make booster shots available to as many Americans as possible. Scientists in South Africa first reported Omicron, but the samples came from several countries in southern Africa. And health officials in the Netherlands now say it was found there before the South Africa detection. As comfort over air travel returns, it’s inevitable that new variants like Omicron will spread from country to country and state to state, said professor Danielle Ompad, an epidemiologist at New York University’s School of Global Public Health. “We shouldn’t panic, but we should be concerned,” she said. Hochul said the case involving the Minnesota visitor underlined the need for everyone who is eligible to get vaccinated or receive a booster shot if they have not already. “There is one way to address this: New Yorkers, get vaccinated, get boosted, and get ready,” the Democrat said.It was a week of goodbyes at the ABC as Fran Kelly farewelled her loyal audience after 17 years and outgoing news chief Gaven Morris highlighted much-needed improvements in diversity as a source of pride during his six-year tenure. Kelly might have been all misty-eyed from the musical and political tributes that flowed in her last program – only Scott Morrison was notable for his absence – but she wasn’t going to let Christopher Pyne get away with claiming he had “almost always” given her a direct answer. “Christopher Pyne, I don’t know that you always gave direct answers, or even that you almost always gave direct answers, but there you go,” Kelly countered with her trademark directness. Morris told the Melbourne Press Club that ABC News was setting the standard for reflecting the full diversity of modern Australia in its workforce and content. “The ABC has made more progress here in the past five years than we made in the 50 years before,” Morris said. “And it’s about time. “Bridget Brennan, who was Australia’s first Indigenous foreign correspondent, is now on the news leadership team. Isabella Higgins, our London correspondent. Stan Grant, well, everywhere in primetime. “Nas Campanella is disability affairs correspondent and the chair of ABC Inclusive. Charles Brice is an excellent reporter in SA for News Breakfast. Both with lived experience of having a disability.” Earlier in the week Campanella revealed on air that she was pregnant. Perhaps Morris’s tribute to the improvements in diversity was a nod to the likely appointment of the ABC’s managing editor of coverage, who is also diversity lead, Gavin Fang, as his replacement. ‘Too successful’ Amid all the farewells there was a message for the ABC’s detractors, including social media critics, the Australian, the IPA and members of the government. “I’ll say one thing to our increasingly shrill critics, from the vested interests of the media to the unhinged rantings on social media: we’re not your target because we’re failing, but because we’re succeeding,” Morris said. “We don’t have to remember too far back when the criticism of ABC News was its audience was too small, too niche, too urban, we didn’t break stories, we didn’t have an impact, we were too narrow. “I don’t hear those criticism now. We’re too big, too popular, too successful on digital, too impactful in our journalism, too many stories leading the agenda, too omnipresent in Australian’s lives, too diverse.” For Kelly, the claims on Twitter and on the program’s text line about her alleged allegiances with either the left or the right are laughable. “I’m happy for the audience to critique me and critique my work,” she told Weekly Beast. “But it’s a bit tedious being branded [as partisan]. One running criticism of me on Twitter is that I’m best friends with Angus Taylor’s wife, which is absolutely not true. I don’t think I’ve even met her.” Regional expansion Gaven Morris’ last day as news director was marked by good news. Swan Hill, Whyalla, Victor Harbor, Northam and Gladstone will get their own dedicated ABC reporters in 2022, thanks to multimillion-dollar deals the ABC has signed with Google and Facebook. They will be part of an influx of more than 50 new regional reporters to be hired by the broadcaster, a 10% increase in the regional content-maker team. This week the ABC inked a deal with Facebook, to add to its money from Google, under the news media bargaining code which became law in February. An agreement was signed with Facebook this week and follows an agreement reached with Google last month. Revenue from both will go towards increasing the ABC’s investment in regional and rural journalism across Australia. “We decided at the very start of these negotiations that any net revenue we received from these deals would go where it is needed most – and that is in regional Australia,” said the ABC managing director, David Anderson. “We want to provide greater coverage of regional stories in areas that are under-served by the media or are in news deserts. Extra regional services are a great way to start 2022, our 90th year, and this announcement is fitting given the ABC’s relationship with rural and regional Australia over those nine decades.” Swords and Shields Reaction on Twitter to the appointment of Bevan Shields as editor of the Sydney Morning Herald this week was not uniformly celebratory. Quite a few people pointed out that Shields had blocked them, and some had no idea why. Among those who were blocked was Guardian Australia columnist Greg Jericho and Shields’ former colleague at the SMH, Peter Hannam, who has left the paper to join the Guardian as economics correspondent. Is there a pattern here? The increasingly pointed attacks on the ABC chair, Ita Buttrose, which are often sexist in nature, were raised this week in Senate estimates by Sarah Hanson-Young as she questioned Senator Jane Hume, who was representing the communications minister, Paul Fletcher. “So what is it with some of the men in your party and the way they speak about the female chair of the ABC?” the Greens senator asked. “Is it reflective of the Morrison government and its members that Ita Buttrose is ‘a terrible failure’ and ‘a hopeless failure’? “I would say the comment, ‘Squealing like a cut cat,’ is pretty gendered.” Hume rejected the suggestion. “That’s very convenient, isn’t it,” Hanson-Young replied. “You can have your members running these lines, attacking the ABC, and the minister can say, ‘Oh well, not my fault. Nothing to do with me.’ It is the culture in this government, isn’t it, that no one takes responsibility for anything.” The Australian’s associate editor Chris Kenny has said called Buttrose’s claims of political interference are “utter rot” and Murdoch loyalist Terry McCrann has asked if Buttrose is “really that dumb”. The former Liberal minister Richard Alston told Sky News that Buttrose was “squealing like a cat”. The Age ‘demonising’ anti-vaxxers Cartoonist Michael Leunig has rejected a suggestion by the Age editor, Gay Alcorn, that he “romanticised the anti-vax movement” and that was why he lost his spot on the editorial page after a 5o-year career. Alcorn finally gave Leunig’s Monday editorial cartoon the flick in October after rejecting a cartoon in which he he compared mandatory vaccination to the massacre in Tiananmen Square. Leunig is unabashed and posted the drawing on his personal Instagram account instead. Talking to Lisa Main from the Judith Nielson Institute for a session on “cancel culture” this week, Leunig was prickly when he was told that Alcorn had a problem with his affectionate portrayal of the protesters. “Well, I think that’s very disrespectful of her,” he said. “I’d say the Age has demonised them. It is typical of what has happened to any protest movement from the Vietnam war to the Iraq war. When were protest movements ever respected as an important democratic reflection of a society?” Leunig, who still has a Saturday cartoon in the Age and a Christmas calendar, accused the paper of treating the “mostly conscientious” protesters as “conspiracy theorists and rightwing lunatics”, “without ever having moved amongst them or knowing them”. No wonder they broke up. Laptop story rebooted There’s another book out which you may want to add to the stocking filler list: Miranda Devine’s Laptop from Hell is the “inside story of the laptop that exposed the president’s dirtiest secret”. “When a drug-addled Hunter Biden abandoned his waterlogged computer at a Mac repair shop in Delaware in the spring of 2019, just six days before his father announced his candidacy for the United States presidency, it became the ticking time bomb in the shadows of Joe Biden’s campaign,” the publicity blurb says. Devine, who is a regular contributor to Fox News, says Hunter “owes the American people an explanation” but the mainstream media are ignoring the scandal. Luckily the Australian journalist is based in New York, at Murdoch’s New York Post, to pursue the story. “And unfortunately, though, I think that unless the Washington Post and New York Times and CNN and MSNBC actually start being honest with their audience, the White House can just continue to ignore it.” Farewell to Christian Kerr Christian Kerr, who with Stephen Mayne co-founded Crikey,died in his sleep this week aged 56. Kerr, a former political lobbyist, was a trailblazer in the 1990s, before social media and blogging, with an emailed must-read political column under the pen name Hillary Bray. He remained on good terms with Mayne – who owned the Crikey masthead – after it was sold to the former SMH editor Eric Beecher, but Kerr was not a fan of what Crikey became after the first glorious eight years. A lifelong conservative whose last job was at the Spectator, Kerr said Crikey had become “anti-free speech, anti-pluralism, doctrinaire, conspiracy theorist (and, presumably, tax-efficient loss generator)”. The original Crikey, on the other hand, was “loud, lively, likeable and liberal-minded”, he wrote on his Facebook page. This tension was acknowledged in Crikey’s generous and warm tribute to Kerr by its politics editor, Bernard Keane. “It’s fair to say Christian didn’t exactly approve of what Crikey became after his tenure, and he was unabashed in letting us know,” Keane wrote. “But that doesn’t change how crucial he was to our early success. “There’s probably no more room for snark-filled, in-jokey political gossip in the media landscape. Social media provides more than enough of that as it is, anyway. Even many of those nicknames of 20 years ago no longer pass any sort of taste test. But there should always be room for wonderful writers. Christian was one of them.”In Auckland, nature was healing. The ungroomed lined up for their eyebrow appointments. Bars flung open their doors with the promise of free drinks. Locals posted photos of their flat whites and brunch menus. The city’s sky tower was lit up for the first day of the “traffic light” reopening. And, in perhaps the truest sign that the gridlock-plagued city was on its pathway to normalcy, four lanes of the southern motorway were bumper to bumper. The traffic light system, announced by prime minister Jacinda Ardern in late November, ends lockdowns in favour of restrictions on the unvaccinated. The red, orange and green levels depend on vaccination rates and the level of strain on the health system, but even at red – the strictest level – businesses are fully open to the vaccinated, with some restrictions on gathering size. Friday marked the first day of eased Covid restrictions in New Zealand’s largest city, after a gruelling 107 days in lockdown. For the vaccinated, much of life opened up at midnight on Thursday: they could once again invite family and friends into their homes, plan a trip to the gym, drink in a bar, sit in a cafe and drink an espresso. For the small percentage of the country who remain unvaccinated, the divide between them and fellow New Zealanders suddenly became tangible. As Aucklanders emerged, blinking, into their new freedoms, some felt exhilarated. “There’s such a weird, strange, electric vibe in Auckland today,” said breakfast host Matty McLean on Twitter. “Like the first day back at school! We just went and sat down at our local cafe and it was such a simple, yet exciting activity!” Mayor Phil Goff declared it “a day to celebrate and enjoy,” and some Aucklanders committed to just that. At Headquarters bar, a man told a Stuff reporter that being back at the pub was “insane g”. “I’m a plumber that just loves getting on the rinse,” he said. “Free drinks, how good.” The opposition said the new freedoms didn’t go far enough, with National party leader Christopher Luxon calling the change “harsh news for bars and restaurants across Auckland who suffered 100 days of lockdown and who now will be unable to host large Christmas and New Years’ events”. Others expressed trepidation – including for workers tasked with checking vaccine passports, for Māori communities, whose vaccination rates remain behind the rest of the country, and about divisions caused by the increasingly divergent experiences of vaccinated and unvaccinated New Zealanders. Deputy prime minister Grant Robertson said claims that New Zealand would become a “divided nation” could be countered by the high rates of vaccination: “Getting 90 percent-plus of New Zealanders to agree on anything is a highly unusual achievement.” The day marks a key milestone in the country’s transition from using lockdowns as a primary public health strategy to relying on vaccination instead. Experts have said that they cannot predict how the newly loosened restrictions will affect the virus’s spread – but there are some reasons for optimism. Average daily cases in Auckland have stabilised and seem to be starting to drop. On Friday, the country announced 92 new cases – the first time that daily case number has dropped below 100 since October. The director of public health, Dr Caroline McElnay, said the dropping cases were a promising sign that the country’s rising vaccination rates were eating into the virus’s ability to spread. As of Thursday, the Ministry of Health reported that 93% of the eligible population (those aged 12 and over) had had at least a first dose of the vaccine, and 86% were fully dosed. Māori continue to sit behind the rest of the population, raising concerns that they will bear the brunt of a larger outbreak: 83% of Māori had had a first dose and 69% were fully vaccinated.The New South Wales Liberal party has endorsed a target of 50% of female candidates at the next federal election due by May 2022, but the party’s past track record with non-binding targets suggests it will struggle to achieve this aim. The party unanimously endorsed a target, as opposed to a firm quota, in May this year at a fax ballot, after the move was supported by the prime minister, Scott Morrison. But the decision has not been made public and the party is yet to hold several crucial preselections amid factional manoeuvring between the right, the centre-right and the moderates. Senior Liberals are now attempting to nudge the party into taking the issue of preselecting women seriously, although there is scepticism at the party’s ability to meet the target, considering past failures. A senior Liberal member of the state executive told the Guardian: “We set a target every election, then we fail to meet it. “In the upcoming NSW local government elections we set a target of 50% women and we achieved 32%. We do this every election but we don’t achieve it, ever.” This was disputed by the Liberal Party’s head office which said the target for this weekend’s local government elections was 40%, and 38% of candidates were women. According to the women’s council representative on state executive, Mary-Lou Jarvis, the party was on track to achieve 38% of female candidates in winnable seats in this weekend’s council elections. Despite local councils being the most grassroots level of government, only 21% of Liberal councillors were women prior to this election. The Liberals’ performance in selecting women at other levels of government is little better. In the state parliament, where representation is highest, 40% of Liberal MPs are women. In federal parliament it is about 25% of Liberal MPs, with the party falling well short of a 2025 target of equal representation that it set in 2016. Labor instituted quotas in 1994 under an affirmative action policy that targeted 35% of winnable electorates being preselected with female candidates by 2002. The ALP has since increased its female representation in parliament to about 48%. In 2016 former Howard minister Sharman Stone led a similar reform but the party opted for non-binding targets with an aspiration to reach 50% of women by 2025. Instead, women in federal parliament have remained under-represented with the number stubbornly hovering around 24%. The test for the Liberal party will present itself in coming weeks when it meets to preselect candidates in several safe seats where Liberals are retiring or in winnable marginal seats. These include Warringah (against Zali Steggall, the independent), Hughes (currently held by Liberal defector Craig Kelly) and Bennelong (where John Alexander is retiring). Gilmore, regarded as a bellweather seat, Dobell, Eden-Monaro and Parramatta are also regarded as marginal and likely to be hotly contested. But there are also several Liberal female MPs who may face preselection challenges, including one minister. These include: Fiona Martin in Reid in Sydney’s inner west; the environment minister, Sussan Ley, who is facing a challenge from the right’s Christian Ellis in Farrer; and Senator Connie Fierravanti-Wells, who is facing a challenge from Dallas McInerney, the chief executive of Catholic Schools NSW. The ability of the party to achieve its targets might also be affected by new preselection rules. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In 2017 the party adopted the Warringah motion, championed by the former prime minister Tony Abbott. These rules, designed to introduce more power for the rank and file, require plebiscites to be held. Some Liberals have claimed that Morrison’s factional ally Alex Hawke, who sits on the NSW executive, is trying to delay the preselection process to manufacture a crisis that would then require head office to intervene and appoint candidates instead of holding plebiscites.Seven children have been rescued from sexual exploitation in the Philippines and a Brisbane man has been jailed for five years after a multinational police operation into an alleged international child abuse ring. Neil Andrew Lyall Robards, 68, of Brisbane was sentenced in the district court on Thursday to five years in prison for a range of child abuse offences across international borders. Australian federal police say Robards sent money to people in Thailand and the Philippines to facilitate the sexual abuse of children. Two more people – a woman in the Philippines and a man in Britain – have been arrested over their alleged involvement in the same abuse network. Robards was arrested at Brisbane airport in February 2020 as he returned to Australia: officers searched his laptop, phone and a USB drive that were found to contain child abuse images. AFP officers worked with the Philippine Internet Crimes Against Children Centre to identify others suspected of being involved in the abuse. In February Philippine police executed a search warrant on the southern island of Mindanao. Seven children, aged between three and 14, were rescued and one woman arrested. The woman is facing court in the Philippines. After the raid a 51-year-old British national was arrested in the UK in September and electronic devices were seized from him. Detective Superintendent Jayne Crossling said the multinational operation showed the AFP’s cooperative efforts target those suspected of abusing children, wherever in the world they were. “The AFP is working around-the-clock with our international and domestic law enforcement partners to bring to justice those who seek to do harm to children,” she said. “Advances in technology now mean it takes multiple law enforcement agencies working together to break networks that share this material and to keep children safe. The AFP will never relinquish this duty.” Since being established in 2019, the Philippine Internet Crimes Against Children Centre has undertaken 147 operations that have rescued 445 victims. Ninety-three suspects/facilitators have been charged and 18 offenders have been convicted. Australian-based investigations led to the arrest and charge of 40 suspects and the removal of 159 children from harm. In Brisbane, Robards was charged with obtaining child abuse material outside Australia, causing a child to engage in sexual activity, preparing for or planning sexual intercourse with a child outside Australia, encouraging sexual intercourse with a child outside Australia, and using a carriage service to solicit child abuse material. Sentencing Robards to five years in prison, the judge, Nathan Jarro, ordered a non-parole period of two years. • Members of the public who have any information about people involved in child abuse and exploitation are urged to call Crime stoppers on 1800 333 000 or make a report online by alerting the Australian Centre to Counter Child Exploitation. • In Australia, children, young adults, parents and teachers can contact the Kids Helpline on 1800 55 1800, or Bravehearts on 1800 272 831, and adult survivors can contact Blue Knot Foundation on 1300 657 380. In the UK, the NSPCC offers support to children on 0800 1111, and adults concerned about a child on 0808 800 5000. The National Association for People Abused in Childhood (Napac) offers support for adult survivors on 0808 801 0331. In the US, call or text the Childhelp abuse hotline on 800-422-4453. Other sources of help can be found at Child Helplines InternationalThe federal government will attempt to use the high court to thwart the publication of a decision ruling that Bernard Collaery’s trial should not take place in secret, a step human rights lawyers have slammed as “not only absurd but undemocratic”. Earlier this year, the Australian Capital Territory’s highest court, the ACT court of appeal, ruled that Collaery’s trial should be held in the open, citing the importance of open justice and the need to deter political prosecutions. But the ACT court of appeal never published its reasons for making that decision, because the Commonwealth wanted them partly suppressed on national security grounds. The court of appeal refused to redact the judgement. In a dramatic escalation late on Friday, the Commonwealth sought leave to appeal in the high court to have parts of the judgement suppressed. The attorney-general Michaelia Cash did not respond to requests for comment. But the high court confirmed the application had been filed. The government’s actions drew immediate condemnation from human rights lawyers. Human Rights Law Centre senior lawyer Kieran Pender said it was another “perverse turn” in the government’s pursuit of secrecy in the prosecution. “The Attorney-General’s attempts to have a decision that said no to secrecy itself be kept secret is not only absurd but undemocratic,” he told the Guardian. “Rather than seeking to shroud this prosecution in secrecy at every turn, the Morrison Government should be reforming the law – like it promised to do 12 months ago – so that whistleblowers who speak up are protected, not punished.” Collaery, a barrister, is facing trial for his alleged role in revealing a 2004 bugging operation Australia mounted against Timor-Leste. Timor-Leste claims the operation was designed to give it an advantage during negotiations with the impoverished and fledgling nation over oil and gas reserves in the Timor Sea. At the same time as it seeks a high court hearing to redact the judgement, the Commonwealth is also seeking to put new secret evidence before a judge, which Collaery cannot see, to justify the need for secrecy in his trial. That evidence would only be available to the judge, and would tell him that the national security situation and Australia’s international relations in the past two years, as Collaery’s trial has dragged on. The evidence would force the court to again decide whether, on balance, Collaery’s trial may need to be partly heard in secret. Earlier on Friday in the ACT supreme court, Collaery’s lawyers said that would cause “irreparable” and “obvious” unfairness. “The unfairness is obvious and it is irreparable,” Collaery’s barrister, Christopher Ward SC, told the court. “It is an irreparable prejudice. The unfairness is that the commonwealth gets to update evidence ... as to world events, as to the current state of asserted threats to national security in the way that the defendant is simply unable to respond to.” The court heard that much has changed for Australia’s international relations in the 18 months since the case began, including, for example, the dispute with France over the submarines contract, the resignation of Christian Porter as attorney general, and the Brereton inquiry report into alleged special forces war crimes in Afghanistan. Ward warned of an “endless process” in which delays to the case allowed the commonwealth a continuous ability to say the world had changed, and that new factors ought to be taken into account when determining the national security risk of the trial. But Jeremy Kirk SC, representing the attorney general, said the commonwealth was simply trying to update the evidence, now two years old, on the potential national security ramifications, not reopen the original hearing on how much of the trial should be conducted in secret. Kirk said it would be absurd to not allow such evidence to be updated and dismissed the suggestion it would lead to an endless process of delay and updating evidence. The unfairness, he said, would be towards the attorney general and the national security interests of Australia, should the commonwealth not be permitted to update the evidence. “That is a bit of an unreal submission, in our respectful submission ... this evidence is 18 months to two yers old,” he said. Justice David Mossop has reserved his decision on whether to accept the new evidence. He will hand down his judgment on Tuesday. Collaery was acting for his client, former intelligence officer Witness K, when the pair helped Timor-Leste mount a case in the international courts against Australia, alleging a treaty governing resources in the Timor Sea was void because of Australia’s bugging operation. Timor-Leste subsequently negotiated a better deal for a fairer share of the oil and gas reserves.An inability to provide access to stadia that meets Fifa requirements of capacity and availability has cost Melbourne its chance to host major knockout fixtures of the 2023 Women’s World Cup, and there are no guarantees that the situation will be different should further major football events head to Australia. With 595 days to go before the start of the competition, Fifa on Thursday announced the full match schedule, with games to be staged in nine different cities and at 10 separate venues across Australia and New Zealand. Sydney will host 11 matches in total – including the final, a semi-final and the Matildas’ opening game – with Auckland and Wellington hosting nine each. Brisbane has been scheduled for eight games, while Melbourne has been booked to host just six games in total, equal with Dunedin. Perth, Adelaide and Hamilton will also play host to games at the showpiece event. Although AAMI Park will host the Matildas’ third group game, Melbourne had previously been positioned to host a quarter-final. The Victorian capital will now make do with two last-16 matches. For an outpost that styles itself as the “sporting capital of the world” and takes pride in its ability to support women’s sport – 86,174 fans attended the 2020 Women’s T20 World Cup final at the MCG – that four other cities across Australia and New Zealand will host more games of what is rapidly becoming one of the biggest sporting events on the planet is, at a first glance, perplexing. Further, beyond its bombastic rhetoric, Victoria is home to the second most registered football participants across Australia - Football Victoria reported 456,604 total participants in 2020 and a more than 50% growth in registered girls and women playing the sport in 2020. However, although conspiracy theories surface whenever Fifa or Sydney-based Football Australia is involved, the reasoning for the allocation is a relatively simple one: a matter of stadium availability and the AFL – the local heavyweight code – flexing its muscle. Securing large-capacity, marquee venues such as Marvel Stadium and the MCG for singular, one-off matchdays would have been a relatively simple proposition for organisers. But the exclusivity periods that Fifa demands of World Cup stadia – two weeks before the first game at the venue and at least a week after the last – would have effectively locked out the AFL, the owners of Marvel Stadium and a key tenant of the MCG, from those venues for an extended period during its 2023 season. Coming off the back of two heavily disrupted years, the prospect of losing one or both of its key venues during the 2023 season presented an anathema to the AFL and required significant compensation. Football Australia, with little appetite for protracted negotiations or using revenue from the tournament to compensate a rival code, quickly set their sights on securing venues in Brisbane, Sydney and Auckland rather than battle for a deal with the Victorian sporting powerbroker. Football and the AFL, as well as a host of other sports, are also engaged in a fierce battle for hearts, minds, participation and revenue from the rapidly growing interest in women’s and girl’s sport, with the AFLW planning to expand to a full 18-team competition in 2023. As a result, the 30,000-seat AAMI Park became the only viable venue in Melbourne, a ground too small for the tournament’s major games as per rules set by Fifa – who are the ultimate arbiters of venue selection at World Cups. “The Fifa Women’s World Cup Australia and New Zealand 2023 will be held from 20 July to 20 August in 2023,” a Football Australia spokesperson said. “This period presented challenges in the availability of venues and for the duration these venues were required as part of Fifa’s requirements. We worked closely with state governments to ensure that the best possible venues were selected and available in accordance with the venue requirements for the tournament.” Melbourne will at least host some fixtures in 2023 and Football Australia has signalled an intention to bring both Matildas and Socceroos events to the city in the near future, but the precarious situation could come back to haunt Victoria should further major sporting events come to Australia. While the actual prognosis of an Australian bid for the 2034 Men’s World Cup is a matter of debate – China, despite not formally signalling an intent to host, is seen as a prohibitive favourite to host the next time the tournament returns to Asia – the line between staging a successful Women’s World Cup in 2023, Brisbane Olympics in 2032, and another World Cup in 2034 is an obvious one. The prospect has been raised as a matter worthy of exploration at Football Australia. However, Fifa’s guide to the bidding process for the 2026 World Cup – the first iteration of the tournament in which 48 teams will take part – dictates that every match be played at a venue with a minimum 40,000 net seating capacity; 80,000 is required for the opening match and the final and at least 60,000 for a semi-final. The issue of the AFL releasing Marvel Stadium or the MCG was a matter of significant consternation during Australia’s ultimately disastrous and misguided attempt to secure the 2022 World Cup – which ended up with the bid receiving just a single vote – and Football Australia would have to negotiate with the AFL for Melbourne to host any matches at all at that tournament.Alec Baldwin said his 40-year acting career “could be” over after the shooting incident on the set of the western Rust that resulted in the death of cinematographer Halyna Hutchins and wounded director Joel Souza. In a lengthy and emotional interview on US TV with ABC News’ George Stephanopoulos, Baldwin added that he “couldn’t give a shit” about his career. The actor said he did not pull the trigger on the gun that killed Hutchins, 42, and injured Souza, 48. The gun he was holding, which Baldwin believed to be safe, went off during rehearsals for the western, in an incident that shocked Hollywood and prompted a reckoning over production safety and the use of weapons on set. Baldwin responded to comments by fellow actors, such as George Clooney, who said they checked guns themselves, saying: “There were a lot of people who felt it necessary to contribute some comment to the situation, which really didn’t help the situation at all. If your protocol is you checking the gun every time, well, good for you. Good for you.” He added: “My protocol was to trust the person that had the job.” Baldwin, who was also credited as a producer on the film, questioned how a live bullet ended up in a gun. “There’s only one question to be resolved, and that’s where did the live round come from?” Baldwin said the interview with Stephanopoulos that aired Thursday night. The interview was first time the actor has spoken in-depth on camera about the 21 October shooting. “A live round isn’t supposed to be anywhere near the set,” Baldwin said. “I don’t have anything to hide.” In a clip from the interview released Wednesday, Stephanopoulos asked Baldwin, who was also a producer on the film, to confirm that the script didn’t call for the trigger to be pulled. “Well, the trigger wasn’t pulled. I didn’t pull the trigger,” Baldwin says. “So you never pulled the trigger?” Stephanopoulos asks. “No, no, no, no. I would never point a gun at anyone and pull a trigger at them. Never,” Baldwin responded. The actor said he “let go of the hammer” on the weapon and the gun went off. “I never pulled the trigger,” he said. Baldwin explicitly denied responsibility for the shooting, saying he would have killed himself if he believed it was his fault. “I feel someone is responsible for what happened, but I know it isn’t me. I might have killed myself if I thought I was responsible, and I don’t say that lightly,” he said. Baldwin also described meeting Hutchins’ husband after the shooting, and said he told him he was “willing to do anything I can to cooperate”. “I didn’t know what to say,” Baldwin said of meeting Matthew Hutchins. “He hugged me and he goes, ‘I suppose we’re going to go through this together.’” He added, “I think to myself, this little boy [Hutchins’ son Andros] doesn’t have a mother any more … and there’s nothing we can do to bring her back,” Baldwin told Stephanopoulos. “I told him, ‘I don’t know what to say, I don’t know how to convey to you how sorry I am’”. Hutchins was “the loveliest woman, one of the loveliest women I’ve ever worked with and one of the most professional in terms of her demeanor,” Baldwin said. The Colt .45 revolver was supposed to be loaded with blanks or dummy rounds rather than live rounds, which are banned on set. Baldwin said he had “no idea” how live rounds came to be in the gun. According to court records, Dave Halls, the film’s assistant director, allegedly called “cold gun” as he passed it over to Baldwin. Hannah Gutierrez Reed, 24, handled weapons on set, including the gun given to Halls. Halls told investigators he did not know there were live rounds in the gun before he gave it to Baldwin, according to an affidavit for a search warrant filed by the sheriff’s office on 22 October. Halls’ attorney, Lisa Torraco, told ABC News that her client has always said Baldwin never pulled the trigger. “He told me since day one he thought it was a misfire,” Torraco said. “Dave has told me since the very first day I met him, that Alec did not pull that trigger.” In the week after the shooting, attorneys for Gutierrez Reed said she had “no idea” how live rounds came to be on the set, and blamed producers for an “unsafe” workplace. They said she had lobbied for better safety on the set. The district attorney in Santa Fe, New Mexico, said in October that criminal charges in the shooting have not been ruled out. “Everything at this point, including criminal charges, is on the table,” Mary Carmack-Altwies told the New York Times. Investigators with the Santa Fe county sheriff’s office are primarily focused on how live rounds came to be in the gun held by Baldwin. Baldwin and other producers are facing multiple lawsuits over the shooting, including one from the film’s script supervisor that alleges he “intentionally, without just cause or excuse, cocked and fired the loaded gun even though the upcoming scene to be filmed did not call for the cocking and firing of the firearm”. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.The federal MP Craig Kelly – who has been permanently banned from Facebook and criticised for the online distribution of “seriously misleading” information about Covid-19 vaccines – has been appointed to a parliamentary committee looking into social media and online safety. The appointment has raised eyebrows among other members of the committee after the former Liberal, turned Palmer United party MP, was banned from Facebook and Instagram in April this year over posts promoting hydroxychloroquine and ivermectin and questioning the effectiveness of masks. In September, the Therapeutic Goods Administration also issued a statement saying its lawyers had written to Kelly over text messages the party had sent to millions of Australians. The TGA alleged the party had breached copyright and demanded it stop distributing “incomplete extracts” of adverse event reports relating to Covid vaccines which the TGA believed could be “seriously misleading”. Kelly has since called for the social media companies to be reined in, and argued Facebook’s move was in contempt of parliament and amounted to improper interference. The then Speaker Tony Smith dismissed that claim, stating there was no evidence that the ban was targeted at Kelly in his capacity as a member of parliament. Since Kelly joined the United Australia party, YouTube’s parent company Google has also faced pressure to remove the party’s account. Labor’s national secretary, Paul Erickson, wrote to Google in September raising concerns that the UAP was using its platform to undermine confidence in Australia’s response to the Covid-19 pandemic, citing videos in which Kelly questioned the safety of Covid vaccines and promoted ivermectin. The party has spent close to $3m on ads on YouTube since August, far more than any other political party in Australia over the same period. The parliamentary inquiry was announced by Scott Morrison this week as part of the government’s ongoing focus on large tech companies. The committee will be chaired by the Liberal MP Lucy Wicks, and report back in February, before the next federal election. The terms of reference for the committee are broad. It will review “the range of online harms that may be faced by Australians on social media and other online platforms, including harmful content or harmful conduct”, what impact algorithms have, identity verification and age verification policies, online safety for children, and data collection. The committee consists of eight members, with five from the government, and three from the opposition or crossbench. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning On Thursday, Kelly along with the Labor MPs Tim Watts and Sharon Claydon were added to the committee in a motion in the House of Representatives by the assistant minister to the deputy prime minister, Kevin Hogan. The crossbench ultimately decides which of its members are put up on committees, meaning it was not a decision of government members to appoint Kelly to the committee. Guardian Australia has sought comment from Kelly. On Wednesday, Watts warned an inquiry being held over the summer in the shadow of a looming federal election campaign meant it was questionable how much the current parliament could achieve. The shadow communications minister, Michelle Rowland, also warned that, while she was supportive of the inquiry, the government had been doing nothing in the meantime to address Covid-19 misinformation online. “I supervise my children in their use of the internet. But what bothers me deeply is when I have my nine-year-old and four-year-old say to me: ‘Mummy, you go out and tell people to get vaccinated. Why are the people in these ads telling us not to?’ Nothing is being done to address the disinformation that is harmful during a pandemic.”Netflix Don’t Look Up Film, US, 2021 – out 24 December “This comet is what we call a planet killer,” says a scientist (Rob Morgan) in director Adam McKay’s new black comedy sci-fi – because nothing is funnier than the end of the world. Meryl Streep’s president Janie Orlean hears this dire prediction for the fate of the human race and informs astronomers (Leonardo DiCaprio and Jennifer Lawrence) of her ingenious plan: “Sit tight and assess.” This indicates the kind of comedy likely to ensue: about bureaucracy in general and humans’ reluctance (or inability) to save themselves in particular. McKay’s directorial work includes The Big Short, another comedy about an on-the-surface very unfunny subject matter: the global financial crisis and the people who saw it coming. Cobra Kai: Season 4 TV, US, 2021 – out 31 December Time to go … back to the dojo! The first season of karate soap opera Cobra Kai cleverly flipped the script, turning the bad guy from the original The Karate Kid, Johnny (William Zabka), into an underdog protagonist, and the original hero, Daniel (Ralph Macchio) into villain-ish character. But across the first three seasons things got a bit complicated, with the roles of goodies and baddies blurring – at least when it came to those two adult characters. The kids are more stereotypical, as is the true villain (John Kreese, played by Martin Kove), but it doesn’t matter because the show is so sharply written and addictively entertaining. The fourth season should make good holiday viewing. The Hand of God Film, Italy, 2021 – out 15 December The flavour of Italian auteur Paolo Sorrentino’s work (including films Il Divo and The Great Beauty, as well as the TV series The Young Pope) is ostentation and excess. His latest film marks a departure in the sense that it is his most personal project, set when he was a teenager, at a time when he tragically lost both of his parents, their deaths caused by a carbon monoxide leak. Honourable mentions: The Power of the Dog (film, 1 December), Lost in Space season 3 (TV, 1 December), Shaun the Sheep: The Flight Before Christmas (TV, 3 December), The Unforgivable (film, 10 December), The Witcher season 2 (TV, 17 December), Stay Close (TV, December 31). Stan Eyes Wide Shut Film, 1999, US/UK – out 14 December When I went to the cinema and watched Stanley Kubrick’s final film with two friends back in 1999, we all had very different experiences – speaking to its divisive qualities. I loved it, one of my friends hated it, and the other one fell asleep. A “once seen but never forgotten” experience, chilling and grand, the film explores sexual yearnings, paranoia, orgies, and other hallmarks of a well-functioning marriage. Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman deliver fine performances as said couple: a doctor and stay-at-home mum respectively. They don’t appear to have embraced method acting, though, with Kidman claiming the pair apparently went go-kart racing in between filming. Bump season 2 TV, 2021, Australia – out 26 December The first season of Stan’s original series Bump was by no means exceptional – but it was sweet, well-calibrated and thoughtful, bringing to life the urban myth of a teenager who doesn’t know they’re pregnant until they start giving birth. Co-produced by and starring Claudia Karvan, with Nathalie Morris delivering a fine performance in the lead role, both return in season two, which continues to explore the lives of Oly (Morris), her partner Santi (Carlos Sanson Jr) and Oly’s parents (Karvan and Angus Sampson). Honourable mentions: Results (film, 2 December), Police Academy (film, 4 December), Before Sunrise (film, 6 December), Landscapers (TV, 8 December), Before Sunset (film, 6 December), Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me (film, 22 December), Inception (film, 25 December),, Gringo (film, 29 December), The Disaster Artist (film, 30 December). Amazon Prime Video Being the Ricardos Film, US, 2021 – out 21 December Every film and TV show involving playwright-cum-screenwriter-cum-director Aaron Sorkin is an event: a very wordy, very eloquent event, full of slick patter and snappy retorts – the kind of dialogue we wish we could come up with in real life. His latest film is set over one week during the making of the iconic sitcom I Love Lucy, with Nicole Kidman playing star Lucille Ball and Javier Bardem as co-star Desi Arnaz. Sorkin has experience adapting true stories, even if he turns them into irresistible confection rather than realistic drama. Exhibit A: his very entertaining recent courtroom drama The Trial of the Chicago 7. Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs Film, US, 2009 – out 9 December Over the years I have not hidden my affection for Phil Lord and Christopher Miller’s highly distinctive disaster movie, about a nutty young inventor (voiced by Bill Hader) who accidentally summons extreme weather in the form of giant bits of food that rain from the sky. I have so far snuck my favourite quote from the film (“you can’t run away from your own feet”) into not one but two Guardian reviews – a fact I pondered for some time before divulging, realising that I have now tipped off my editors. Anyway: watch this delightful, funny and visually inventive film for yourself, if you haven’t already. And if you have, watch it again. Honourable mentions: Alex Rider season 2 (TV, 3 December), Harlem (TV, 3 December), The Protege (film, 3 December), Encounter (film, 10 December), I, Tonya (film, 21 December), Gringo (film, 29 December). ABC iView Shaun the Sheep: The Flight Before Christmas TV, UK, 2021 – out 24 December Following on from my Meatballs-related comment above, I have also never hidden my affection for that lovable scamp Shaun the Sheep, and the frankly ingenious artists over at Aardman Animations responsible for Shaun and other iconic stop-motion classics such as Wallace and Gromit. The Flight Before Christmas is a half-hour special; I would have preferred another feature length production to add to the exceptional Shaun the Sheep movie and its also great sheepquel – but some Shaun is better than no Shaun. If ewe haven’t seen either of those films (or the TV show they originated from), ewe really should; they’re woolly woolly good. Honourable mentions: Brian Johnson’s A Life on the Road (TV, 1 December), Re-Frame (TV, 3 December), Would I Lie to You? at Christmas (TV, 9 December), Us (TV, 11 December), Sammy J: Full Credit to Christmas (TV, 16 December), The Yearly with Charlie Pickering (TV, 22 December). SBS on Demand Parasite Film, South Korea, 2019 – out 19 December The hugely successful Oscar-winning film from great South Korean director Bong Joon-ho is both funny weird and funny ha-ha, with compelling class commentary under the bonnet. The poor Kim family – led by father Ki-taek (Song Kang-ho) and mother Chung-sook (Chang Hyae-jin) – hatch a plan to insert themselves into the home and daily lives of the affluent Park family, who live in a sleek modern abode that is also now a very famous movie set, built from scratch. Strange and sometimes outlandish events ensue, demonstrating the director’s strength in multiple genres and his capacity to surprise. Bong memorably described Parasite as “a comedy without clowns, a tragedy without villains”. Honourable mentions: Perfect Life season 1 and 2 (TV, 3 December), Echos (TV, 9 December), My Brilliant Career (film, 9 December), Hunt for the Wilderpeople (film, 10 December), The Sketch Artist (TV, 16 December), What We Do in the Shadows (film, 20 December), SF8 (TV, 23 December), Framed (TV, 26 December), The Silver Brumby (film, 28 December). Binge And Just Like That TV, US, 2021 – out 9 December The Sex and the City gang have occupied an important place in popular culture across six seasons and two spin-off movies, belonging to a franchise that provides a space for women to speak candidly about their sex lives. Carrie, Charlotte and Miranda (though not Samantha) return to screens as 50-something women who are still buddies, still charming and cheeky, and who of course still live in New York City, which is not just a setting in the show but a character itself. Godzilla vs Kong Film, US, 2021 – out 23 December It was never going to win an Academy Award for best screenplay – though it was, for a brief period, mooted as the film that saved cinema. More than just delivering what it says on the tin – an epic punch-on between a gargantuan lizard and a giant ape – director Adam Wingard also creates a great sense of scale, achieved through conceptually simplistic but visually effective means: contrasting small things (a young girl) with very large things (the aforementioned ape). He uses other tricks in the book, such as heavy rain and bright lights, to create an eye-watering – and at times eye-gouging – look that screams “CINEMATIC”. Honourable mentions: Book Club (film, 11 December), Peter Rabbit (film, 24 December), Grease (film, 24 December), Love Me (TV, 26 December). Disney+ The Book of Boba Fett TV, US, 2021 – out 29 December Once upon a time (in a galaxy far, far away), Star Wars movies were rare events, and the only Star Wars TV shows were silly TV specials. Those days are long gone, friends, with Disney milking the brand for all it’s worth and pumping out a dizzying array of productions – including this adventure series themed around the famous bounty hunter. We’ve already had two seasons of The Mandalorian, another space western following a bounty hunter. How about the Big Mouse do something truly boldand dedicate an entire TV series to Jar Jar Binks? The working title can be “The Book of Binks: mesa called Jar Jar!” The Last Duel Film, UK/US, 2021 – out 8 December Described by New York Times’ Manohla Dargis as “what may be the big screen’s first medieval feminist revenge saga”, The Last Duel would have been an epic box office success, rather than a bomb, were it not for stupid millennials and their love of smartphones. At least that’s the logic of its director, Sir Ridley Scott, who is presumably not tickled pink that the film is landing on Disney+ after a short and limited theatrical season. Set during the Hundred Years’ War, the story involves the wife (Jodie Comer) of a knight (Matt Damon) who refuses to stay silent about the identity of a man who viciously assaulted her. The film is of course best watched on your smartphone. Honourable mentions: The Simpsons season 33 (TV, out now), Diary of a Wimpy Kid (film, 3 December), Welcome to Earth (TV, 8 December), Glass (film, 17 December), Fight Club (film, 24 December), Gone Girl (film, 24 December), Birdman or (The Unexpected Virtue Of Ignorance) (film, 24 December), The Rescue (film, 31 December). Paramount+ HouseBroken TV, US, 2021 – out 11 December Our pets have experienced an emotional rollercoaster ride in recent times, inundated with human company during lockdowns, then cruelly separated from their beloved upon the recommencement of old routines. It stands to reason they should gather in group therapy, given reassurance such as “it’s important to remember that just because you had a bad day, doesn’t mean you’re a bad dog”. That is a line from HouseBroken, spoken to a poodle (voiced by Lisa Kudrow) who’s been having a hard time since the sudden death of her best friend. The show is an adult animated sitcom that, given it covers mental illness, will inevitably draw comparisons to one of the best TV shows so far this century: BoJack Horseman. A tough yardstick. Honourable mentions: Violet (film, 2 December), The Last Bus (film, 2 December), Paradise Lost (TV, 3 December), South Park movie (film, 17 December), 1883 (TV, 20 December).Dozens of human rights organisations have called on the European Union to impose global sanctions on NSO Group and take “every action” to prohibit the sale, transfer, export and import of the Israeli company’s surveillance technology. The letter, signed by 86 organisations including Access Now, Amnesty International and the Digital Rights Foundation, said the EU’s sanctions regime gave it the power to target entities that were responsible for “violations or abuses that are of serious concern as regards to the objectives of the common foreign and security policy, including violations or abuses of freedom of peaceful assembly and of association, or of freedom of opinion and expression”. “These rights have been repeatedly violated using NSO technology,” the letter said, pointing to findings by a UN special rapporteur on freedom of opinion who found that use of spyware by abusive governments could also “facilitate extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions and killings, or enforced disappearance of persons.” The letter cited recent allegations, reported by the Guardian and other publications, that NSO’s signature surveillance software, known as Pegasus, was used to hack the devices of six Palestinian human rights activists. It also follows the publication last summer of the Pegasus Project, an investigation by the Guardian and 15 other media organisations, which was coordinated by the French media organisation Forbidden Stories. It exposed the ways in which Pegasus has been used to target journalists, human rights activists and other members of civil society. NSO has said that its technology, which has been sold to government clients around the world, is only meant to be used against serious criminals and terrorists. It has denied many of the allegations included in the Pegasus Project and has said it investigates credible claims of abuse of its software. The Biden administration last month added NSO Group to the commerce department’s entities list, a trade restriction that in effect means the company has been blacklisted in the US. The company has said it would try to reverse the administration’s designation. It is not clear how EU member states will respond to the call for a boycott. Allegations that the Hungarian government has used NSO Group software to target journalists and critics of the prime minister, Viktor Orbán, have been met with intense concern inside the European Commission. But other EU states are also believed to be clients, including Spain. Germany’s internal police also use the spyware. The letter was sent to high representative Josep Borrell, the EU representative for foreign affairs and security. In response to recent queries about NSO’s long-term viability in the face of political and financial pressures after a recent downgrade by Moody’s, NSO said in a statement: “NSO Group remains strong, proud, and confident, and we will continue to provide technologies to help law enforcements catch paedophiles, terrorists and criminals.”Four years of schemes, schematics, bullets, blasts, anti-capitalist allegory, remarkable contingency planning and wildly ill-advised workplace romances will come to an end on Friday with the release of the final five episodes of Netflix’s blockbuster Spanish series La Casa de Papel. The drama, known to English-speaking viewers rather more prosaically as Money Heist, follows the adventures of an inevitably motley crew of robbers who dress in red overalls and Salvador Dalí masks to plunder the Royal Mint and then the Bank of Spain. Armed with guts, grievances, labyrinthine plans and the odd heavy machine gun, the robbers rob, fall in love, squabble, play cat-and-mouse games with the police, and somehow endear themselves to a public sick of austerity, corruption and Spain’s political elites. The first series, which was shown on the Spanish TV network Antena 3 in 2017, was picked up by Netflix the same year and soon became a global phenomenon and the platform’s most-watched non-English language series. As well as winning an international Emmy award for best drama in 2018, La Casa de Papel (literal translation “The House of Paper”) has been touted as socioeconomic fable for our times and even served as a Halloween costume inspiration for the many Spanish children who have marched door-to-door in red overalls, demanding sweets at the end of a plastic assault rifle. Despite its success, however, even its creator finds its appeal difficult to pinpoint. “It’s really complicated, because you never really know what’s going to happen – just look at Squid Game,” says Álex Pina. “But I think there are a few things that explain it: you’ve got very pure entertainment combined with characters whose personal and emotional relationships are almost as important as the heist itself. “And the robbery works like a football match because two teams are playing and one has to win and the other has to lose. You really want to know how it’s going to end: will they get the gold out of the Bank of Spain or not?” Pina, whose other hits include Sky Rojo and White Lines, also suspects the show’s underdog protagonists struck a chord with viewers in Spain after the suffering, anger and austerity that followed the 2008 financial crisis. But he points out that in the past few years there has been “a real scepticism about all the institutions, central banks and governments” across the world. Natalia Marcos, who writes about TV for the Spanish newspaper El País, agrees that the show’s social and political backdrop may have appealed to audiences living though harsh times in Spain, Latin America and the Arab world. But she attributes much of its success to “a narrative rhythm that lends itself well to binge-watching”, to word of mouth, and to its design. “It’s a very visual show with its own iconography,” she says. “It pops up on the Netflix menu and straight away you see the Dalí masks and the red jumpsuits and you get pulled in.” According to Pina, La Casa de Papel also arrived at a time when viewers were beginning to move on from US and European fantasy shows and the woollen bleakness of Nordic noir. “It’s been great for Spain – we’re seeing about a threefold rise in what was being made before and we’re getting close to the UK in production levels,” he says. “That was unthinkable before – as was the idea of Netflix bringing a production hub to Spain.” Diego Ávalos, Netflix’s vice-president of content for Spain and Portugal, describes La Casa as “one of the first shows that truly opened up and levelled fiction from a global perspective”. Not only has the series “solidified the position of Spain as a true leader in the audiovisual space – particularly in fiction,” it has also helped pave the way for the likes of Lupin and Squid Game. All three shows, Ávalos suggests, demonstrate there is “an appetite for content regardless of language and country of origin that can be able to be loved and consumed everywhere in the world”. And all three examine privilege and power in their own way. “Lupin couldn’t be more French, Squid Game couldn’t be more Korean, and La Casa de Papel couldn’t be more Spanish,” he says. “But all three are meant to be for the general audience, and all three are meant to be enjoyed by the maximum number of people within those countries.” Or, as Pina puts it, people will always hunger for something a little novel and idiosyncratic. “The world of fiction is a bit of a bubble, but there was a feeling last year or the year before that everything was a bit similar,” he says. “If you manage to do something different, then people are very grateful.”Twitter has shut down thousands of state-linked accounts in China that seek to counter evidence of human rights abuses in Xinjiang, as part of what experts called an “embarrassingly” produced propaganda operation. The operations used photos and images, shell and potentially automated accounts, and fake Uyghur profiles, to disseminate state propaganda and fake testimonials about their happy lives in the region, seeking to dispel evidence of a years-long campaign of oppression, with mass internments, re-education programs, and allegations of forced labour and sterilisation. The networks were found to share themes and content, but often used repurposed accounts dedicated to pornography or Korean soap operas with little engagement except when they were amplified by Chinese diplomats and officials. Twitter is banned inside China but officials frequently operate accounts overseas. According to analysts at thinktank the Australian Strategic Policy Institute (ASPI), the content from the 2,160 accounts that Twitter closed down was often “embarrassingly” produced but provided a level of “implausible deniability” which muddied the waters around the issue. The accounts linked to Chinese operations were in two sets, the largest being a network of 2,048 accounts amplifying the Chinese Communist party’s narratives related to Xinjiang, and the second set of 112 accounts connected to “Changyu Culture,” a private company that ASPI said appeared to be contracted by the Xinjiang regional authority to create videos of Uyghurs supporting the government. More than 30,000 tweets from each network were identified, frequently responding to other tweets labelling evidence of abuses as “lies” under the hashtag #StopXinjiangRumours or sharing videos they claimed were “the truth” of Xinjiang, or targeting foreign politicians while claiming to be a Uyghur person. When the data were analysed by ASPI, it found much of it linked to pornography, Korean soap opera fans, and spam accounts and content. “That’s most likely because they’ve taken over these existing accounts and repurposed them,” said ASPI senior analyst Fergus Ryan. “They take them over and pump out this content that’s generally quite reactive … It’s so ham-handed, and really not done very well. One of the really weird things about one data set was that for some unknown reason they include hundreds of tweets with this handle for an account @fuck_next.” The tweets also repeatedly mis-tagged the account of former US secretary of state Mike Pompeo, and many videos linked to the now-suspended Changyu Culture YouTube channel, which is known to be a marketing outfit backed by the Xinjiang provincial authorities. The result was a torrent of highly implausible propaganda, obvious to most eyes but still a cause for concern, said ASPI. ASPI found 97% of the identified accounts had fewer than five followers, and 73% of accounts had zero. While 98% of tweets had no likes or retweets, the remainder were often boosted by Chinese diplomats and officials, spreading the content and giving it legitimacy. “The target is not actually people who are sceptical of the Chinese government, but is giving content to people who trust Chinese state media and are sceptical of western mainstream media,” said ASPI researcher Albert Zhang. “It’s propaganda appealing to the base.” ASPI’s report said the propaganda campaign reflected the likely direction of future information operations by the Chinese Communist party (CCP). However, Zhang and Ryan also said it also showed there might be a lack of understanding by Chinese propaganda and media purveyors about what is believable or legitimate – as was showcased last month with attempts to rebut concerns about tennis star Peng Shuai. Ryan said a portmanteau term originally ascribed to China’s surveillance system – “Chabudwellian” – also applied here, combining “Orwellian” with the Chinese term “cha bu duo”, which means “almost” but is often used to describe something done with poor or minimal effort. “Outside of China, foreigners think their surveillance system is highly sophisticated … but in reality a lot of the time this infrastructure is gerry-rigged and not super effective,” said Ryan. “That can apply to the information campaigns as well.”There was a chill in the air as I wandered down to the harbour, but the breeze had dropped and the sea lay as calm as the neighbouring mill pond. The tide was high, the water lapping against the crumbling red brick sea defences. A flock of black-headed gulls had gathered near the old sea gates. Some hovered above the water, dipping down to snatch insects from the surface, while others paddled in lazy circles, their heads cocked as they peered into the depths. There was a splash as one gull dived, popping up with a writhing fish in its bill. As it gobbled down its catch, a silver-scaled mullet rocketed two feet in the air, falling back into the water on its side. Three more jumped in quick succession. A set of ripples radiated out in concentric circles. The shoal was swimming just below the surface, breaking the surface tension as they rose. I began to make out their torpedo shapes beneath the dimple rings. Mature mullets can grow to 70cm in length, but these fish were juveniles, 10cm or smaller. Three species can be found in Langstone harbour – the golden grey (Chelon aurata), the thinlip (Chelon ramada) and the thicklip (Chelon labrosus). All have streamlined bodies with small heads, flattened snouts and deeply forked tails, so it is difficult to tell them apart, but these were likely to be the thicklipped, the most common species. Mullets have a varied diet, consuming small invertebrates and benthic diatoms found in the seabed sediment, and grazing on marine vegetation. The fish began nibbling away at a curtain of gut weed (Ulva intestinalis) suspended in the water. Vast swathes of this green algae blanket the mudflats, the algal growth stimulated by elevated nitrogen levels caused by effluent discharge. Raw sewage spills are an ongoing issue in the harbour. Worryingly, the thousands of gallons of wastewater pouring into the sea expose fish to hormonal pharmaceuticals and endocrine-disrupting chemicals, which studies suggest can alter grey mullet development, causing gonadal disorders including the intersex condition, whereby testicular and ovarian tissue are found in the same gonad, impeding their ability to reproduce. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryChucky 9pm, Sky Max Another reboot that nobody remembers asking for, Chucky is Don Mancini’s modern retelling of the killer doll from his Child’s Play franchise. Episode one sees teenager Jake finding the cursed toy at a yard sale. It’s not long until the town descends into bloody chaos, and we learn Chucky’s backstory. Wait a minute, could this ridiculous gorefest actually be … “fun”? Hollie Richardson Griff’s Great New Zealand Adventure 8pm, ITV The epic journey continues. In tonight’s episode, Rhys Jones takes a ferry to the South Island, where he visits an old whaling station, the Kahurangi national park, and the Old Ghost Road mountainside bike track. He also finds out what it means to have a “Number 8 Wire” mentality. Ali Catterall Kirstie’s Handmade Christmas 8pm, Channel 4 It’s beginning to look a lot like the extended run-up to Christmas, and who better to spend it with than crafter extraordinaire (and sometime keyboard warrior) Kirstie Allsopp. “TV husband” Phil Spencer is on hand to show off his wrapping skills, while MasterChef’s Shelina Permalloo serves up festive fare. Hannah J Davies Gogglebox 9pm, Channel 4 It is time to unwind from the week with some familiar, friendly faces. Will we see their shock reactions to I’m a Celeb’s bushtucker trials? Or perhaps they’ll have a pop at the government’s latest blunders? Comforting Friday night telly at its best. HR Have I Got News For You 9.30pm, BBC One Clive Myrie takes the guest host reins on the never-ending panel show, with journalist Camilla Long and comic actor Miles Jupp joining team captains Paul Merton and Ian Hislop to poke fun at the week’s headlines. HR The Graham Norton Show 10.35pm, BBC One Tom Holland and Zendaya – stars of the new Spider-Man film – join Norton in the studio tonight. Henry Cavill also drops by to talk about the return of his Netflix series The Witcher, while Gugu Mbatha-Raw discusses her upcoming BBC drama The Girl Before. Little Mix provide the music. HR Film choice Godzilla vs Kong (Adam Wingard, 2021), 10.15am, 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere The fourth film in the recently minted “MonsterVerse” pits the two big beasts against each other for more tsunami-inducing, skyscraper-dismantling action. Alexander Skarsgård, Rebecca Hall and Bryan Tyree Henry join the returning Millie Bobby Brown as concerned bystanders, while Adam Wingard orchestrates the B-movie action. The real baddies are, of course, the Earth-despoiling humans, and the dino and ape are just there to make the military-industrial complex see sense … mostly by smashing things up. Simon Wardell Live sport Premiership rugby union: Gloucester v Bristol Bears 7pm, BT Sport 1. From Kingsholm Stadium.Doctors have urged unvaccinated Black and south Asian people to get their Covid jabs after new data revealed hospitalisations and deaths are higher in those groups, despite infection rates being lower than in white people. Infections were higher in many Black and Asian groups during Britain’s first two waves of Covid but recently the pattern has shifted, with infections now more common among white people, even though their death rates remain relatively low. The new data, published on Friday in the final government report on understanding and tackling Covid-19 disparities, suggest that poor vaccine coverage is now a major reason for severe Covid in some Black and Asian groups, despite programmes to improve underwhelming vaccine uptake. Dr Raghib Ali, the government’s independent adviser on Covid-19 and ethnicity, and the author of the report, said evidence gathered over the past year showed that higher death rates seen in ethnic minorities in the first two waves of the pandemic were primarily due to a higher risk of infection, particularly among older people. Many factors contributed to the higher risk of infection but a greater likelihood of living in a densely populated area, working in public-facing roles such as health and social care, and living in larger and multigenerational households all played a part. “In the third wave to date, a different pattern is emerging with infection rates in ethnic minorities now lower than in whites, but rates of hospital admissions and deaths are still higher, with the pattern now matching levels of vaccine uptake in older and other higher risk groups,” Ali said. “I’m confident this is being driven by vaccination rates.” Data gathered by Oxford University shows that vaccine coverage has reached more than 90% among white people, but is 20 percentage points lower among Black groups, with coverage among south Asian people halfway between the two. “Although vaccine uptake in all ethnic minorities has increased very significantly over the last year, the proportion unvaccinated is roughly twice as high in south Asian people and four times as high in Black people,” Ali said. The report finds that differences in infection rates in the first wave were largely driven by occupational risk, with Black Africans and Black Caribbeans in health and social care particularly exposed to the virus. In the second wave, when many schools were open, Bangladeshi and Pakistani groups were at greater risk because they were more likely than others to live in multigenerational houses, where children brought the virus home to more vulnerable older relatives. The report goes on to highlight obesity, diabetes and hypertension as risk factors for severe disease and death, and a gene that is nearly four times more common in south Asian people than Europeans, which doubles the risk of respiratory failure and death from Covid. “This recent data is another reminder that the vaccines are the best way to protect yourselves and your elderly relatives, especially if you live in a multi-generational household, and it is never too late to come and take your first dose,” Ali said. Neena Modi, professor of neonatal medicine at Imperial College London, said it was disappointing the report did not highlight the toll Covid has taken on pregnant women who make up a disproportionate number of the women in intensive care. Last month, Chris Whitty, England’s chief medical officer, urged pregnant women to get vaccinated, adding that almost all pregnant women admitted to hospital and intensive care were unvaccinated.Corruption is a word used nervously in the UK. We’re quite happy applying it to other countries; but in Britain even critics of the status quo can be surprisingly reluctant to describe as corrupt our society’s tight, often concealed circulation of power and rewards. Partly, this is because corruption is a slippery concept. “There has never been a single, fixed, universal definition,” wrote Mark Knights of Warwick University in 2016. “Notions about what is unfair, unjust or immoral change over time.” As a small, centralised country with a huge capital city, Britain has for centuries been run by elites with overlapping memberships and interests, and offered a wide range of services to foreigners with dubious fortunes. To attack this system as corrupt is to risk being called unworldly – and experience feelings of deep frustration and futility. From the House of Lords to the City of London, the capital is lined with ancient institutions that anti-corruption campaigners have failed to cleanse. Yet there are periods when the charge of corruption suddenly acquires potency. Having struggled for two years to find an effective way of criticising Boris Johnson’s government, Labour seems finally to have discovered one. “Corruption,” said the party’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, on Monday, “is rife right through this Conservative government.” Keir Starmer, often too measured, has become just as blunt about the issue. Johnson’s response – “I genuinely believe that the UK is not remotely a corrupt country” – has been floridly unconvincing even by his standards. Most voters disagree with him. According to YouGov, 80% think there is “a lot” or “a fair amount” of corruption in British politics, and only 1% think there is none . Since the corruption controversy took off, the Tories have dropped in the polls. The word corruption sometimes suggests something past its peak and beginning to decay. And despite their efforts to pretend otherwise, the Conservatives have been in office for a long time. But more often corruption suggests something spreading, swelling, mutating, becoming monstrous. The constant acquisition of power and resources by Johnson’s Tories and their corporate allies has those qualities: from the appointment of cronies to public office to the funnelling of state funds to Tory constituencies to the awarding of government contracts to friends, relations and supporters – a practice for which the Omicron variant may open up more opportunities. Previous governments have done sleazy things, but few have done them so systematically and blatantly. When Tony Blair was prime minister, the anti-corruption group Transparency International gave the UK scores in the 80s (out of 100) in its annual index: good, but not outstanding by the group’s standards. Under Johnson, the UK scores in the 70s. Appropriately for an administration that shows contempt for parliamentary democracy, the British ruling culture that Johnson’s increasingly resembles is a pre-democratic one: the once-infamous Old Corruption of the 18th and 19th centuries. Government jobs were routinely sold and public money was distributed to people with political leverage. As the state grew, expanded by wars rather than a pandemic, new functions were carried out by private companies whose ability to win contracts and extract profits far exceeded their operational effectiveness. The prime minister sat contentedly at the centre of this system. A satirical cartoon from 1740 shows Robert Walpole – an Old Etonian like Johnson, who governed for more than 20 years – as a giant figure “stretched over ye Doors of all ye Publick Offices”, waiting for supplicants to kiss his exposed buttocks. Johnson is like an 18th-century politician, with his shamelessness, elaborate but untrustworthy rhetoric, and enrichment of favourites. And, like his style of government, at first Old Corruption seemed immune to criticism. It took a century of campaigning by radicals such as the journalist and MP William Cobbett for the system to start being dismantled. We live in faster times now. Johnson’s ascendancy has lasted little more than a 10th as long as Walpole’s, and already there are signs it could be ending. The exposure of corruption may be particularly damaging for this government because Johnson has so emphatically promised to spread resources and opportunities more widely – not to hand them to an even narrower circle. Setting up “VIP lanes” for companies with Conservative links is hardly levelling up. Such inside-dealing is part of a bigger Tory project that predates the Johnson government. During George Osborne’s period as chancellor, his “grand strategy”, according to his biographer Janan Ganesh, was “the calculated use of [government] policy” to change Britain in his party’s favour. Austerity was intended to shrink one of Labour’s main bases of support: public sector employees. Under Johnson, patronage of certain firms is intended to create an even more Tory-friendly private sector. The coherence and cleverness of all this should not be overstated. The Tory governments since 2010 have often been haphazard, with last-minute policies and limited capacity for longterm thinking, as the frustrated departures of more ambitious strategists such as Dominic Cummings and Steve Hilton have indicated. Yet one of the lessons of the past 11 years is that even mediocre Tory governments can be transformative. They act as conduits for powerful forces, such as corporations wanting to run state services. The Johnson government’s corruption stems as much from modern Conservatism’s emptiness as its over-confidence. Labour’s response to all this works as a political message. With the rectitude of a former prosecutor, Starmer promises “a truly independent anti-corruption and anti-cronyism commission”. A Starmer government would almost certainly be much less sleazy. But after a reshuffle that left the shadow cabinet with few fundamental critics of our economy’s incestuous workings – and one of them, Ed Miliband, effectively demoted – any Labour anti-corruption drive feels likely to be limited. The Johnson government may end in disgrace, but Britain’s insiders will keep prospering. Andy Beckett is a Guardian columnistPicks of the week Harsh Reality: The Story of Miriam Rivera In 2004, when There’s Something About Miriam was touted as the next big thing, ratings were more important than duty of care in reality TV. This podcast goes beyond the reality show that saw six men competing to win cash and Miriam Rivera’s love – and exploited the trans star’s identity as its “twist”. It recalls Miriam as a superstar on the New York ball scene and celebrates her life as a pioneer, rather than a victim of cruelty. Hannah Verdier The Thing About Helen &amp; Olga From the makers of serial killer podcast The Thing About Pam – currently in development for TV, starring Renée Zellweger – comes another serviceable, if tabloid, true crime tale. This time, our subjects are two nice retired women helping the homeless in Los Angeles – and bumping them off. Hannah J Davies One Year Another series of Slate’s podcast, which zooms in on forgotten or little-known events from one year in history (this time it’s 1995). Josh Levin reports on the mind-boggling story of a group of US students hoodwinked into believing they had been accepted into Oxford, the rise of the Macarena and more. HJD John Grant’s Beautiful Creatures Grant has a voice made for gentle, witty chat and a bank of high-quality guests, so it’s no surprise that his first venture into podcasting is a real treat. First up is Paul Rudd, with a conversation that meanders through their mutual love of bad horror movies to the genius of yorkshire pudding. Kristin Hersh and Linda Thompson follow. HV In the Boardroom It feels as if, in recent years, some of the wider issues surrounding The Beautiful Game have finally started to be addressed. In this series from The Athletic, football broadcaster Jacqui Oatley hears from the men and women at every level of the game who are trying to bring about positive change to their clubs and the wider football community. Her guests so far include Arsenal’s head of women’s football, Clare Wheatley, and the co-founder of the Football Black List, Leon Mann. Hollie Richardson Producer pick: Uncanny Chosen by Joleen Goffin It was around Halloween that I discovered Uncanny on BBC Sounds, so I blame the appeal of a podcast about all things spooky to the time of year, and also perhaps, to my 13-year-old self who spent several nights summoning spirits using an improvised Ouija board. Google wasn’t around yet to explain the inexplicable, so I was left wondering: were we talking to actual ghosts? In Uncanny, host Danny Robins explores the mysterious world of weird encounters and paranormal sightings, drawing on real-life stories from listeners who got in touch with him following his previous hit series The Battersea Poltergeist. In Uncanny’s first episode a respectable scientist called Ken tells him about how certain sinister sightings in his student bedroom in Belfast 40 years ago, still haunt him today. A panel of experts attempt to explain what may have occurred, but the best part comes when, a few episodes, later Robins returns to the case after listeners – and former room 611 inhabitants – confirm that Ken wasn’t the only witness … Entertaining if you’re a sceptic – and haunting if you’re a believer. Talking points It’s the terrifying word of mouth hit that brought intrigue and interest to the well-worn true crime podcast genre, and this week Sweet Bobby came to an end with a stunning revelation. Showing that a complicated story doesn’t need an overly sensational treatment, Tortoise Media’s series has been among the most talked about shows of the year, and the most terrifying. Why not try: Boys Like Me | Twice Upon A Time with Janet Ellis | Paul McCartney: Inside The Songs Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about Hear Here or any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to the Guide, our weekly look at the best in pop cultureOne day in May last year, Violet Chemesunte, a community health volunteer in Kibera, the largest slum in Nairobi, got a call from a colleague worried about a woman she had visited who kept coughing. She asked if Chemesunte could go round and convince the 37-year-old woman, a single mother to three young children, to seek medical help. She suspected tuberculosis (TB), and feared it might already be too late. “I went there and she was very sick,” remembers Chemesunte. “She didn’t want to go to hospital because she was scared she might have Covid and would be taken into quarantine. The government had enforced very strict measures at that time and there was a lot of fear around.” Chemesunte spoke to the woman about TB, which has some similar symptoms to Covid, and persuaded her to get tested at a nearby site. It came back positive. Two weeks later, before she could start treatment, she was dead. Her children, aged between nine and 13, tested negative and have since left Nairobi to live with their elderly grandmother. “It was very sad,” says Chemesunte. “She didn’t need to die. TB is curable. The only thing you need is to be diagnosed early enough.” TB is one the world’s deadliest infectious diseases. It kills more people than HIV and malaria combined. Last year in Kenya 21,000 people died of TB, four times the number of those who have died from Covid-19 since the pandemic began. The disease is airborne and can lie dormant in someone infected with the bacteria. When a person develops active TB, symptoms may include a cough, fever, night sweats and weight loss. Left untreated, TB kills about half of those affected. Someone with active TB can infect five to 15 others through close contact over the course of a year. The World Health Organization revealed in October that Covid-19 had reversed years of global progress in tackling TB, and for the first time in over a decade, deaths had increased. Kenya is one of the 30 countries with the majority (at least 83%) of cases. Last year, around 140,000 people in Kenya were estimated to have TB, according to the country’s Ministry of Health. Covid also meant that the number of “missing people” with TB – those who go undetected, untreated and unreported – increased. Nearly half of people with TB in Kenya last year were likely to have missed out on diagnosis and treatment. An estimated 15% reduction in case finding was “largely attributable to the pandemic”, according to the Ministry of Health’s national tuberculosis, leprosy and lung disease programme annual report. Restrictions on movement, patients avoiding health facilities, the repurposing of health services and workers to cater for the pandemic, and stigma related to similar presentations of Covid-19 and TB all contributed. “Covid has made everything worse,” says Dr Enos Okumu Masini, who served as head of the national TB and lung disease programme and now works for the StopTB partnership. “It had a knock-on effect, and the programme [to tackle TB in Kenya] has a lot of work to do.” Against this backdrop is a lack of funding to tackle the disease. Masini says less than half of Kenya’s plan to tackle TB has adequate funding. One concern is lack of diagnosis in children; two-thirds of cases in those under 15 are missed, he says. Masini is aghast at what he sees as an imbalance of attention and political will between Covid and TB. While Kenya’s president is fully in charge of the Covid response, with regular ministerial briefings and readily available data, this is not the case with TB, he says. The number of deaths from TB is “the equivalent of two bus crashes in Kenya every day,” he adds. “[If that happened, it] would cause uproar. There would be high-level intervention. For TB, that urgency is not there – it’s not taken as an imminent danger. Resources are not aligned to the magnitude of the disease.” Back in Kibera, where poor and cramped housing allows the disease to thrive, Anne Munene, project officer for Amref Health Africa, sits at a table outside a TB clinic. “Covid was an eye-opener,” she says. “What have we done wrong that we never got this attention for TB?” She and her team at Amref Health Africa, which has received funding from the Global Fund, ran a campaign aimed at raising TB awareness at a community level, where so many cases are missed. Information on the dangers of TB were distributed to matatus, the minibuses used for public transport, and schools. The school curriculum is being updated to include TB, Munene says. The disease was also discussed on TV and radio chatshows. Munene and her colleagues ran a competition asking businesses to suggest ways to find people with TB in the community. One innovation that has been adopted is an automated TB screening machine, or “ATM”. A community health volunteer helps people go through five automated questions, asking if they have experienced any TB symptoms. If they answer yes to any, they are encouraged to submit a sputum sample for testing. The ATMs have been placed in frequently visited sites across Nairobi, including the train station and a compound in Kibera with various government and health services. From November 2019 to May 2021, about 80,000 people were screened for TB, Munene says. Of those, 262 tested positive and were put on treatment. “These are things that have never been done,” she says. “To get 262 cases in the first 12 months that we would not have found otherwise shows we are filling a gap.” The pandemic still threatens to curtail efforts and derail progress, but Munene also sees it as an opportunity. “Now we need to ride the wave of Covid to raise awareness of TB. We are still grappling with this.” The Global Fund provided transport while the Guardian was in Kenya Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:George Clooney is smoother than a cup of one of those Nespresso coffees he has advertised for two decades and for which has earned a highly caffeinated £30m-plus. With that, on top of the tequila company Casamigos, which he co-founded then sold four years ago for a potential $1bn (£780m), the ER juggernaut and – oh yeah! – the hugely successful film career as an actor, director and producer, it seems safe to assume that Clooney could, if he were a bit less cool, start every morning by diving into a pile of gold coins like Scrooge McDuck. So, George, I ask, do you ever think: “You know what? I think I have enough money now.” Unruffled as the silver hair on his head, Clooney leans forward, as if he is about to confide in me. “Well, yeah. I was offered $35m for one day’s work for an airline commercial, but I talked to Amal [Clooney, the human rights lawyer he married in 2014] about it and we decided it’s not worth it. It was [associated with] a country that, although it’s an ally, is questionable at times, and so I thought: ‘Well, if it takes a minute’s sleep away from me, it’s not worth it.’” Personally, I would lose a minute’s sleep for a tenner, but Clooney operates on a different scale from the rest of us. We meet on the terrace of a hotel in London, to talk about his new film, The Tender Bar, which he directed and which stars Ben Affleck, but it feels more like we are in Beverly Hills in the 50s, with Frank Sinatra and Clark Gable at the next table. Clooney, 60, is a very old-fashioned kind of movie star. He doesn’t really bother with relatability, because he knows there is no point in pretending he is just one of the guys when the reason he didn’t go to Barack Obama’s 60th birthday party this summer was because “we were in Italy” – ie at his villa on Lake Como. But despite being extremely famous for almost 30 years, he has suffered none of the usual pitfalls of modern celebrity. There are no photos of him falling around drunk, no appearances on reality TV, no misguided tattoos and no affairs with the nanny. Even his wedding in Venice in 2014 had the smack of retro glamour; photos show Clooney in a dinner jacket speeding down the Rialto in a mahogany limousine. If Clooney has a brand, it is carefully cultivated classiness. He has been – by and large – clever with his film choices, opting for thoughtful and stylish fare. His best-known movies are probably those in the Oceans franchise, a very deliberate hark back to the Hollywood of the 60s. Clooney’s aunt was Rosemary Clooney, who starred alongside Bing Crosby in White Christmas. I ask if growing up around her gave him a template for how to handle fame. “I didn’t really grow up with her, because I lived in Kentucky and she was in Los Angeles. But we all worshipped her and I loved the idea of Hollywood – I’d dream about it!” he grins. Yet even the star of your film, Ben Affleck, has had his less-than-ideal moments in the spotlight, I say. “Sure, sure,” he says. So how have you avoided any real public embarrassments? “I was 33, 34 when ER took off, so I was older, right? Also, Rosemary was a huge singer – huge! And then rock’n’roll came and she lost her career. And she didn’t get it, because at 21 she thought she was the real deal and by 26 it was gone. So, I’m lucky enough to understand how little the fame side has to do with me.” Most celebrities operate within a forcefield that repels any information that doesn’t pertain to them. But when I mention to Clooney that, like him, I have young twins, he drinks it in, making repeated references to our twin-parent connection throughout the interview. It is the conversational equivalent of Bill Clinton’s trick of gripping someone’s upper arms when he meets them, immediately creating a sense of intimacy. And it works, damn it, the old charmer. “How old are your twins? I have to ask you, are they very different kids? Ours are so different; it’s like night and day. Alexander loves to laugh and Ella’s very serious, always making sure everybody plays by the rules. They really are born with their personalities!” he grins. Given that their father is an extremely successful movie star and their mother is an extremely successful barrister, I assume the twins have an army of nannies, but he insists not. “We don’t, because it’s so important to Amal [to be involved]. We have a nanny four days a week and the rest of the time it’s just us. And during lockdown it was just us – for a full year! I felt like my mother in 1964, doing dishes and six loads of laundry a day,” he says. He has the relaxed demeanour of a man recalling a beach holiday as opposed to pandemic parenting. Unlike so many celebrities, Clooney keeps his children, now four, firmly out of the spotlight. I tell him that I like that he gave them old-fashioned names instead of the usual Hollywood coinages. “We talked about it from the beginning and said: ‘Their lives are going to be unusual, right? There’s no denying that. So let’s give them a head start by giving them normal names,’” he says. I suspect that parenthood and the soft emotions it inspires is partly what drew him to direct The Tender Bar. Unlike so many of his other movies – such as The Ides of March and, my favourite of all his films, Good Night, and Good Luck, both of which he produced, directed and starred in – there are no prickly political overtones here. It is a straight‑down-the‑line coming-of-age story about a young boy, JR (Daniel Ranieri and then Tye Sheridan), whose single mother (Lily Rabe) and irascible uncle (Affleck) help him to get ahead in life. It is well acted, especially by Affleck, even if, at times, it veers close to soft-focus Wonder Years territory. That was the point, says Clooney: “The whole country, for the last five years, has been engaged in hate and anger, and I’ve been part of it at times. I’ve been angry, and this was such a kind story. It’s such a gentle film, and I wanted to be part of that, and I thought maybe an audience would want to be part of a gentle experience,” he says. After Suburbicon, this is the second film Clooney has directed not acted in. It is striking how much he has slowed down on the acting since he got married. Is that because of age or wanting to spend time with his family? “In general, there just aren’t that many great parts – and, look, I don’t have to act. My wife and I had this conversation when I turned 60 this summer. I said: ‘I can still bounce around pretty good, and we both love what we do. But we gotta make sure we don’t book ourselves silly.’ So, part of it is just us making sure we live our lives.” As an aside, he then mentions that he is about to go to Australia to make a film with his frequent co-star Julia Roberts, while next summer he will be in the UK to make a film with another regular co-star, Brad Pitt. So, Clooney’s idea of slowing down is, again, not on the usual scale. Clooney grew up in Kentucky and Ohio, the son of a city councillor and a news anchor. His father, Nick, is revered for his journalistic integrity: “My dad says: ‘I spent the first half of my life being Rosemary Clooney’s brother and the second half being George Clooney’s father.” It has always been obvious how much Clooney has been influenced by his father, not least in Good Night, and Good Luck, which is about the news anchor Edward R Murrow, who stood up against Joe McCarthy. “Both my parents are really respected where we’re from and I wouldn’t want to do anything to embarrass them. Also, my dad made one rule for me and that was: ‘I don’t care what you do in life, but challenge people with greater power than you and defend those with less power,’” he says. It would be interesting to know what Nick made of his son’s early acting career in classics such as Return of the Killer Tomatoes, but since he hit the big time as the heart-throb Dr Doug Ross in ER, Clooney has tried to live up to his father’s dictum. For 20 years, he has campaigned indefatigably for causes such as pursuing a resolution to the Darfur conflict and helping Syrian refugees, as well as taking on enemies from Donald Trump to the Daily Mail, after the latter published an untrue story about Amal’s mother. He has always “liked a good fight”, he says with relish, although he is very aware of the eye-rolling sparked by actors getting involved in politics; he can quote how TV hosts such as Bill O’Reilly and Bill Maher have mocked him. “But I would be so ashamed if, for instance, in this last Trump regime, I hadn’t been on the record of being against some of the horrible things he’d done. My kids would be like: ‘So, they were putting kids in cages and you didn’t say anything?’ The blowback is nowhere near as bad as the shame I’d feel.” Given the political edge to so many of his films – including Michael Clayton and Syriana, for which he won an Oscar – I start to ask if Gregory Peck’s performance as Atticus Finch in To Kill a Mockingbird was an influence on him. He answers before I finish the question. “Huge. Huge! The two actors who were personally friends and also had the most influence on me were Paul Newman and Gregory Peck, both of whom were men I greatly admired for who they were and how they were on screen. They were proper old-fashioned movie stars and they mixed it up in [politics]. So it was really fun to be friends with them and copy some of the things they did.” Does it worry him that Peck and Newman each lost a son to, respectively, suicide and an overdose? “That has not gone unnoticed by me. The pressures on a son of a famous man are a lot. But I have an advantage, which is that I’m considerably older, so the competitive juices will be different. I’ll be 75 when my son will be in any way compared to me, so it won’t be the same vibe. Also, it is very important to Amal and me that they grow up knowing that their own path is the only way, and they have nothing to live up to but their own expectations.” For someone who is fairly private, Clooney mentions his wife a surprising amount. Did I know that her last two clients, Maria Ressa and Nadia Murad, each won the Nobel peace prize? Do I know how many journalists she has got out of jail? Wait, I watched ER when I was on maternity leave? So did Amal, because she had never seen it before! That’s crazy! Yet not very long ago, Clooney was at least as famous for his – shall we say – bachelor lifestyle as he was for his politics. What was it about Amal that persuaded him, at 53, to cash in the single life? “It’s true, I’d been dating for quite a while. But she’s a very impressive person! She’s beautiful, smart, funny and we fell in love right away and got married after six months. And now we’re having such a great time,” he says, which is not something you hear often from a parent of young twins. Rich, handsome, successful, smart: I don’t know if Clooney is the perfect man, but he is certainly the perfect interviewee. He is excellent at selling himself, which isn’t to say he is inauthentic – on the contrary. But a man can be genuine and hyperaware of what people want from him. His answers to my questions – neither too rambling nor too terse – reveal just enough to gratify me, but not too much to embarrass him. He is deft at getting ahead of criticisms before they are brought up. When I bring up his advertising deals, he neatly segues into talking about how proud he is to work with Nespresso, adding that whenever people have pointed out problems with the company, they fix them, thereby heading off questions about last year’s report of child labour in the company’s supply chain before I can ask them. “It’s fun to be able to [change] things like that,” he smiles. By this point, I am convinced that we are best buddies, so I tell him I have a very important question. “Bring it on,” he says, straightening up. How can I get an invite to his house in Como? “It’s not hard; it’s usually just someone driving by. I remember Ernest Borgnine – one day, he and his wife were riding by in a boat and I hear: ‘George!’ and I stick my head over the fence and he goes: ‘It’s Ernie Borgnine! What are you doing?’ And I go: ‘I don’t know, come on up!’ So we sat there and drank prosecco and had a hysterical time,” he chuckles. Great, I’ll bring the twins, I say. “Oh yes, because there’s nothing more fun than more twins. Now, tell me, are yours identical?” Alas, we have run out of time. We leave the terrace and walk into the hotel room, where his crew of PRs and assistants are waiting. I turn around to wave goodbye, but he is otherwise engaged. “So, what’s next?” he asks his gang. Clooney is already on to the next project. • The Tender Bar is released in the UK on 17 DecemberThe NHS is forecasting there will be 230,000 new cases of post-traumatic stress disorder in England as a result of the coronavirus pandemic, official figures show. Covid-19 has increased exposure to events that could cause PTSD, an anxiety disorder triggered by very stressful, frightening or distressing events, according to the Royal College of Psychiatrists. It says the NHS is already facing the biggest backlog of those waiting for mental health help in its history. Forecasts cited by the college from the NHS strategy unit, which carries out NHS analysis, show there could be as many as 230,000 new PTSD referrals between 2020/21 and 2022/23 in England, which suggests a rise of about 77,000 cases a year on average. The NHS strategy unit said it was not possible to directly compare the modelling of new cases to current figures since the NHS does not publish a total figure for all PTSD referrals in England. However, analysis suggests the number of new cases predicted would represent a significant increase. The strategy unit said its forecast of the rise in cases was based on the effects of the pandemic on domestic abuse victims, children and young people, relatives of Covid survivors, health and care workers, and those who have lost friends and family to the disease. People affected can experience intense negative emotions, thoughts and memories, experts said. Prof Neil Greenberg, expert editor of the Royal College of Psychiatrists’ new resource tool for patients with PTSD, said: “It’s a common misunderstanding that only people in the armed forces can develop PTSD – anyone exposed to a traumatic event is at risk. “It’s vital that anyone exposed to traumatic events is properly supported at work and home. Early and effective support can reduce the likelihood of PTSD and those affected should be able to access evidence-based treatment in a timely manner. Especially our NHS staff who are at increased risk as a result of this unprecedented crisis.” The college highlighted a poll of 709 intensive care staff across six NHS hospitals in England during the first wave of the pandemic that found two in five reported symptoms of PTSD – more than twice the rate found in military veterans with recent combat experience. It also pointed to research published in the journal BJPsych Open earlier this year, which found that 35% of Covid-19 patients who were put on a ventilator go on to experience extensive symptoms of PTSD. One patient, Dee, a 52-year-old from Bristol, who became severely ill with Covid-19 last year, said: “I experienced severe anxiety about my breathing problems. This included intrusive visions of not being able to breathe and of NHS staff in PPE suits taking me to hospital. “My sleep was badly affected and I started using alcohol as a coping mechanism. I have since tested positive for Covid-19 a second time, which has been extremely traumatising. I’m struggling but I’m not confident that I can get the help I need.”For the best part of a decade, Alejandra Ghersi Rodriguez has built her career as Arca on a kind of idiosyncratic, confrontational maximalism. Her signature style involves densely woven tapestries of warped electronics, seemingly designed to engulf the listener. The accompanying visuals are similarly extravagant, featuring Arca as a grotesque pillar-box red mutant, or with prosthetic appendages and flame-throwers for arms, or as a naked, androgynous being attached to the bonnet of a car with a series of terrifying-looking mechanical devices. The latter appeared accompanying Arca’s 2020 single @@@@@: a solitary track that was 62 minutes long. Last year, she released the first “official remixes” of her material: 100 of them, at once, all of the same song. Arca, you get the feeling, does not place a tremendous amount of store by the theory that less is more. Her latest release feels similarly overwhelming. She recently announced three new albums, follow-ups to 2020’s Grammy-nominated KiCk i, to be released simultaneously. It turns out there are actually four: KICK ii, KicK iii, kick iiii and kiCK iiiii (released as a surprise today) that between them amount to 47 songs and over 145 minutes of music. It’s a lot to take in, but that isn’t a shock given her previous form. What is surprising is that this is her most obviously pop-focused and straightforward music to date. It isn’t all like that. She bills KicK iii as “mutant club music” – the kind that seems designed to soundtrack that moment in the small hours when your indulgences overwhelm you, where everything blurs and spins out of control. It’s a restless, challenging listen – beats that sound like gunfire, churning and gibbering electronic noise. She distorts her vocals in ways that sometimes remind you of Prince as his female alter-ego Camille, or the helium samples of old hardcore, though they generally sound quite nightmarish. Señorita appears to be Arca’s oblique answer to the plea of one fan during a lockdown livestream, who wanted her to “MAKE VOGUE MUSIC PLEEEEEASE”: it recalls both Timbaland’s work with Missy Elliot and the fierce strain of 90s New York house embodied by Ride Committee’s Get Huh! or Tronco Traxx’s Walk for Me. At the other extreme, you could bill kiCK iiiii as Arca’s take on ambient music, although it follows Aphex Twin’s interpretation of the genre, where moments of blissed-out loveliness coexist with disquiet: Amrep’s long, slow descent into distorted darkness, for example; the sense of prickly unease that lurks behind Fireprayer’s twinkling melody. KICK ii, however, is based largely around reggaeton rhythms, which crossed over from Puerto Rican clubs to mainstream pop a long time ago. The album scrapes away the familiarity the sound has accrued over the years – the icy synths and distorted voices of Rakata; the frantic, panicky-sounding Tiro – something it also succeeds in doing to the voice of power-ballad queen Sia on Born Yesterday. It starts out floating her vocals, singing a very Sia-esque melody, over soft electronics, but gradually ratchets up the tension and chaos: the rhythms chatter, a relentless house kick drum fades in, a plethora of warped noises start to crowd her out. It’s a brilliant reimagining of 21st-century pop as a space in which the traditional and experimental can cohabit. kick iiii runs with that idea. Boquifloja sets Arca’s voice over a downtuned guitar riff that feels faintly grungy: its chorus is simultaneously beautiful and unnerving, the music slurring in and out of tune, the vocals glitching and stammering. Xenomorphgirl takes another familiar sound, Auto-Tuned sprechgesang vocals, and maroons them in an alien electronic landscape that keeps shifting from calming to threatening. Queer feels like pop music dreamed up by a science-fiction author to set the scene in a future world: the message of Planningtorock’s vocal is strident – “Queer power! Queer power!” – but the sound is both epic and decayed: it sounds like everything was recorded with the needles in the red, the beats very occasionally slipping out of time. It goes without saying that “pop” and “straightforward” are relative terms in Arca’s world: not a note of this music would make it within striking distance of Spotify’s Today’s Top Hits playlists, although said playlists might be more interesting if it did. The fact that Arca’s forays into pop arrive amid a torrent of more leftfield material possibly tells you something about her own vexed relationship with the mainstream. Before she was Arca, Rodriguez was Nuuro, a teenage alt-pop star in her native Venezuela, who found herself “betraying” her own identity by making more heteronormative music in pursuit of popularity. “I had to go on a pilgrimage and almost repent,” she told the Guardian a few years ago, explaining her subsequent approach. Clearly, this time around, any movement in a more commercial direction has to be conducted entirely on her own take-it-or-leave-it terms. Her version of pop is rich and imaginative enough that you should take it, or at least spend the time sifting through it. This week Alexis listened to Nilüfer Yanya: Stabilise Spindly electric guitars over a beat inspired by techstep drum and bass, a great chorus: what used to be called indie music reimagined, imaginatively.Improving the air that we breathe is an opportunity for our politicians to save lives and for each of us to have better health. In September the World Health Organization (WHO) revised its guidelines for air quality. Following this announcement, two studies have estimated the health benefits from implementing these guidelines across Europe. The first study came from the European Environment Agency. It found at least 177,300 early deaths in 2019 could have been avoided if EU countries met the new WHO guidelines. The UK would have saved 17,200 people in 2019, representing nearly half of the 35,700 pollution-related deaths that year. The second study was carried out by Barcelona’s Institute for Global Health. It focused on more than 1,000 European cities. These are home to 168 million people. Here, 109,000 early deaths could have been avoided in 2015 if the new guidelines had been met for particle pollution. Another 57,000 early deaths could have been prevented if the new guidelines for nitrogen dioxide were achieved. Prof Mark Nieuwenhuijsen, who led the European cities study, said: “Our cities are hotspots of air pollution, but also the places for the quickest and best ways to reduce it. Cities are generally more conscious of the problem and more agile in taking decisions. “We urgently need to shift private car use to public and active transportation. We can do this by introducing new urban models like the 15-minute city, superblocks or car-free neighbourhoods.” Much has been achieved already. Between 2005 and 2019, the health burden from breathing polluted air across the EU reduced by almost a quarter of a million early deaths a year. For the UK, the change was an additional 21,060 avoided deaths annually. The two studies show what could be achieved by more ambitious action. The benefits are not only a reduction in early deaths. Prof Bert Brunekreef from Utrecht University, a member of the WHO Guideline Development Group, said: “Even in relatively clean countries, exposure to air pollution leads to serious health effects. These include premature deaths, but there also effects occurring throughout life: from low birthweight and pneumonia among young children to asthma, heart disease and lung cancer later in life. “It will take major efforts, sustained over a decade or more, to achieve the new guidelines. We must remember that the previous WHO guideline for particle pollution was initially seen as unachievable, but it has now been reached, or is within reach, in many densely populated areas in the world.”Is Superman Circumcised?, a study of the superhero’s Jewish influences, has resoundingly won the competition to be named “oddest book title of the year”. The Diagram prize, which is run by The Bookseller magazine and voted for by the public, pitted six titles against each other this year, from Curves for the Mathematically Curious to Hats: A Very Unnatural History. Despite competition from second-placed The Life Cycle of Russian Things: From Fish Guts to Fabergé, Is Superman Circumcised? took 51% of the public vote to win the award. More than 11,000 people cast a vote in this year’s competition. The title, which follows in the footsteps of former winners including How to Avoid Huge Ships and The Big Book of Lesbian Horse Stories, sees author Roy Schwartz explore the creation of the “Mensch of Steel” by Jewish immigrants Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster. Schwartz argues that Superman’s origin story is based “on Moses, his strength on Samson, his mission on the golem, and his nebbish secret identity on themselves”, and that Krypton’s society is based on Jewish culture. The Bookseller’s managing editor Tom Tivnan said: “Following on from 2019’s champ, The Dirt Hole and its Variations, and 2020’s A Dog Pissing at the Edge of a Path: Animal Metaphors in Eastern Indonesian Society we’ve seen once again that Diagram voters are pulled to titles that are just wee bit naughty.” “Let me also raise a glass to Is Superman Circumcised? publisher McFarland &amp; Company which gets its first ever win on its inaugural shortlisting. But I have a sneaky feeling that with other sublime titles on its list like Mr Sulu Grabbed My Ass and Other Highlights from a Life in Comics, Novels, Television, Films and Video Games and Gag Reflections: Conquering a Fear of Vomit Through Exposure Therapy this will not be the last contribution by McFarland to the Diagram.” The inaugural Diagram prize went to Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on Nude Mice in 1978. The winner does not receive anything, but the nominator of the winning entry traditionally receives a “passable bottle of claret”. “The competition was stiff, but I’m glad I was able to rise to the challenge,” said Schwartz. “I’m sincerely honoured to receive this august literary prize. It’s a great reminder that even serious literature is allowed to be fun.”Police chiefs have urged victims of homophobic and transphobic abuse to come forward after figures showed the number of hate crimes soared to their highest monthly level since the beginning of the pandemic, after lockdown restrictions were eased at the beginning of summer. Reports of sexual orientation hate crimes recorded by UK police forces rose from an average of 1,456 a month from January to April this year to 2,211 on average from May to August. From January to August this year, at least 14,670 homophobic hate crime offences were recorded, compared with 11,841 in the same period of 2020 and 10,817 in 2019. During the same time period, police recorded 2,129 transphobic offences – well above the 1,606 offences in 2020 and 1,602 in 2019. Transphobic attacks also soared during that same period, from an average of 208 a month from January to April to 324 for May to August. England’s third national lockdown began on 6 January, with the “stay at home” order being lifted on 29 March. Campaigners say the real hate crime figures are likely to be higher due to under-reporting and that they were a “stark reminder” that LGBTQ+ people are “still at risk of attack because of who we are”. The data, released under freedom of information legislation, was obtained by the PA Media news agency from 37 of the UK’s 46 forces. They show hate crimes against the LGBTQ+ community were at their highest volume in June, the same month that saw the lifting of most legal restrictions on coronavirus rules. Police forces recorded 2,389 homophobic and 371 transphobic offences, the highest number of any calendar month in the past three years. This equates to about 80 homophobic and 12 transphobic offences a day, roughly double the 38 and six per day in January. Hate crime is defined by the Home Office as “any criminal offence which is perceived, by the victim or any other person, to be motivated by hostility or prejudice towards someone based on a personal characteristic”. LGBTQ+ organisations suggested there could be many reasons for the rise, including an increased number of people being out and about, and the reopening of the night-time economy. Same-sex couples were also more visible when out in public during periods of restrictions, according to Leni Morris, the chief executive of the LGBT anti-violence charity Galop. “What we saw in the pandemic was LGBT+ people experiencing forms of abuse and violence that were either exacerbated by the pandemic itself or caused by it,” she said. “We have some people who were victims of abuse and attacks because of being blamed for the pandemic itself, either because perpetrators thought the pandemic was an act of God – because of the existence of LGBT+ people – or because of the community’s association with the last major pandemic in people’s minds, and that’s the HIV Aids pandemic.” Increases in hate crime offences may reflect improvements in how they are recorded and greater public awareness of how to report offences, some forces suggested. The National Police Chiefs’ Council (NPCC), which represents the leadership of local forces, said officers will “always pursue action against perpetrators of hate crime where there is the evidence to do so”. But Deputy Chief Constable Mark Hamilton, the NPCC lead for hate crime, admitted that with more people moving their abuse online in recent years, it may not be possible to bring a charge if a suspect cannot be identified. Eloise Stonborough, an associate director of policy and research at Stonewall, described the rise as worrying. She said: “LGBTQ+ people have struggled throughout the pandemic, with many not having access to vital support networks and spaces during lockdowns. “It’s always worrying to see an increase in anti-LGBTQ+ hate crime, particularly at a time when our communities were more isolated than ever.”An elderly man who suffered a “medical episode” and died in November had been living in a caravan park near the Queensland border for several months, waiting for permission to enter. Queensland Health told the Courier-Mail the man, 78, had applied for a border exemption in early November, but he had subsequently cancelled his request. The Courier-Mail reported the man, his wife and daughter – who had been living in a caravan in the New South Wales town of Tenterfield – had been trying to cross the Queensland border to live with the man’s son. NSW police and ambulance paramedics were called to the caravan park in Tenterfield on 22 November. Police said members of the public attempted to revive him, but he died at the scene. One of the caravan park’s growing number of semi-permanent residents, mostly waiting to enter Queensland, told Guardian Australia he believed the man and his family had been waiting in Tenterfield for several months. It is unclear why the man applied for an exemption in early November, and why he subsequently withdrew that request about a week later. About the same time, Queensland announced its border reopening plan “to unite families” as the state reached double-dose vaccination targets. Queensland Health then wrote to some people who had been waiting for responses, advising them about the reopening plans and stating their cases would now be “closed” if they did not respond within seven days. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The state has refused to confirm how many people received such emails. Queensland Health has been contacted for additional comment. The department told the Courier-Mail that it offered condolences to the family. “We are unable to comment in depth on individual cases,” a spokesman said. “However, Queensland Health did receive an exemption application earlier this month. “Our exemptions team communicated with the applicant multiple times to progress his application. “The exemption application was closed at the request of the applicant. “We know border restrictions are inconvenient and can cause disruption to people’s lives and livelihoods. “We are doing everything possible to process exemption requests as quickly as we can.”Anthony Albanese will set an emissions reduction target of 43% by 2030 and boost the share of renewables in the national electricity market to 82% if Labor wins the coming federal election. The ALP leader has unveiled Labor’s most electorally risky policy commitment since the 2019 election defeat, declaring a more ambitious target would spur $76bn in investment and reduce average annual household power bills by $275 in 2025 and $378 in 2030. Guardian Australia revealed on Friday the shadow cabinet had signed off on a 43% target, which is lower than the 45% medium term target Labor promised at the 2019 election, but higher than the Morrison government’s Abbott-era commitment of a 26-28% cut on 2005 levels. The primary mechanism Labor will use to reduce emissions faster than current projections will be the Coalition’s existing safeguard mechanism. Improvements to that scheme are expected to deliver emissions reductions of 213Mt by 2030. Ahead of the Cop26 summit in Glasgow, the Business Council of Australia urged the Morrison government to overhaul the existing safeguard mechanism, including reducing baselines to drive an orderly transition to net zero by 2050. The government rejected that proposal, but Labor has adopted it as a core component of its policy. The safeguard mechanism currently applies to 215 of Australia’s heaviest polluters – businesses that emit more than 100,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide or equivalent greenhouse gasses. The shadow climate change minister, Chris Bowen, said Labor would overhaul the scheme but not extend coverage to new entities – and businesses will also be permitted to use offsets to achieve their emissions reductions. Bowen said Labor would not subject any Australian trade-exposed business to any more onerous climate regulation than their international competitors. In electricity, Labor will significantly upgrade transmission infrastructure to hasten the transition to renewables, invest in solar banks and install 400 community batteries. These measures are projected to see renewables make up 82% of power generation in Australia’s national electricity market by 2030, instead of 68% under current projections. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Albanese has dumped a 2019 pledge to introduce more efficient fuel standards to reduce transport emissions – a policy the Coalition falsely badged as a “war on the weekend”. But Labor will remove import tariffs and the fringe benefits tax from electric cars below the luxury car tax threshold to drive consumer take-up of electric vehicles, and will develop a more comprehensive EV strategy if it wins in 2022. The policy commitments were accompanied by modelling by market analysts Reputex. The analysis says Labor’s transition plan will generate 604,000 direct and indirect jobs compared to a business-as-usual scenario, include $24bn in new public investment, and drive 440Mt of emissions reductions between 2023 and 2030. The Morrison government limbered up for another scare campaign on the higher 2030 target before the policy was unveiled. Scott Morrison – who attempted unsuccessfully to boost his own 2030 target before being thwarted by the National party – declared on Friday that Labor’s 43% target was not a “safe” transition for workers in the Hunter Valley, or in the Queensland regional city of Gladstone, or for manufacturing jobs. While the major parties now agree Australia should reach net zero emissions by 2050, and current emissions projections indicate Australia will cut emissions by 35% by 2030, the Coalition will continue to use Labor’s higher medium-term ambition as a political weapon in seats in Queensland and regional New South Wales. Bowen told reporters in Canberra on Friday he expected the Coalition to lie about Labor’s policy. “These guys are liars, and they will continue to lie,” he said. “We are up for a good strong debate about Australia’s future”. Albanese said the pre-emptive strike showed the prime minister will just “attack anything”. He said it suggested the government was “out of puff”. “We see a government that doesn’t have a plan for today, let alone any concept of a vision for tomorrow,” the Labor leader said. The Greens leader Adam Bandt declared the new target meant Labor had “given up on climate”. Labor’s policy was largely welcomed by stakeholders. The Business Council of Australia said it was “sensible and workable”. The Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry said it was “encouraging to see updated 2030 targets that push the frame towards more ambitious action on climate change”. The Climate Council welcomed the target but urged Labor to strengthen ambition. “Right now, our country is the worst-performing of all developed countries when it comes to cutting greenhouse gas emissions and moving beyond fossil fuels like coal, oil and gas,” said Climate Council chief executive Amanda McKenzie. “Labor’s plan is a major improvement, but it will need to be strengthened significantly to genuinely tackle climate change,” she said. That sentiment was echoed by progressive think tank the Australia Institute. “An increased 2030 target is a good first step, however, the world has moved beyond first steps,” said Richie Merzian, climate and energy program director at the Australia Institute. “Australia needs a long-term plan to end fossil fuels.” A number of countries increased the ambition of their 2030 targets in the lead up to Cop26. Australia was the only developed country not to adjust its 2030 commitment ahead of the Glasgow conference. Labor’s pre-election commitment compares with 40% in South Korea, 40-45% in Canada, 50-52% in the United States, and 46-50% in Japan.Top story: Win may ease Johnson leadership jitters Hello, I’m Warren Murray and here is as much as I’ve prepared to tell you. The Conservatives have held the safe seat of Old Bexley and Sidcup with a reduced majority, in the first in a series of closely watched parliamentary byelections. Louie French was elected as the new MP, replacing the well-liked former cabinet minister James Brokenshire, who died in October after suffering lung cancer. French won 11,189 votes, ahead of the closest challenger, Labour’s Daniel Francis, who got 6,711. The result will help calm jitters within the party about Boris Johnson’s leadership. However, there are further byelections to follow. Later in December the Tories will try to hold North Shropshire, vacated by Owen Paterson after the disgraced former MP was found to have committed an egregious breach of paid lobbying rules. A byelection will also be held in Southend West after the murder of its MP, Sir David Amess – however, the Conservatives are expected to be the only major party to contest it as Labour and the Liberal Democrats plan not to field a candidate out of respect. * * * Boost for boosters – Covid booster shots can dramatically strengthen immunity, according to a UK study. Among participants in the research, booster recipients had immunity between eight and 25 times higher than the unboosted. Black and south Asian people need to get their Covid jabs, doctors have urged, after data revealed hospitalisations and deaths are higher in those groups despite infection being more prevalent among white people. NHS England meanwhile is forecasting there will be 230,000 new cases of post-traumatic stress disorder as a result of the pandemic. It is based on the effects of the pandemic on domestic abuse victims, children and young people, relatives of Covid survivors, health and care workers, and those who have lost friends and family. In global Covid news, multiple Omicron cases have been detected in New York as Joe Biden announced a nationwide booster campaign and tighter restrictions on international travel. Follow latest developments at our live blog. * * * Lords complaint over Tory peer – The Conservative peer Michelle Mone has been accused of sending a racist message to a man by WhatsApp in June 2019 during a disagreement following a fatal yacht crash off the coast of Monaco. Screenshots were sent to the House of Lords commissioner for standards as part of a complaint about Mone. The commissioner, Martin Jelley, said he could not investigate because the Lords code of conduct applies only to members “in the course of their parliamentary duties and activities”. Contacted by the Guardian, a representative of the Tory peer initially said: “Baroness Mone is 100% not a racist. Baroness Mone and her husband have built over 15 schools in Africa in the past three years.” Her lawyers later provided another statement in which they said Mone had “no access” to the messages and no “detailed memory of them”. * * * ‘Massive impact’ – Teacher absences are the biggest barrier to children recovering the learning lost during the pandemic, according to head teachers in England, as new data showed that shortages in key subjects such as physics are becoming worse. More than half of the 1,000 senior teachers in England surveyed by the Key – a support service for school leaders – said they had insufficient staff due to absences, caused by Covid and illnesses, to help pupils fill the gaps arising from school closures. “Staff absences are having a massive impact,” one respondent said. “Children learn best with their own teacher, not supply teachers.” Three-quarters of those surveyed said their pupils were “behind” or “significantly behind” compared with previous years. * * * Sanction Pegasus makers, EU told – Dozens of human rights organisations including Amnesty have called on the EU to impose global sanctions on NSO Group. They cite allegations reported by the Guardian and others that NSO’s Pegasus software was used to hack the devices of six Palestinian human rights activists. It follows publication of the Pegasus Project, which exposed its use to target journalists, human rights activists and other members of civil society. NSO has said that technology, which has been sold to government clients around the world, is only meant to be used against serious criminals and terrorists. It has denied many of the allegations and has said it investigates credible claims of abuse of its software. The Biden administration has added NSO Group to a commerce department list that in effect blacklists the company in the US. * * * Heroic effort – Is Superman Circumcised?, a study of the superhero’s Jewish influences, has resoundingly won the competition to be named “oddest book title of the year”. The Diagram prize, run by The Bookseller magazine and voted for by the public, pitted six titles against each other, from Curves for the Mathematically Curious to Hats: A Very Unnatural History. Second placed this year was The Life Cycle of Russian Things: From Fish Guts to Fabergé. Previous winners have included How to Avoid Huge Ships and The Big Book of Lesbian Horse Stories. Today in Focus podcast: Virgil Abloh, more than streetwear This week, Virgil Abloh’s final menswear collection for Louis Vuitton debuted at Miami Art Basel – a few days after Abloh’s sudden death at 41 from cancer. The son of Ghanaian immigrant parents to the US found fame as Kanye West’s creative director, and redefined luxury fashion to include chic hoodies and highly covetable sneakers. Lauren Cochrane tells Nosheen Iqbal that Abloh’s influence can be seen in the way all of us dress. British fashion designer Samuel Ross says Abloh pushed back against the “streetwear” label and wanted his creative legacy to extend well beyond fashion. Lunchtime read: Into the Clooneyverse He acts, he directs, he even does the washing-up – is he the perfect man? George Clooney discusses with Hadley Freeman marriage, raising twins, turning down $35m for a day’s work, and his new film, The Tender Bar. Sport Cristiano Ronaldo’s second goal of the night sealed a 3-2 win for Manchester United against Arsenal after Emile Smith Rowe’s bizarre opener, scored with David de Gea lying on the turf after being injured by Fred, had given the visitors to Old Trafford the lead. Ralf Rangnick, United’s interim manager, was in the stands to see the victory, after which caretaker manager Michael Carrick announced his departure from the club. At Tottenham Hotspur Stadium, an own goal from Sergi Canós and Son Heung-min’s second-half effort secured Spurs a 2-0 win over Brentford. China has attacked the Women’s Tennis Association’s boycott in response to the treatment of Peng Shuai, as two other major international tennis associations steered clear of the subject of future events in a market worth billions of dollars. Lewis Hamilton has said he is not comfortable competing in Saudi Arabia given its repressive laws regarding the LGBTQ+ community. Henrik Stenson and Luke Donald are the leading contenders to captain Europe in the 2023 Ryder Cup, with Lee Westwood’s move to withdraw his name from the running leaving the European Tour with a decision that is far from straightforward. A former amateur rider who says that she was left in tears in a weighing room after fellow jockey Robbie Dunne accused her of “cutting him up” in a race has told a disciplinary hearing that Dunne’s account of the incident was “incredible”. Adam Gemili and Laviai Nielsen have been removed from UK Athletics’ world-class programme after opting to stay with their coach Rana Reider. Chris Woakes has insisted England’s and Australia’s recent off-field scandals will be off-limits when it comes to sledging out in the middle during the Ashes. The organisers of the Champions Cup have urgently relaxed registration rules to help the clubs caught in travel and quarantine chaos following the rise of the Omicron variant. And Chelsea forward Erin Cuthbert has spoken to the Guardian about her route to the top from a “rough area of Scotland”, last season’s struggles and taking revenge on a junior coach. Business The $75bn takeover of Cambridge-based chip designer Arm by its rival Nvidia is in jeopardy after US regulators followed the UK and Europe in moving to block “the largest semiconductor chip merger in history”. The US federal trade commission said: “This proposed deal would distort Arm’s incentives in chip markets and allow the combined firm to unfairly undermine Nvidia’s rivals.” This morning the FTSE is flagged to open higher. The pound is on $1.329 and €1.176 at time of writing. The papers Lead story in our Guardian print edition today is “Blow for Starmer as biggest union backer cuts funding for Labour”. Unite’s new general secretary, Sharon Graham, said it would still pay £1m in affiliation fees to Labour but “there’s a lot of other money that we use from our political fund where, actually, I’m not sure we’re getting the best value for it … Labour needs to talk about workers, needs to defend workers and needs to defend communities.” Len McCluskey, the previous leader of Unite, was a vehement supporter of Jeremy Corbyn and had already reduced its financial commitment to Labour since Starmer replaced him. The Mirror has “Make your mind up over Christmas” as Tory ministers give contradictory party advice. Several front pages today, including our own, have a picture of Arthur Labinjo-Hughes whose father and stepmother have been found guilty of killing him in a “campaign of appalling cruelty”, two months after social workers found no evidence of safeguarding concerns. It makes horrifying, heartbreaking reading. “A bruise for every day of lockdown” is the Telegraph’s headline. “Why didn’t they save Arthur?” asks the Daily Mail and the Sun agrees, asking: “Did they learn nothing from Baby P?” The Express has “Little Arthur, the boy who never stood a chance” – its main story on the front is “Boris blasts bah humbug cancel Christmas brigade”. The Times leads with that booster story: “Jab results boost hopes of beating Omicron”, saying the third shot gives immunity a “massive lift” according to the results. The i has “Deleted: NHS Covid app use is falling, raising fears over Omicron”. “Maskless forced to pay up” – fines and ejections from public transport in the Metro. And the top story in the Financial Times is “Saudi Arabia agrees to raise oil supply after US charm offensive”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendAustralians have been named the heaviest drinkers in the world in a survey after spending more time drunk in 2020 than any other nation. The international survey found Australians drank to the point of drunkenness an average of 27 times a year, almost double the global average of 15. Almost a quarter of Australians reported feeling regret for becoming intoxicated. The Global Drug Survey (GDS) asked more than 32,000 people from 22 countries what their drug and alcohol consumption was last year. The authors note that the GDS is not a prevalence study, as the majority of participants tend to be young and the findings are not representative of the wider population. On average, Australians drank alcohol in line with the global average of two nights a week, and became heavily drunk about once every two weeks. The French topped that metric, drinking around three times a week. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Australian participants also tripled the global average on seeking emergency care for their drinking (3.9% compared with the global average of 1.2%). The Foundation for Alcohol Research and Education chief executive, Caterina Giorgi, said the statistics were “concerning”, and that a clear picture of the impact of harmful alcohol use during the pandemic was only just emerging. “Australia tops the world in both the number of times people report getting drunk and in seeking emergency medical treatment for alcohol … Both of those indicators suggest people are drinking at fairly risky levels,” she said. “We’ve seen a steep increase, which has sustained for calls for help to drug and alcohol hotlines, and increased alcohol involvement with family violence callouts. “There’s an emerging picture [that] there is a significant proportion of people who are drinking at riskier levels … to cope with stress and anxiety. Those habits are hard to undo as we continue to live in this Covid environment.” Giorgi said there had been a $3.3bn increase in alcohol sales into people’s homes in 2020 – a trend continuing in 2021. “In such an uncertain time, there’s been a sustained change in the way alcohol is sold. Companies have been aggressively marketing, and using Covid and preying on anxieties to sell their products,” she said. “We have this perfect storm for an increase in alcohol harm and we’re only just starting to see that.” A joint Turning Point and Monash University study found ambulance attendances for alcohol-related harm increased by 9% in Victoria last year, at the same time the state was under Covid restrictions. “We’ve seen people’s mental health suffer greatly throughout this pandemic and especially when we have had strict measures in place that have limited our normal activities and connection with support networks,” the Turning Point executive clinical director, Prof Dan Lubman, said. “Drinking alcohol at the end of the day has often been promoted as a reward and a way of coping, with ready access to alcohol in stores and through online delivery throughout the pandemic.” Commonwealth Bank data shows total spending on alcohol increased in March 2020, possibly due to the stockpiling of alcohol during Covid restrictions, a trend that has continued. Global Drug Survey researcher Dr Monica Barratt said Australia’s high rate of drunkenness might be related to most of the country avoiding Covid lockdowns in 2020. Bar Victoria, most states and territories only went through short and sharp lockdowns, with relatively few cases or deaths, allowing hospitality venues to remain open and events to continue. “This may have something to do with Australia being the highest-ranked country for frequency of getting drunk,” Barratt told the Latch. Interestingly, while New Zealanders became intoxicated fewer times than almost any other country in the survey, getting drunk about 10 times a year, they drank more frequently than Australians, around three times a week. Danes and Finns spent the most time drinking to excess after Australians, tied at 23.8 times a year. Americans came in third place, becoming intoxicated an average of 23 times in 2020, followed by the British (22.5 times). Frequency of being drunk – top 10 countries 1 Australia 2 Denmark 3 Finland 4 US 5 UK 6 Canada 7 Ireland 8 France 9 Sweden 10 Netherlands If you need help, head to FARE.org.au or call the National Alcohol and Other Drug Hotline on 1800 250 015. Take part in the 2022 Global Drug Survey here. • This article was amended on 31 December 2021 to add detail about the parameters of the study, and note that it is not intended to indicate prevalence across the wider population.Leading voting rights activists came away frustrated and alarmed from what they hoped would be a breakthrough meeting last month at the White House to discuss a strategy to pass federal voting rights legislation. There were high hopes for the 15 November teleconference between the White House and the leaders of the hundreds of groups that comprise the Declaration for American Democracy (Dfad), many of which have been campaigning hard for federal voting rights legislation. Kamala Harris had agreed to stop by the meeting. After Joe Biden gave a strong endorsement in late October of altering the Senate filibuster rule for voting rights legislation, the activists hoped that the White House would lay out a course for getting the stalled bills through the US Senate. Instead, multiple people who attended the meeting said they didn’t hear any kind of plan from the White House. The vice-president, who is leading the White House’s voting rights effort, arrived midway through the meeting and read just over six minutes of prepared remarks and then left without taking any questions, according to people who attended. White House staffers stayed on the call and answered three questions from participants. “They did not lay out a strategy for getting this done,” said one person who attended, who requested anonymity to discuss a private meeting. Cliff Albright, a co-founder of Black Voters Matter, also attended the meeting and said it felt like a “check-the-box kind of a call”. “Nothing substantive came out of it,” he said. “It was very frustrating.” A third participant was also critical of the way the White House handled the meeting. “She said her five-minute remarks, which were the ‘same-old, same old’, and then she left”, said the person, who also requested that their name not be disclosed. “We had hoped going into that meeting that after the president’s comments at the town hall that there would have been some sort of strategic shift, some sort of internal tactical thinking and planning done. It was, from that meeting, clear that no work had been done legislatively,” the person added. “They seemed pretty eager to talk about anything other than legislation.” There is dismay that the senate could recess before the end of the year without passing voting rights bills, making itharder to implement sweeping voting changes ahead of fast-approaching primaries for the 2022 midterm elections. Alarm has escalated as Republicans in several crucial states have enacted new distorted electoral maps that will entrench their majorities for the next decade. Chuck Schumer, the Democratic leader in the Senate, has said voting rights are a priority and his caucus is trying to find a way around the filibuster. But the plan remains unclear. Harris has held meetings with voting advocates in South Carolina, Georgia and Michigan over the last few months to keep a spotlight on the issue. She has said she has spoken with Republican senators about a path forward on voting rights. “The vice-president and this administration remain focused on passing the Freedom to Vote Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act. Senate Republicans have voted against even debating these bills, but the president and vice-president know that inaction and obstruction are not options,” deputy White House press secretary Sabrina Singh told the Guardian. “Nothing comes without a fight, which is why the president and vice-president are working with Speaker Pelosi, leader Schumer, and advocates to protect our democracy and the fundamental right to vote,” she added, referring to the most senior Democrats in the House and Senate. Albright said he asked staffers how the administration would, for example, halt excessive gerrymandering, but the response “just wasn’t satisfactory”. “The worst situation to be in is to have responsibility without authority. And right now that is the definition of her [Harris’] voting rights portfolio. She’s got responsibility, but she does not have the authority to deal with the elephant in the room, the filibuster,” he said. “She cannot go any farther out on the issue than her boss, Potus, is willing to go. And he has not yet demonstrated that he’s willing to go as far as he needs to.” Lisa Gilbert, executive vice-president of the advocacy group Public Citizen, who helped organize the meeting, said she was encouraged by Harris’ attendance. “The vice-president doesn’t attend many coalition meetings. It’s actually a signifier, or at least we hope it is, of greater engagement from the White House, and the seriousness that the vice-president takes it with.” Activists have been pressuring Biden for months to use his bully pulpit to more aggressively push for the voting rights bills. Demonstrators have been regularly convening outside the White House and getting arrested. “The frustration is not tied to that meeting. There has been a concern all year long that goes to the president and the White House with the failure to treat this existential threat as a top priority for the administration,” said Fred Wertheimer, the founder and president of Democracy 21, who also attended the meeting. Jana Morgan, the director of Dfad, also said she was happy Harris attended the meeting and anticipated “increased engagement” from the White House. In July, Biden gave a speech in Philadelphia that called for passing voting rights legislation, but didn’t say anything about the filibuster. Republicans have used the rule to block voting bills four separate times this year, in a chamber split 50-50 with the Democrats. But then in October, Biden more explicitly endorsed changing the filibuster on voting rights “and maybe more”. But Biden urged patience, saying that pressuring reluctant Democrats on the filibuster could make it more difficult to pass other important pieces of legislation. One of the participants in the meeting said staffers conveyed a similar message, saying voting rights legislation would have to wait until after the Senate dealt with the Build Back Better bill. “We know what it’s like when the president treats something as a priority…But we know that we haven’t seen that when it comes to voting rights,” Wertheimer said.A federal grand jury investigating Donald Trump’s former attorney Sidney Powell has uncovered evidence that Powell filed false incorporation papers with the state of Texas for a non-profit she heads, Defending the Republic, according to sources close to the investigation. In the incorporation papers, Powell – who filed lawsuits across the US questioning the 2020 election result which Trump lost to Joe Biden – listed two men whom she said served with her on the organization’s board of directors, even though neither one of them gave Powell permission to do so. As a private attorney, Powell, in the service of Trump, has gained notoriety as she has increasingly embraced implausible conspiracy theories such as that the FBI had attempted to frame Trump to drive him from office, and that Joe Biden’s election as president of the United States was illegitimate. Her lawsuits to overturn the outcome of the 2020 presidential election have all failed, often met with scathing criticism from judges who have overseen them, one of whom sanctioned her for alleged ethical misconduct and referred her to the Texas state bar for investigation. Powell did not respond to multiple requests for comment for this story. The broader federal criminal inquiry into Powell, led by the United States attorney for the District of Columbia, has since last fall been examining allegations of fundraising and financial fraud by Powell in the running of the group, according to documents reviewed by the Guardian. Incorporation papers Powell filed with the Texas secretary of state on 1 December 2020 for Defending the Republic (DTR), listed only three people as comprising the group’s initial board: Powell herself, the Georgia attorney Linn Wood; and Brannon Castleberry, a Beverly Hills-based businessman and consultant. The federal grand jury has reviewed extensive documentation that neither Wood nor Castleberry ever consented to serve on DTR’s board. One of the two men has said he wasn’t notified, even after the fact, that Powell had named him as a board member. The grand jury is investigating whether Powell misrepresented the makeup of her board in an effort to attract more donors. The federal investigators are also trying to determine whether Powell diverted money from DTR for her own personal use. They are also looking into whether Powell defrauded donors by falsely claiming their donations to DTR were used to finance lawsuits Powell filed to overturn the results of the 2020 presidential election. Powell has said the mission of DTR has been to “protect the integrity of elections in the United States”, but to do so required that “millions of dollars must be raised”. But investigators have only found a single instance in which DTR funds were used to finance one of Powell’s numerous high-profile election cases. In testimony given in a civil defamation lawsuit, Brandon Johnson, an attorney for DTR, confirmed that Wood and Castleberry were listed in the non-profit’s Texas incorporation records as the group’s only other two original board members besides Powell. During a sworn deposition in the case, Johnson testified: “That’s an important area to clarify. Apparently, the paperwork was corrected. Neither Brannon Castleberry nor Linn Wood served as directors. This was subsequently corrected.” Johnson further testified that neither Wood nor Castleberry had ever served DTR in any other capacity. Johnson’s testimony was given in a defamation lawsuit brought against Powell by Eric Coomer, a former Dominion Voting Systems employee, against whom Powell made baseless and since throroughly debunked allegations, claiming that Coomer had conspired with antifa, the amorphous and leaderless anti-fascist movement, to steal the 2020 presidential election from Trump. Ironically, the federal investigation is also looking into whether Powell improperly used funds from DTR to defend herself in defamation cases brought against her by both Coomer and Dominion. Powell’s misrepresentations regarding her board are strikingly similar to other incidents during that same period. The Guardian disclosed on Thursday that Powell had also named several individuals as plaintiffs or co-counsel in her election-related cases without their permission. Several said that they only found out that Powell had named them once the cases were already filed. During this same time-span, Powell also named several other lawyers – albeit, with their permission in those instances – as co-counsel in her election-related cases, despite the fact that they played little or no role in bringing or litigating those cases. A former consultant to DTR told the Guardian that Powell’s actions in lying about who was on her board, who were co-counsel or plaintiffs in her cases, and also exaggerating the nominal role of others assisting her, was to convey the appearance to potential donors that she was at the helm of an “elite strike force” who would overturn the results of the 2020 presidential election.Start The Riverside, Aymestrey Distance 9 miles Time 5 hours Total ascent 475 metres Difficulty Moderate Route notes osmaps.ordnancesurvey.co.uk Google map of the route Times have taken a turn for the tranquil in Mortimer Country. Wind back a millennia and this northernmost corner of Herefordshire, where the county cosies up to Shropshire and Wales, was the realm of border battles, brawny castles and ruthless Marcher lords, dominated by the Mortimers, one of the most powerful Norman earldoms. But now it is green, serene and slumbersome, a place of quiet, black-and-white timbered hamlets and tree-frilled river valleys that flush variously with snowdrops, bluebells, ramsons and autumnal flames. The 30-mile Mortimer Trail cuts a diagonal dash across this old frontierland, linking Ludlow (main seat of the Mortimers from the early 14th century) and Kington, to the south-west on Offa’s Dyke. Roughly midway is the village of Aymestrey, where you’ll find the fine parish church of St John the Baptist and St Alkmund, with its exquisitely carved rood screen, and the equally fine Riverside Inn. Sitting alongside the rippling Lugg – home to otters and lampreys – the Riverside has been serving travellers since the 16th century. In 2018 it scooped Visit England’s Best Tourism Pub award, a recognition of the significant role it plays in bringing people to the area. They come for the quality food and drink: chef-patron Andy Link was raised on a Herefordshire farm and has maintained strong connections to the area’s producers, ensuring as many of his ingredients – from rapeseed oil to rare-breed beef – are as local as possible. And they come for the walks – just ask, and a walking booklet can be borrowed from behind the bar. Which is exactly how I come to be setting off from the pub on a bright autumn morning, booklet in hand, homemade fudge in my pocket, ready for a day on the trails. Actually, I am also fudging my walk, combining a few different paths to try to hit all the interesting-looking bits. This takes me first across dew-sparkled grass and into Pokehouse Wood. “Poke” derives from puck, the mischievous sprites alleged to haunt these trees and lead travellers awry – a threat deemed so serious in these parts that a local man once put up a stipend to pay for the church bells to be rung for an hour at sunset each day to guide any lost souls to safety. Ultimately though, mankind proved the bigger danger. With the Lugg gurgling away beyond the bracken and hazel, I find the remains of a quarry where, in 1903, labourer William Haywood murdered his wife, Jane, after she tried unsuccessfully to persuade him to come home from the pub; he was apprehended below Pokehouse Wood, heading towards Aymestrey, pushing Jane’s limp and battered body in a wheelbarrow. He was the last man to be hanged in Herefordshire. As I navigate Pokehouse and then School House Wood, I see no ghosts or fairies, only dog-walkers and a runner, enjoying the soft, wide trail with its views south across Herefordshire’s gentle rise and roll. It is a route that leads to Croft Castle, founded in the 11th century and now in the care of the National Trust. A phalanx of twisted sweet chestnuts lines the way down to the fortified manor and walled gardens; there’s a fee to enter the grounds but not to use the public rights of way. So I continue into Fishpool Dingle – how could you not, with a name like that? This tight, secretive valley was once a hive of activity, dotted with quarries, lime kilns and a chain of ponds connected by slipways that were stocked with carp and trout for the castle’s kitchen. In the 19th century, it was redesigned to be officially “picturesque” – that popular Georgian fancy – with scattered follies and conscious landscaping. The result is a collage of tucked-away grottoes, industrial leftovers, squirrel-scampered beech and enormous Douglas firs reaching up to 40 metres. Captain James Croft (1907-1941), 11th Baronet of Croft Castle, had the right idea: he’s buried at the head of the valley, well placed to enjoy the view for eternity. It is by his mossy grave that I veer north, for an even loftier lookout. At the top of the rise, looming ahead at around 300 metres, is Croft Ambrey, an iron age hillfort that was occupied from the sixth century BC until Roman times. I trace the outer northern edge and find the perfect picnic bench, exposed to the wind but gazing past soaring Scots pines, to the Black Mountains of Wales, shadow-marked even under blue skies. I hop over a stile into the hill fort’s inner sanctum, its ramparts still visible and a few lumps and bumps suggesting the village once contained within – archaeological excavations have unearthed evidence of granaries and sheep pens. The panorama from the highest point is superb; the buzzard circling and mewing above seems to agree. From here I fall in step with the Mortimers, picking up part of the eponymous trail to descend through woods stippled with blackberries and bracken on the turn to gold. Invisible birds sing and the neat-ranked, straight-backed trees of the plantation applaud them in the wind. Eventually I return to the closer confines of Pokehouse Wood – nearly home – when I see a flash of something in the thicket’s darkest innards. A startled deer’s retreating rump, perhaps? Or a puck up to his tricks, trying to lead me astray, to keep me away from the pub’s warm bar, fillet steak and glass of fruity malbec. He will have to try harder than that. The pub Not so long ago, the Riverside was called the Crown and was a drinkers’ pub, popular with local farmers. These days, it’s famed for its food, which is sustainably sourced and as local as possible. Link and manager George Parkes spent lockdown expanding the kitchen garden and adding a pigsty, so more produce can be grown on site. Braised beef is Link’s speciality; also expect truffle chips, creative veg and homemade breads and ice-creams. A woodburner keeps the informal, oak-floored dining rooms cosy in winter; tables among the terraced flowerbeds make a lovely summer spot. The rooms There was no bridge over the Lugg in 1600, so sheep drovers and other wayfarers would stop overnight before fording the river. There are still four guest rooms in the old, timber-framed part of the inn. There are two suites in a stone annex plus – most fun – three newer garden rooms, up towards the veg patch. With their mind-your-head doorways and conical roofs, these feel like hobbit houses, though are spacious inside. Mine – Beechenbank – has a freestanding bath, a plush king size bed and an exceptionally cosy feel. Doubles from £90 B&amp;B, riversideaymestrey.co.ukAbu Zubaydah, the Guantánamo detainee who was tortured close to death by the CIA and who has been held without charge by the US for nearly 20 years, has petitioned a federal court for his release on grounds that America’s wars in Afghanistan and with al-Qaida are over. In a filing with the US district court in Washington DC, Zubaydah’s lawyers argue that recent White House declarations that the armed conflict in Afghanistan is over – combined with the complete destruction of the original al-Qaida group that carried out 9/11 – have removed any remaining legal justification for keeping him captive. The motion calls for his immediate release, describing Zubaydah’s treatment over the past two decades as a “parade of horribles”. At the heart of the new habeas corpus push for the detainee’s freedom is Zubaydah’s status as a so-called “enemy combatant”. Under the 2001 Authorisation for Use of Military Force (AUMF), passed by Congress days after 9/11, the then president, George W Bush, was given the power to pursue those behind the terrorist attacks as part of the war on terror. But as the new filing points out, Zubaydah has never been charged with involvement in 9/11 and he was not even a member of al-Qaida, as the US government has conceded. Rather, he was accused of offenses that took place in Afghanistan as part of a war that has now officially been concluded. A day after the chaotic evacuation of Afghanistan was completed in August, the current president, Joe Biden, said: “My fellow Americans, the war in Afghanistan is now over.” The defense secretary, Lloyd Austin, has countered that while the war in Afghanistan may be over, military operations against al-Qaida are ongoing. In court statements, Austin says that troops and weapons are still being deployed in “military operations against al-Qaida and associated forces … throughout the Middle East and Africa”. Zubaydah’s lawyers insist that the new emphasis on al-Qaida as the justification for keeping him in Guantánamo is also based on legal chicanery. Al-Qaida, they point out, was never specifically mentioned in the AUMF under which Zubaydah is being detained. They also highlight the fact that all the top al-Qaida leaders involved in 9/11, including Osama bin Laden himself, have either been killed or captured with the sole exception of Bin Laden’s successor, Ayman al-Zawahiri, who some suggest has died of illness. “They are saying that if there’s conflict with al-Qaida anywhere in the world, in Africa or elsewhere, then the war continues and Guantánamo detainees will be locked up forever,” the lead lawyer in Zubaydah’s habeas petition, Mark Denbeaux, told the Guardian. “That means that detention without trial, without hearings or justification, with detainees held in isolation and no access to the public or their families – all that will never end.” Denbeaux added: “The war is over. How can you detain enemy combatants when there’s no combat going on?” Denbeaux described the Zubaydah case as “the perfect storm that exposed the evil behavior driving the global war on terror and the torture program in particular”. Zubaydah, a Palestinian aged 50 whose name at birth was Zayn al-Abidin Muhammad Husayn, was the first terror suspect to be captured by the CIA months after 9/11. For more than four years he was held in CIA black sites in Thailand and Poland and subjected to some of the most brutal torture ever carried out by the US state. Zubaydah became the guinea pig for a program devised by two psychologists under contract to the CIA euphemistically known as “enhanced interrogation” but widely denounced as torture. He was waterboarded 83 times in one month, held for hours in the nude with his hands shackled above his head, deprived of sleep for days at a time, and stuffed into a closed box resembling a coffin. The devastating details of Zubaydah’s treatment are back under the public spotlight because the US supreme court is considering a state secrets case that was prompted by his time within a CIA black site in Poland. Though the case has no bearing on Zubaydah’s habeas petition, observers were struck by the fact that for the first time supreme court justices directly referred to what he endured as “torture”. Several of the justices also expressed astonishment that Zubaydah was still in Guantánamo without charge despite clear supreme court rulings that prohibit such indefinite detention. In a series of critical rulings, the nation’s highest court has barred detainees from being held perpetually without checks and balances, granted them the right to petition a judge in federal court, and stated that their “detention may last no longer than active hostilities” continue in the particular armed conflict in which they were deemed to be enemy combatants. Zubaydah first challenged his imprisonment in the Washington DC federal district court in August 2008, just weeks after the supreme court had granted enemy combatants that right under habeas corpus in its ruling Boumediene v Bush. Habeas corpus requires the state to go before a judge and either press charges against an individual or set them free, yet 13 years later the case is still unsettled and Zubaydah remains locked up without charge. In October, during oral arguments in the state secrets case, Justice Stephen Breyer said that the supreme court had ruled that the government could hold Guantánamo detainees while “active combat operations against Taliban fighters … are going on in Afghanistan. Well, they’re not any more. So why is [Zubaydah] there?” Breyer later added: “I don’t understand why he is still there after 14 years.”Pick of the week Welcome to Earth Will Smith’s grandmother used to tell him: “All the best things live on the other side of fear.” It’s not the kind of quote you’d get from a David Attenborough documentary but this series, in which the actor explores the Earth’s extremities, isn’t without charm. In the opening episode, the source of Smith’s disquiet is a journey to the bottom of the ocean in a submersible. What he finds down there is magnificently strange: naturally occurring psychedelia such as the sea cucumber (AKA the headless chicken monster) and bioluminescence. Smith’s insights basically consist of gasps of awe and squeals of delight but, in the circumstances, that’s understandable. Disney+, from Wednesday 8 December *** The Great The scurrilous and irreverent historical drama returns for a second season. Newly empowered and pregnant Catherine (Elle Fanning) is grappling with both her new responsibilities and her old domestic quandaries. “You honestly can’t think that you can run Russia without bloodshed?” asks her recently deposed husband Peter (Nicholas Hoult). It’s the question set to dominate the season and it’s doubtful that Catherine’s cause will be helped by the breezy arrival of her scheming mother Joanna Elisabeth (the reliably brilliant Gillian Anderson). Great fun. StarzPlay, from Sunday 4 December *** Mariah Carey’s Magical Christmas Special There are tastefully understated ways of doing festive TV – but don’t expect to see any of them on display in the Queen of Christmas’ maximalist extravaganza. Instead, a loose narrative about saving Christmas spirit is the pretext for lashings of tinsel, snow, famous friends, chestnuts roasting over open fires and a spot of product placement, too – Carey launches her new single Fall in Love at Christmas with collaborators Khalid and Kirk Franklin. Ariana Grande, Jennifer Hudson and Snoop Dogg also make cameos. Festive, to a frankly exhausting degree. Apple TV+, from Saturday 4 December *** Voir Director David Fincher has found a productive home on Netflix, allowing him to branch out into TV with Mindhunter and hosting his Oscar-nominated celebration of cinema, Mank. This new series sees him – and an elite group of fellow cineastes including Walter Chaw, Drew McWeeny, Taylor Ramos, Sasha Stone and Tony Zhou – going deep on the art of film. Over the course of six very personal episodes, Voir aims to offer an emotional treatise on cinematic appreciation – more a love letter to its enduring power than a linear history of the medium. Netflix, from Monday 6 December *** Canada’s Drag Race Anniversary Extravaganza The Drag Race universe continues to expand. This hour-long celebration looks back on an exciting year as all 12 contestants from the contest return to recall the triumphs, the traumas, the laughs and the tears. Presiding over it all will be the reigning queen Priyanka and under her guidance expect an informal awards ceremony. Who brought the greatest looks? Which was the most memorable elimination? And who did the best lip-syncing? All will be revealed. Everyone, as the saying goes, is staying “true, north, strong and fierce”. BBC iPlayer, from Friday 10 December *** The Expanse A concluding season for the sci-fi epic in which humans have colonised the solar system. The show has never been short of ambition and its themes of resource depletion and the limits of expansion feel more relevant than ever. It also manages smaller, more intimate narratives; for example, the revived relationship between Holden and Naomi. Human and Martian relations are explored, too, via Bobbie and Avasarala. And the colonisers’ dilemma – whether to subjugate or collaborate – will remain a central thread. Amazon Prime Video, from Friday 10 December *** How to Ruin Christmas The lively South African comedy returns for more festive antics. Rebellious Tumi Sello has plans for Christmas and they don’t particularly involve spending time with her family. However, an untimely death sees her caught in the middle of two factions and guilt-tripped into arranging a funeral. Unfortunately, it clashes with an important wedding anniversary and the festive season. The bad-taste comedy potential of funerals is milked mercilessly but it crackles with madcap energy and Busi Lurayi as Sello is dryly funny and a star in the making.When Annebella Pollen was 17, she left behind her strict Catholic upbringing for the life of a new-age hippy, living in a caravan and frolicking naked among the standing stones of Devon, while earning a living by modelling for life-drawing classes. That early experience, followed by a relationship with a bric-a-brac dealer, shaped her later life as an art historian. “I’m very interested in things that are culturally illegitimate,” says Pollen, who now teaches at the University of Brighton. “A lot of my research has been looking at objects that are despised.” Foraging trips with her partner to car-boot sales alerted her to a rich seam of 20th-century nudist literature that is still emerging from the attics of middle England: magazines whose wholesome titles – Sun Bathing Review or Health &amp; Efficiency – concealed a complex negotiation with both public morality and the British weather. This is the subject Pollen has picked for her latest book Nudism in a Cold Climate, which tracks the movement from the spartan 1920s through the titillating 50s, when the new mass media whipped up a frenzy of moral anxiety, to the countercultural 60s and 70s, when the founding members were dying off and it all began to look a bit frowsty. Though nudism had its roots in 19th-century Germany, the first British camp was set up in 1924 in an Essex back garden – for climatic reasons most of its centres were in the relatively balmy south of England. By 1931 the word had entered the Oxford English Dictionary where, for decades, it became interchangeable with naturism. Early pictures show members digging and sawing to lay the foundations of a utopian political movement, or drinking tea together in the sheds they had built. “In the very early days, many were intellectuals: campaigners, psychiatrists, artists, writers and pioneering feminists who argued that nudism would bring an equality of the sexes,” says Pollen. By 1933 the practice had assumed such a moral high ground that one Anglican vicar condemned the bathing costume as a “satanic invention” that promoted titillation through part-concealment. But the intrusion of the camera began to challenge naturism’s claim to be a wholesome family movement, by privileging pictures of beautiful bodies and playing fast and loose with the market in erotica. At a time in the 30s when the movement had fewer than 10,000 members, the second issue of Sun Bathing Review sold 50,000 copies; the slender, young, white women who dominated the pictures were mostly photographed by men, for men. By the late 50s, nude images were regularly seized by police under obscenity laws. “Often the same model would be used for a naturist photograph next to a wheelbarrow, and for a sleazy photograph, produced in a Soho studio, bending over with a choker and fishnet stockings,” says Pollen. Nude photographs are not something that can be stabilised, Pollen says; we all bring our own perspectives and intentions to them. But they “are worth taking seriously for what they reveal about bodily ideals and realities in a period of rapid social and cultural change”. • Nudism in a Cold Climate: The Visual Culture of Naturists in Mid-20th Century Britain by Annebella Pollen (Atelier Editions) is out now in the UK and globally on 11 January. Back to nature: four images from Nudism in a Cold Climate East Midland Sunfolk, Colin R Clark, 1951 Annebella Pollen: “Although pictures of nudist clubs purported to show normal people enjoying themselves, often models would be shipped in so a photographer could sell images both to naturist and pin-up magazines. I like the fact that this is of a group of women of different ages having a wonderful time, because older women were so rarely depicted. And everyone here was actually a naturist.” Still from Nudist Paradise, uncredited, 1958 (pictured, top) “This is a still from the first British feature film to include naturism. It was shot at Spielplatz, a 12-acre Hertfordshire camp that took its name from the German word for playground, in honour of the movement’s Germanic roots. Although real naturists appeared in the background, the film’s stars were professional actors.” This Modern Sunbathing Venus of Today …, uncredited, 1936 “Sunlight was being used to treat TB, rickets and other disorders, so there was a central story about the good that sunbathing might do for physical and mental health if you fully exposed your body. The problem was that there aren’t many sunny days in Britain, so in the 1930s indoor nudism emerged as a practical solution.” Jean Straker, Soho, David Hurn, c1960 “Straker (pictured, middle) opened his Soho studio in the early 50s. He clashed with police for selling nude images with visible genitalia, under the guise of artistry and of providing detailed views of women’s bodies for scientific research. He became an unlikely figurehead in late-60s campaigns against censorship.”Red Lion is the kind of boat you would not see in most regattas. Its frame is made of bamboo, sourced from washed-up fishing equipment, and it uses two old oil drums for buoyancy. Equally strange is Rasta Rocket – made from old plastic drain pipes, washed-up floats and fishing buoys. These were two of the boats in the inaugural Aldabra Regatta: an ironic attempt to draw attention to marine plastic pollution by racing boats made from marine debris. Organised by the Seychelles Islands Foundation (SIF), a non-profit organisation that manages the Aldabra atoll, the event was a fun but nevertheless last-ditch effort to fight back against the waves of plastic washing up on this Unesco world heritage site. “A significant portion of three boats was made from marine litter associated with the fishing industry,” says Luke A’Bear, the science coordinator for Aldabra and part of a team that lives at the isolated research station all year. The bamboo for Red Lion comes from fish-aggregating devices (FAD) – floating objects used to attract certain species of fish. They are often abandoned by the fishing boat to save fuel on the journey back to shore. Huge chunks of bamboo, which can take years to degrade, wash up on the beaches of Aldabra, blocking turtles from coming ashore to nest. “Sadly, there is no consequence and very little incentive for FAD recovery,” says A’Bear, explaining how the decision to hold the regatta felt like a desperate move. “It is going to take years for any meaningful policy or legislation to come into force.” Another boat, Wakanda, built by Rickpert Woodcock, an electrician, and Alex Rose, who works in logistics, with wood recovered from the beach, also used washed-up floats for stability. A fourth, Floppy, was built by the manager of Aldabra island, Jude Brice, using part of a wooden canoe that had washed ashore. Island nations such as Seychelles bear the brunt of marine plastic pollution due to the convergence of ocean currents. On Aldabra, researchers have observed the endemic giant tortoises eating plastic, seabirds entangled in fishing lines and other examples of the havoc wreaked by marine litter on both terrestrial and marine ecosystems. “Just last week, we pulled out a 200-metre longline with hooks and buoys that had got stuck on the coral. We had to attach it to the boat to be able to pull it off. It just kept coming and coming,” says A’Bear. “And that’s just one long line.” “At our most conservative estimate, around 68 tonnes of marine litter gets washed ashore annually,” says April Burt, an SIF research associate based at Oxford University, who co-led the five-week Aldabra Clean-up Project (ACUP) in 2019. The collective effort removed 25 tonnes of accumulated plastic litter from the atoll, at a cost of $225,000 (£170,000), but that is merely a fraction of the 513 tonnes that ACUP researchers estimate still remains. “This number [also] did not account for the new litter arriving each year,” Burt adds. An overwhelming 83% (by weight) of the marine debris remaining on Aldabra is fishing-related gear, including buoys, nets, ropes and FADs. The regatta was not a close race: Floppy led throughout the 1.5km course, eventually winning by more than 300 metres, with Rasta Rocket edging Wakanda for second place. The participants enjoyed themselves, but they are serious about the challenges ahead. “If you went to the beaches cleaned during the ACUP, you wouldn’t know that they have been cleaned,” says A’Bear. “Sometimes there’s 55kg of litter washed-up along a 50-metre stretch – in one month. We’ve cleaned a beach a month before, and it’s like you’ve done nothing. It’s depressing.”A school student in western Sydney is believed to be the first case of community transmission of the Omicron strain of Covid in Australia, as health authorities decide against shortening the interval period for booster shots. The student from Regents Park Christian School is the ninth confirmed Omicron case in New South Wales. The source of the infection is unclear, as the student has not travelled overseas recently and has no links to any returned travellers. On Friday, authorities confirmed two other Covid-positive students from the school were infected with the Omicron strain. Students in senior grades have already finished for the year, however contact tracers are investigating if the Omicron variant has spread further and could be circulating in the community. The NSW health minister, Brad Hazzard, said “it would appear that the case could well be an on-NSW-soil transmission”. “This is of concern to the extent that this is the first case that we know of that appears not to have had any travel history,” Hazzard said. And late Friday, the ACT confimired a case of the Omicron variant had been in the community. Health authorities were attempting to trace if the case was acquired in NSW as the individual had not been overseas. Amid concerns that Omicron could be spreading, the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation determined that Australians will still have to wait six months after their second Covid vaccine dose to receive their booster. Australia’s chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, said there was little evidence that bringing forward the booster shot would provide a greater level of protection against the new Omicron variant. “Is (Omicron) more severe? We don’t know yet. But at the moment, there is the evidence that it’s mild or the same,” he said. “I would stress that it’s very early days. It is only in the last few weeks this has been circulating in South Africa and elsewhere, and there is that delay from cases to hospitalisations and deaths.” Kelly added that even the hospitalisation numbers from patients with the Omicron variant being recorded in southern African countries was “not any more severe than previous”. The federal health minister, Greg Hunt, said “it is too early to draw a final conclusion”. Hunt said that while “it may be more transmissible … vaccines are likely, still, to have good protection”. There have been 10 confirmed cases of Omicron in Australia – nine in NSW and a 10th detected in the Northern Territory. Also on Friday, the Northern Territory recorded its first death from Covid-19, as police start an investigation into the border breach that ignited the current outbreak. The unvaccinated woman in her 70s from the Binjari Aboriginal community died about 11.30pm on Thursday in Royal Darwin hospital. “This is a very hard day,” the chief minister, Michel Gunner, said. “This is the news we never wanted to give. “While we are the last place in Australia to have one of our own succumb to Covid, it is very unlikely to be the last time we have to deliver such news.” • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Gunner said the woman was admitted to hospital on 20 November and had underlying health issues. There are 60 cases in the territory’s current outbreak. The majority are Indigenous Territorians. The fatality comes a day after the virus was detected in another remote community, with a 45-year-old man diagnosed in Lajamanu, 900km north-west of Alice Springs, near the Western Australia border. The outbreak started when an infected woman illegally entered the NT in late October. The 21-year-old lied on her border entry form before travelling from Cairns to Darwin after visiting Victoria, where she contracted the virus. She infected a man in Darwin before the virus spread to Katherine, then the Aboriginal communities of Robinson River (1,000km south-east of Darwin), Binjari and Lajamanu. Globally, more than 400 Omicron cases have been identified in 30 countries.This year marks half a century since the storied singer of the Doors, Jim Morrison, met his untimely death. Or at least that’s what most reasonable people believe happened. Due to a combination of denial, wishful thinking and some eagerly promoted conspiracy theories, however, some people believe that Morrison still lives. According to the Doors’ guitarist, Robby Krieger, that’s just one of many outrageous myths, misconceptions or outright lies that have clung to the band’s story. “To me, what happened to the Doors was pretty damn cool just the way it was,” Krieger told the Guardian from his home in Los Angeles. “This wasn’t a story that needed to be hyped.” In order to represent his version of setting the record straight, then, Krieger has just published a memoir, Set the Night on Fire: Living, Dying and Playing Guitar with the Doors. It’s a doorstop-thick attempt to retell an oft-told tale, this time informed by a desire to suck the hot air out of the more inflated earlier versions, aided by a hilariously flip tone that makes this late-arriving history perhaps the most reliable, and certainly the most entertaining, of all. The witty prose, fashioned by co-author Jeff Alulis, stands in marked contrast to the bitter tone of the two memoirs by the band’s drummer, John Densmore – the second of which focused on his protracted lawsuit against the two other surviving members of the band – as well as the pedantic, and at times pretentious, tone of the published reminiscences of keyboardist Ray Manzarek. Krieger’s tome also aims to blow holes in the mega-selling 1980 book on Morrison, No One Here Gets Out Alive, as well as Oliver Stone’s bloviated 1991 movie The Doors, which Krieger takes down in an entire mocking chapter. To the guitarist, Stone’s movie wins the prize for fostering the single most outrageous fallacy. “The scene in the film where Jim supposedly pushes a fan into a closet and sets it on fire is the worst,” Krieger said. “That is ridiculously untrue.” At the same time, Krieger’s version of the story hardly wants for drama or lunacy. Here’s what happens in just the first three pages: Morrison proclaims himself God and threatens to throw Krieger “right out of the universe”. Minutes later, during a dinner, Morrison comes on to the wife of the band’s producer and, then, as they’re all tensely driving back to their hotel, he grabs the steering wheel, held by said producer, and swerves directly into oncoming traffic. After somehow making it back to the hotel alive, Morrison runs up to his room on the 12th floor and proceeds to dangle his body out of the window while stone drunk and stark naked, before leaping back into the room at the last minute to grab Krieger’s crotch and pin him down on the bed for an unsolicited dry hump. “All those things did happen,” Krieger said. “But it seemed normal at the time. It was like, ‘It’s the 60s, man. Anything goes.’” It helped that they were all incredibly young at the time. Krieger was just 19 in late 1965 when he joined the other three members who had begun trying to find a sound six months earlier. Krieger may have come to the band with what he calls “the worst hair in rock’n’roll,” but he had already developed a distinct and sophisticated guitar style, informed by a love of flamenco music and John Coltrane’s jazz. On the other hand, Krieger said that Morrison hadn’t yet developed the commanding voice he would later become famous for. “Jim had never sung before and your singing muscles need time to develop,” he said. “It didn’t take long but, vocally, Jim became a 95 on a scale of 100 after starting as a 10. His voice became a weapon.” Likewise, though Morrison “was very shy and reserved on stage at first”, the guitarist said, “as we played night after night, he got better and better – and wilder and wilder.” The prodigious amounts of acid he took helped. “Most people, when they take acid, get self-conscious and quiet,” Krieger said. “With Jim, it was the opposite. He would really go for it.” That attitude didn’t only apply to his time onstage. “I think Jim believed that life could be boring and that a lot of people were just going through the motions, so he would try to freak them out,” Krieger said. “He would do anything to add to the craziness.” That even applied to how he initially dealt with a case of syphilis. “Most people would be scared if they contracted a potentially lethal STD,” Krieger writes, “but Jim was excited to feel close to all those disease-ridden nineteenth century poets and painters he idealized. He wanted to let it go untreated so he could experience what it was really like to go insane.” In considering such behavior now, the guitarist said, “I think Jim had some real mental issues – manic depression, or whatever.” He also believes he had issues with his parents. “Whenever the press would ask about his family, he would say that they were dead,” Krieger said. “His mom was weird. She was very bossy. But he was fixated on her.” In fact, that fraught relationship informed one of Morrison’s most famous lyrics – his oedipal outburst in The End in which he shouts about killing his father and having sex with his mother. In the book, Krieger writes that the other band members had no idea that part of the song was coming the first time Morrison introduced it during an improvised section of a show at the Whiskey a Go Go in Hollywood. “The first time I heard it, I didn’t even know what he was talking about,” Krieger said. “It wasn’t until we recorded it that Jim talked about why he put it in there. He would never tell us what his lyrics were about. He’d say, ‘you have to interpret the words.’ But this time, he went on and on about it. I never met anyone who had such an Oedipus complex that he writes a song about it and then talks about it. Most people don’t even realize they have it.” Krieger believes Morrison’s ability to create such frank, outrageous and spontaneous moments is what made the Doors’ live shows so vital and real. “When people saw us play, they knew that this wasn’t just a show,” he said. Or, as he writes in the book, “there was no difference between Jim on-stage and off. I’m pretty sure Iggy Pop doesn’t roll around in glass in between trips to the supermarket and I doubt Hendrix ever set his guitar on fire just to keep warm. The magic of Jim was that he was just Jim.” At the same time, because the singer became so famous for his out-of-the-blue provocations, fans, writers and even the authorities felt free to project stunts on to him he never pulled or intended. An infamous incident at a Miami show in 1969 in which Morrison was arrested for exposure as well as for simulating oral copulation on Krieger was entirely false, the guitarist said. “I would have noticed if he had given me a fake blowjob,” he writes. The depiction of the band’s behavior surrounding their Ed Sullivan Show appearance is equally baseless, he said. The only reason Morrison sang the word “higher” during Light My Fire – after he had been specifically instructed by the show’s producers not to – wasn’t to be defiant. It was because he was nervous to perform on TV, so he stuck to the script of the song to anchor himself, Krieger said. He added that it was flat-out false that the band were subsequently banned from the show, as the Doors movie had it. In his book, Krieger writes that Manzarek later embellished this part of the story even more than Oliver Stone did. “The way Ray told stories, I’m surprised his version didn’t end with us strutting in slow motion down Broadway while the CBS studios exploded in the background,” he wrote. Another mischaracterization concerns Morrison’s nom-de-persona, The Lizard King, which came from a lyric in the song Not to Touch the Earth. The line was meant to refer to a character in the song, not the singer. “Jim thought the name was silly,” Krieger writes. He asserts, too, that the singer’s weight gain later in his career wasn’t a willful attempt to sabotage his rock god image. The girth came from his escalating alcoholism, a voracious appetite for food, as well as his natural tendency to pack on the pounds. In a related story, Krieger said that Morrison’s move to Paris in 1971 wasn’t about getting away from his rock career so he could be taken more seriously as a poet. “More than anything, he loved being onstage and playing rock’n’roll,” he said. “There’s no way he would have stopped being a singer.” In fact, the guitarist said Morrison felt the band had revitalized itself with the album they cut shortly before his death, LA Woman. That album will be honored with a 50th-anniversary edition out this month, containing some never-before-heard alternate studio versions of the album’s classics. Krieger, who wrote the core of many of the band’s best-known songs, from Light My Fire to Love Her Madly, considers LA Woman to be the best Doors album since their debut four years earlier. He believes that has to do with the fully collaborative nature of the writing and the more spontaneous nature of the playing and recording, encouraged by their engineer-turned-producer Bruce Botnick. “The coolest thing was when we were recording songs like Riders on the Storm and LA Woman, we were just jamming,” Krieger said. “We were making things up on the spot which we hadn’t done in years.” After Morrison’s death, the remaining Doors considered other singers to replace him, though not Iggy Pop, as has long been rumored. They coveted Joe Cocker and Paul Rodgers, though they never made offers to either. Instead they recorded two albums on their own, which Krieger believes may have been two too many. After the surviving three members finally admitted defeat, Krieger continued to record with new bands, yet a growing depression rooted in his realization that his career had peaked when he was just 25, led him into a heroin addiction that took years to beat. In the book, he details that time and connects it to other personal problems in his life, including his mother’s long history of pill addiction and his twin brother’s mental illness, which led to an early, and still mysterious, death. A painful part of the book deals with drummer Densmore’s suits against Krieger and Manzarek after they tried to tour under the band’s original name in the early aughts. Contentious as that period was, Krieger said that he and Densmore later became friendly again, spurred by Manzarek’s death from cancer in 2013. “I think John was upset that he and Ray hadn’t really made up,” Krieger said. “And he realized you can’t be mad forever.” As to why Manzarek continued to stoke Doors myths up until his death, Krieger believes it was because the keyboardist “couldn’t believe it was over. So, he kept doing interviews and making stuff up,” he said. At the same time, Krieger admits that the escalating myth-making “is, in a way, what kept the Doors going. So, maybe it was for the best.” Especially since Krieger no longer worries, as he had for years, that the myths – and truths – about Morrison’s wild antics would overshadow the band’s recordings. “The music will outlast all the ‘crazy Jim’ stuff,” he said. Fifty years after the group’s demise, said Krieger, “the music is what will keep the Doors in people’s minds for the next fifty years.” Set the Night on Fire: Living, Dying and Playing Guitar with The Doors is out nowWith that, I will let you all get on with enjoying your weekends. Stay safe and dry. Here were today’s major developments: Labor has revealed its much anticipated emissions reductions plan to reduce emissions by 43% by 2030. Opposition leader Anthony Albanese says it will spur $76bn of investment, create more than 600,000 jobs and cut power bills. Key to the plan is an upgrade of the electricity grid and the rollout of Australia’s first national electric vehicle strategy to tackle Australia’s woefully low uptake. It’s lower than the 45% target taken to the last election. The BHP vaccine mandate was declared unlawful by the full bench of the Fair Work Commission. It said the findings may have been different if BHP had consulted its employees differently. NSW health minister Brad Hazzard said the community should be “cautious” about Omicron. There have been three new cases of the variant bringing total cases to 13. Health minister Greg Hunt said all cases so far had been mild. Nationals MP Damian Drum has announced he will quit parliament and not re-contest the seat of Nicholls. Shepparton councillor Rob Priestly announced last month he would run as an independent. He is a member of the Voices for Nicholls movement. NSW recorded 337 new cases and no deaths. Victoria recorded 1,188 cases and 11 deaths. The ACT recorded four cases including an Omicron case, and, sadly the NT recorded its first death, a woman in her 70s from the Binjari community. It came as the NT shut its border to SA. Residents of northern NSW towns Boggabilla and Toomelah have been told to evacuate following dangerous storms. And the body of jockey Chris Caserta has been found off the Gold Coast. He had gone missing after a swim on Wednesday evening. ACT Health has confirmed an individual in the ACT has tested positive to the Omicron variant: The person is fully vaccinated and returned a positive test result on 1 December. Following genome sequencing, this has today been confirmed as the Omicron variant. It is not yet known if this case was acquired in the ACT or NSW. The individual has not travelled overseas. Due to the evolving situation with the Omicron variant, out of caution and in line with other jurisdictions, ACT Health has increased the quarantine requirements for close contacts regardless of vaccination status. This means that anyone identified as a close contact of someone with the Omicron variant is required to quarantine for 14 days. All household contacts members of the close contact are also required to quarantine for 14 days. There are no changes to the quarantine requirements for casual contacts. Currently the impacts of the new variant are unknown, including its rate of transmission and the effectiveness of the vaccine against this variant. However, as we have done throughout the pandemic, we will continue to closely monitor the situation and adjust our response accordingly. There are currently four exposure sites: Next Gen Canberra, The Knox Made in Watson, Supabarn Kingston and Blue Gum Community School. The full bench of the Fair Work Commission has found BHP’s decision to make Covid vaccinations mandatory at its Hunter Valley mine was not lawful or reasonable. The commission: Had the respondent consulted the employees in accordance with its consultation obligations – such that we could have been satisfied that the decision to introduce the site access requirement was the outcome of a meaningful consultation process – the above considerations would have provided a strong case in favour of a conclusion that the site access requirement was a reasonable direction. The Independent Education Union Victoria Tasmania has welcomed the passage of the Equal Opportunity (Religious Exceptions) Amendment Bill, which grants equal protections to workers in faith-based institutions. General secretary Deb James: At last, staff in our schools will be protected against discrimination on the grounds of their sexual orientation or identity, their marital or parental status or their religious belief. No longer will a faith-based employer have the right to discriminate against a divorced teacher, a gay lab technician, or a single-parent receptionist. Despite the loud campaign against these reforms from some faith leaders, we know that most principals and school leaders welcome reforms which better protect their hard-working staff and ensure that all our schools are more welcoming and inclusive places to work and to learn. While this is a huge step forward for Victorian discrimination law, we now face the prospect of these reforms being steamrolled by the damaging and misguided proposed federal Religious Discrimination Bill. This federal Bill does not protect against discrimination – it enables it, and it enables homophobia, misogyny and hate speech. We call on federal politicians from all parties to stand against it. In every electorate right across Australia, there are loyal employees of faith-based schools, hospitals, care facilities and other institutions who deserve the same protections as other workers but will be denied them by this Bill. Residents of two towns in northern NSW have been ordered to evacuate as “very dangerous” storms threaten areas around Sydney, AAP reports. The State Emergency Service on Friday morning told residents of Boggabilla and Toomelah they must evacuate by 11am or risk being stranded without help. An evacuation centre has been set up at Moree East Public School. On Friday afternoon the Newell Highway between Boggabilla and Moree was closed by flooding. Severe storms have been threatening areas around the greater Sydney region, with a band developing from the Hunter through the Blue Mountains and down to the Illawarra region on Friday afternoon. The Bureau of Meteorology warns Gosford, Cessnock, Maitland, Bowral, Katoomba and Taralga are among the areas that could be impacted by the damaging winds and large hailstones on Friday afternoon. A “very dangerous” storm in Penrith was due to move towards Richmond, while another at Picton was moving south-east towards Wollongong. Another storm was moving north-east over the Hunter region. The Macintrye River has already reached moderate flood levels in Boggabilla, but is expected to peak with major flooding. Major flooding is also occurring upstream in Goondiwindi, with the river likely to exceed the peak of the 2011 floods that devastated south-east Queensland. But the border town is “incredibly prepared” for floods, the Queensland Fire and Emergency Services assistant commissioner, Steve Smith, says. The Macquarie River is expected to reach a 9.5-metre peak before beginning to recede overnight at Warren, where major flooding has isolated the town. Major flooding is also underway at Wee Waa along the Namoi River and at Jemalong on the Lachlan River. Flood warnings are still active for the Severn, Gwydir, Dumaresq, Bogan, Murrumbidgee, Murray, Warrego, Paroo and Barwon rivers, after NSW’s wettest November on record soaked catchments. But sunny weather has returned for a spell, with multiple parts of NSW facing maximum temperatures exceeding 30C on Friday. Federal-state disaster assistance is available in 39 local government areas across NSW for individuals and councils to clean up damage from November’s floods. The Electric Vehicle Council is similarly pleased with Labor today. Anthony Albanese’s plan would make electric vehicles cheaper with an electric car discount and Australia’s first national electric vehicle strategy. The EVC chief executive, Behyad Jafari, says: Labor’s plan for a National Electric Vehicle Policy is well overdue for Australia; the Electric Vehicle Council is ready and eager to support its development. Working with industry will be critical in creating a plan that maximises the enormous benefits of electric vehicles. Australia should be building batteries and electric vehicles, but we have so far been let down by a lack of ambition at a federal level. Left unchecked, these manufacturing opportunities and their associated jobs will go elsewhere. It’s a welcome development to see the debate now shifting to how to embrace the future of electric vehicles in Australia. Making it easier for Australians to make the switch through discounts will help us catch up to the rest of the world. Labor’s policy, if implemented, will make Australia’s streets cleaner and quieter, lower health costs, reduce carbon emissions and break our dependence on foreign oil. If you haven’t caught up with this yet, it’s well worth a read. Craig Kelly – who has been permanently banned from Facebook over Covid-19 posts – has been appointed to a parliamentary committee looking into social media and online safety. The Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry has released a statement on Labor’s emissions targets, calling the plan a pathway to achieve the economic and technological transition towards a more sustainable future. The ACCI chief executive, Andrew McKellar, says: Australia needs to pull its weight when it comes to action on climate change. The critical test for this policy, whether it sinks or swims, will be its impact on energy prices for businesses and for consumers. Any transition to reduce emissions must deliver lower power prices and ensure increased reliability. A bipartisan commitment to reach net zero emissions by 2050 is fundamental for businesses to take action to reduce their emissions. Of course, further analysis of the federal opposition’s plan is required to understand the impact that businesses will face in transitioning towards a low-emissions economy. It is encouraging to see updated 2030 targets that push the frame towards more ambitious action on climate change. If Australian businesses are to remain internationally competitive, we must have the clear policy settings that signal this commitment. Reforms to reduce the baseline of the safeguard mechanisms are a sensible approach, recognising that businesses need certainty to be able to compete with their foreign counterparts. This will provide a stable policy framework for the biggest emitters to adopt renewable energy resources. We give the opposition credit for announcing its detailed emissions policy well in advance of the forthcoming federal election. This means businesses and the Australian public now have the capacity to assess both major parties in this policy area. With business leading the way, ACCI will continue to work with government and federal opposition to ensure that action on climate change creates jobs, grows businesses and drives our economic recovery to ensure a more sustainable future. With the weekend looming, people might be checking the forecasts, particularly if you’re in storm-hit Melbourne or relatively sodden Sydney and Brisbane. Basically, things don’t turn wet for the eastern seaboard until the middle of next week, but the widespread falls of 25mm or more over several days will probably trigger more flood watches. Summer’s under way and if you were in central or north-western Australia you’d know it as temperatures rise to 40C or above in many places. A severe to extreme heatwave will be in place for the next few days over part of that region, the Bureau of Meteorology said. In recent years, spring heatwaves have been common events including over eastern Australia, setting things up for dangerous summer fire seasons. Not this year, though. Bureau reports this week out for November and spring have shown how relatively cool and damp it was, with New South Wales and South Australia reporting their wettest Novembers on record. Reports out today for individual cities reinforce that theme. Sydney’s Observatory Hill had a rare below-average month, with the average maximum temperature of 23.2C half a degree below the 1961-90 yardstick and a full degree cooler if you are comparing only recent decades. Rainfall was about two-thirds above average. Melbourne’s Olympic Park, meanwhile, had five consecutive November days with maximums failing to reach 16C, equalling the record of such days set in the city in November 1925. Brisbane meanwhile had more than double the usual November rain, topping more than 250mm. Average daily maximums were 27.3C, or 1.1C below the norm. The Red Centre was damp too, with Alice Springs smashing its previous wettest November by about 40%, with 218.2mm recorded. That’s a lot more than the average of 30.7mm for the month. On 10 November it recorded 100.2mm alone, one of only six 100mm-plus days for any month since records began in 1942. Darwin was one place to buck the trend. Rainfall was slightly below average but temperatures averaged 34.7C. Tropical temperatures tend to stray less from their long-run norms, and so even though the average was just 1.3C above a typical November, it still made it the equal second-warmest reading for the month in records going back to 1941. November 2020 holds the title with an average 35 degrees. The Climate Council has released a statement on Labor’s emissions reduction targets, welcoming the 43% commitment by 2030 but warning it must be strengthened. Its analysis shows Labor’s plan sets Australia on a path to net zero in 2050 which, under current policy settings, wouldn’t be reached until almost 2100. Renewable energy is expected to power 82% of Australia’s energy needs by 2030 according to the plan, contrasting to 68% from a business as usual approach. The Climate Council CEO, Amanda McKenzie, says: Labor’s plan helps bridge the gap between the Morrison government’s do nothing approach, and state government and business leaders who are forging ahead to create jobs and grow our nation’s prosperity by slashing emissions this decade. Right now, our country is the worst performing of all developed countries when it comes to cutting greenhouse gas emissions and moving beyond fossil fuels like coal, oil and gas. Labor’s plan is a major improvement, but it will need to be strengthened significantly to genuinely tackle climate change. We know how dangerous global warming is because we’re being slammed by megafires like the Black Summer and extreme flooding. Our very way of life, and everything we love about this great country, is in danger from unchecked climate change. The Climate Council recommends that Australia cut its emissions 75% (based on 2005 levels) by 2030, and aims to reach net zero by 2035. Ben Roberts-Smith’s long- and oft-delayed defamation trial against three newspapers will resume in the new year, on 2 February. Roberts-Smith is suing the Age, the Sydney Morning Herald and the Canberra Times for defamation over a series of reports published in 2018 that he alleges are defamatory because they portray him as someone who “broke the moral and legal rules of military engagement” and committed war crimes, including murdering unarmed civilians. The 42-year-old has consistently denied the allegations, saying they are “false”, “baseless” and “completely without any foundation in truth”. The newspapers are defending their reporting as true. The latest delays have been because of Covid travel restrictions preventing witnesses from Western Australia – mainly serving and former SAS soldiers – travelling to Sydney to give evidence. The sensitive nature of their evidence means that it can’t be heard via videolink. Roberts-Smith’s lawyer, Arthur Moses QC, has consistently argued the Victoria Cross recipient was being prejudiced by the long-running and uncertain delays. Moses pointed out to the court yesterday that by February next year it will be three-and-a-half years since the defamation action was filed, nine months since Roberts-Smith ceased work because of the trial, seven months since he had given evidence, and six months since the court heard from Afghan witnesses. Moses said a fixed date for the resumption of the trial was needed, arguing “the federal court can’t be held hostage by the whims of a state premier” in relation to border closures. Justice Anthony Besanko fixed 2 February as the date to resume the trial. Any witness who has been subpoenaed but wishes not to give evidence will have until 28 January to seek to be excused, Besanko said. Queensland is edging closer to 80% double dose targets. The international law expert Donald Rothwell told the inquiry the initial information-sharing agreement under Aukus was “an unusual treaty”. That is because it “is effectively an agreement to potentially agree on something more substantive at some undefined point in the future”. Rothwell said the agreement indicated Australia, the US and the UK were “very aware” of obligations under the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). But he said the agreement could have contained “a much stronger statement” on those commitments. He pointed out Australia had a higher level of obligation under the NPT than the US and the UK (which are nuclear weapons states): Given the novelty of the Aukus arrangement it may well have been prudent to seek to reassure other states who have expressed concerns to Australia about Australia’s actions and its consistency of its actions in the NPT, to have inserted a stronger statement into this agreement reaffirming Australia’s NPT obligations. Australia’s plan to acquire nuclear-powered submarines could “spell disaster” for the global non-proliferation regime, according to the Nobel prize-winning International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons. Ican was among groups to sound the alarm about the Aukus security partnership today, telling a parliamentary committee that Iran and other countries may use the “very dangerous precedent” to follow suit. (Essentially it boils down to safeguards that apply to states like Australia that do not have nuclear weapons.) Marianne Hanson, the co-chair of Ican Australia, told the treaties committee that if the plan went ahead, “it will pose a substantial threat to the nuclear non-proliferation treaty” – a treaty of which Australia “claims to be one of the chief champions”. Hanson said Australia acquiring the technology and using highly enriched uranium was an unprecedented step, that would “set the stage for other states, like Iran for example, to claim their prerogative to do the same thing”. We are a state which is not likely to acquire nuclear weapons, and our prime minister has said as much. However, the problem is if the exception is made for Australia … other states will ask for the same thing to happen. If Iran, if numerous states require this kind of provision through what seems to be a loophole in the International Atomic Energy Agency’s process then this spells disaster for the non-proliferation regime. Bevan Ramsden, a spokesperson for Independent and Peaceful Australia Network, who also gave evidence today, called for the initial proposed treaty to be left unratified, “to allow proper democratic debate in the public and parliament”. The treaties committee is holding a fast-tracked inquiry into an initial agreement among Australia, the US and the UK, called the Exchange of Naval Nuclear Propulsion Information Agreement. It’s not the overarching Aukus plan, but an initial treaty to allow the sharing of information as part of the 18-month study process to find the best way for the US and the UK to help Australia build at least eight nuclear-propelled submarines. It was referred to the committee on 26 November with submissions due four days later. The president of the Medical Association for Prevention of War, Dr Sue Wareham, said: “This process has been pretty deplorable. This is one of the biggest decisions Australia has made in a long time and the community has been given literally four days to comment.” The Australian government has said it “remains staunch in our support for the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT)” and that it will “work closely with the International Atomic Energy Agency to ensure full compliance with our NPT obligations”. Labor is up and about following their emissions reduction plan announcement. Meanwhile, prime minister Scott Morrison says a 43% reduction target is “not safe” for our country or jobs. Many thanks to legends Mostafa Rachwani and Tory Shepherd. Let’s keep rolling on into the weekend. And, for the second time today, I am handing over the blog, this time to Caitlin Cassidy, who’ll expertly guide you through the evening’s news. Thanks again for reading. Scott Morrison has made some comments on Senator Alex Antic’s vaccination status, after the senator was taken to hotel quarantine upon arrival in South Australia. Asked if he had been misled, here is what the PM had to say: I was advised that he was double vaccinated, and in our conversation I said to him that I understand you’ve been double vaccinated. He didn’t correct me. Senator Antic has made his choice and he’s entitled to that choice. I was labouring under the understanding that he had been double vaccinated. I’m disappointed that that was unclear. And I’m glad that it’s been resolved. Good afternoon and hello again, a quick thanks to Tory Shepherd for covering Labor’s announcement. There is still much going on, so let’s dive in. And that’s all from me (Tory Shepherd) for today. I feel I barely scratched the surface of Labor’s plan, but Guardian Australia will unpick it in full for you, and see how the nation reacts to it. Back to you, Mostafa Rachwani! Some highlights from the press conference with the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, and shadow climate change and energy minister, Chris Bowen (I’ve paraphrased the questions): Q: How can you be sure that you’ll deliver a $275 saving on power bills? Albanese: (Possibly channeling the French president, Emmanuel Macron): “I don’t think, I know.” I know because we have done the modelling. The modelling is available. We are releasing it here today. That is the average reduction in power prices from today as a result of the suite of policies which we have announced. Q: How do you combat accusations it’s effectively a carbon tax, and if 45% was too much at the last election, isn’t 43% too? Albanese: Doesn’t address the carbon tax part of the question, but says Labor has consulted broadly with business, unions, economists and experts. We know, as well, that over a period of time, technology has got better, of course, and renewables have come down in price. The benefit of the shift to clean energy is there for all to see. Business knows it, industry knows it. Everyone except for the federal government (knows it). Q: Where in the budget does the $24bn investment come from? Bowen: It will be found through “rewiring” existing policies (you can see more detail in the full plan here). Q: What’s your message to carmakers like Volkswagen who say it’s not worth entering the Australian market (because electric vehicles are too expensive)? Bowen: There are tariff exemptions (which Labor says will take thousands off the price of electric vehicles), and abolishing the fringe benefits tax will take another $900 off. Car fleets will be a big part of the policy, and as they sell cars they will enter the second-hand market. Q: Will you legislate the target? And actually that target is lower than what business wants ... Albanese: This is a policy from the alternative government of Australia that is fully costed, it is worked through, that I think has got the right element of ambition. It is a modest policy. We do not pretend that it is a radical policy. Bowen adds that it will legislate the 2030 target, and net zero by 2050. There’s much more, but as I mentioned earlier, Katharine Murphy will be right across the details. Anthony Albanese goes on to say that the policy – which Labor will take to the election next year – is consistent with calls at the Cop26 conference in Glasgow for countries to have an updated 2030 target (the prime minister, Scott Morrison, says the Coalition will probably overachieve on its existing target of 26-28%, but declined to update the target.) He says: This is the right plan for Australia going forward, it is the plan that acknowledges what business wants, it is the plan that acknowledges that the world economy is demanding this ... (It is) consistent with our optimistic view that Australia can be a better country coming out of the global pandemic, that we should be optimistic about our future, that we should seize the opportunities that are there due to the natural advantages we have, located in the fastest growing region of the world in human history with the abundant renewable resources as well as other resources that we have in this country, our greatest resource of course is our people. What this plan does is maximise the potential of those people to get high-paid, good, secure work and for households and businesses to have much cheaper and cleaner energy. The shadow climate change and energy minister, Chris Bowen, is with him, and says he will be reporting on progress on the plan to parliament, in a similar way to how the government currently reports on Indigenous disadvantage. He says: We want to be held to account of progress, we want the parliament to be focusing on how well we are doing as a country. We’re into questions now, and the indomitable Katharine Murphy is there. Stay tuned for her take, and I’ll get a summary of the Q&amp;A in the next post. And here are the dot points Labor has released – apologies if this is way too much information for your Friday afternoon! The party is promising to: Upgrade the electricity grid to fix energy transmission and drive down power prices. Make electric vehicles cheaper with an electric car discount and Australia’s first national electric vehicle strategy. Adopt the Business Council of Australia’s recommendation for facilities already covered by the government’s safeguard mechanism that emissions be reduced gradually and predictably over time, to support international competitiveness and economic growth – consistent with industry’s own commitment to net zero by 2050. Protect the competitiveness of emissions-intensive trade exposed industries by ensuring they will not face a greater constraint than their competitors. Allocate up to $3bn from Labor’s National Reconstruction Fund to invest in green metals (steel, alumina and aluminium); clean energy component manufacturing; hydrogen electrolysers and fuel switching; agricultural methane reduction and waste reduction. Provide direct financial support for measures that improve energy efficiency within existing industries and develop new industries in regional Australia through a new Powering the Regions Fund. Roll out 85 solar banks around Australia to ensure more households can benefit from rooftop solar. Install 400 community batteries across the country. Demonstrate commonwealth leadership by reducing the Australian public service’s own emissions to net zero by 2030. Invest in 10,000 New Energy apprentices and a New Energy skills program. Establish a real-world vehicle fuel testing program to inform consumer choice. Work with large businesses to provide greater transparency on their climate-related risks and opportunities. Re-establish leadership by restoring the role of the Climate Change Authority, while keeping decision-making and accountability with government and introducing new annual parliamentary reporting by the minister. Here’s Anthony Albanese now, officially announcing the plan to reduce emissions by 43% by 2030 (on 2005 levels). He says the plan is fully costed, and he’s releasing the modelling, saying it’s the “most comprehensive modelling ever done by any opposition in Australia’s history since federation”. You can be sure it will be closely examined. He says it will spur $76bn of investment, create more than 600,000 jobs, cut power bills, all while reducing emissions. Albanese says: Our plan will create 604,000 extra jobs by 2030. Five out of every six will be in regional Australia ... it (will see) the electricity prices fall from the current level by $275 for households by 2025 at the end of our first term if we are successful. Over the forward estimates the cost to the budget will be $683m. Australian business is leading. It is time that the Australian government caught up. That is why our plan to create jobs, cut power bills, grow renewables and reduce emissions, is the right plan for Australia. More to come ... As Mostafa said earlier, we’re waiting for Labor leader Anthony Albanese’s press conference on the new climate change policy – and Mostafa also linked to Katharine Murphy’s excellent preview. Murphy is also casting an eagle eye over prime minister Scott Morrison’s response on Twitter: The Weekly Beast is in! Amanda Meade talks us through tears for departing ABC legend Fran Kelly, and the sad death of former journo and political lobbyist Christian Kerr. And more... The West Australian state Nationals MP and former federal party vice-president James Hayward has been suspended from the party after being charged with child sexual abuse offences. Hayward, who was elected to WA’s parliament earlier this year, is facing multiple charges relating to an eight-year-old girl, including persistent sexual conduct. The 52-year-old faced Perth magistrates court on Thursday and was not required to enter a plea. He was granted bail to reappear on 13 December. “The Nationals WA has suspended the membership of James Hayward, effective immediately,” the party said in a brief statement late on Thursday. “No further comment will be made at this time.” The state opposition leader, Mia Davies, said she was shocked and distressed to learn of the allegations shortly before boarding a flight from Carnarvon earlier on Thursday. She moved immediately to stand down Hayward from his shadow local government, water and regional cities portfolios. “They are serious allegations and the charges that have been brought are very distressing,” Davies told reporters. “James has been in and around our party for some time. He’s a colleague. You work very closely with people in this environment, so needless to say it’s come as a shock to everybody that knows him.” The WA Nationals assumed opposition status after Labor’s blowout victory in the March election left the Liberals with two lower house seats. Under their opposition alliance, the Nationals and Liberals hold a combined 16 seats in the 95-seat parliament. Individuals convicted of persistent sexual conduct in WA face a maximum prison term of 20 years. In the run-up to Christmas there are a few mid-year economic updates to come from the federal and state governments that might well be lost in the yuletide rush by, well, just about everybody. As it happens there are some updated figures from the Parliamentary Budget Office. Generally, the news is on the positive side, with the economy recovering faster than expected, compared with February estimates. Still, for those who fleetingly wonder whether the current optimism about growth in employment and business activity (and property prices that are a quarter higher over the past year) implied the Covid pandemic may not have been a bad thing need only look at the scale of the debt hole we’re still excavating. National net debt is forecast to increase from 38% of GDP ($774bn) in 2020-21 to 55% of GDP ($1.325tn) in 2024-25, the PBO said. That’s less than previously forecast but still pretty ginormous. Swelling the debt will be extra interest repayments as rates rise. Assuming the increase is 0.8 percentage points across the four years to 2023-24 compared with the level expected in the 2021-22 budget, that means annual repayments will be an extra $3.2bn over the period. By 2024-25, $34bn will have to come from state and federal budgets to pay off that debt. Higher rates, if that’s what happens, could swell that bill further. Speaking of holes, there’s a bit of a boring story from Scott Morrison’s visit to Snowy Hydro’s giant pumped hydro project earlier today. A second tunnel boring machine has been commissioned, apparently dubbed “Kirsten” for some reason. There’s no word about what happened to the first one, or what its name was. “Our $1.38bn investment in this project is already creating a local jobs boom, with a current workforce of more than 1,300 people and an expected 4,000 direct jobs over the life of the project, and many opportunities for local Australian businesses and suppliers,” the prime minister said. The Northern Territory chief minister, Michael Gunner, is giving a press conference now, saying the report of the first death in the territory was “the news we never wanted to give”. Today is a tragic reminder of the severity of this virus and why we take it so seriously. We will not be releasing any other personal information at this time. This is a period of great sorrow for a family and a community. Gunner also announces the Territory will shut its borders to South Australia from 8pm tonight, with all arrivals needing to do seven days of home quarantine upon arrival. Given the wider community spread of Covid in SA that is now happening, we have decided to declare SA red zone for the purposes of travel to the NT effective from 8pm this evening. Thanks, Mostafa, and hello! I’m coming to you live from Adelaide, just a couple of blocks away from the medi-hotel where former premier Jay Weatherill and Liberal senator Alex Antic are quarantining. Weatherill was visiting his old hometown from Perth – and unfortunately visited a whole stack of South Australian luminaries before he was diagnosed with Covid. Antic, meanwhile... well, Mostafa mentioned this below, and Paul Karp has the story here: And on that note, I will leave you in the ever-capable hands of Tory Shepherd to take you through Labor’s announcement. Thanks for reading. The body of jockey Chris Caserta has been found off the Gold Coast in Queensland. Caserta had gone missing after a swim, and police say his body was found almost 200 metres offshore, near the sand pumping jetty at Main Beach. He has been formally identified, police say. Caserta’s body was found around 8.30am following an extensive search after he was reported missing on Wednesday night. The PM has addressed questions about whether he knew if senator Alex Antic was vaccinated or not: Earlier, it was reported Antic was taken to hotel quarantine upon arrival in South Australia, a move usually reserved for travellers who are not fully vaccinated. A woman in her 70s from the Binjari community, just outside Katherine, has become the first person to die of Covid in the Northern Territory. The case is linked to the current cluster in Katherine, and the territory’s government has extended its condolences to the family. Earlier today, federal health minister Greg Hunt announced an extra $540m investment in Covid protection measures. Hunt announced the money as he welcomed the country’s fully vaccinated rate climbing above 87%. The money will be spent on aged care support, Covid responses in Indigenous communities, modelling and pathology labs. An additional $48m will be put towards medical research on Covid. NSW health minister Brad Hazzard has confirmed the new case of Omicron in NSW, but said investigations were ongoing into whether it was a locally acquired case or not. Hazzard said another two cases were under investigation to see if they were also infected with the new variant, but urged residents to remain “cautious” and not to be too worried. There isn’t clarity around whether this particular variant is going to cause us anywhere near the problems that the earlier variants caused us. And what we always aim to do, right from the outset, was to make sure that we had capacity in our hospitals if there were increasing numbers. We are well-placed if it does increase but at the moment, it is very early days, so my advice to the community is be cautious, the way you always have been. We do anticipate rapid growth, so do listen to the continuing health messages and be cautious, and especially if you have symptoms, go and get tested. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, has welcomed the Morrison government’s expansion of Australia’s sanctions laws, saying the two countries “will seek to promote our shared democratic values with similar tools”. Foreign government officials could face sanctions for “gross human rights violations” and “egregious acts of international concern”, including cyber-attacks, under the laws that passed the lower house yesterday, a day after clearing the Senate. Corrupt business people could also be banned from travelling to Australia and have their assets and bank accounts frozen. Bear in mind, Australian government insiders have previously raised the lack of such “Magnitsky-style” laws as one of the reasons Australia wasn’t able to join with its allies to impose coordinated sanctions against Chinese officials over the mass detention and persecution of Uyghur Muslims in Xinjiang back in March. Blinken issued a statement overnight saying the US “looks forward to continuing our partnership with Australia, other like-minded governments, and civil society alike to defend human rights, combat corruption, promote responsible behaviour in cyberspace, and promote accountability and good governance”. He also wants other countries to follow suit, saying: The United States commends Australia on passing legislation that strengthens its sanctions regime to address more comprehensively human rights abuses, corruption, malicious cyber activity, violations of international humanitarian law, and weapons of mass destruction proliferation globally – all of which threaten international peace and security. The new legislation will enhance US-Australia cooperation on defending human rights and combatting corruption. Together with other allies and partners, the United States and Australia will seek to promote our shared democratic values with similar tools and continue to call on international partners to adopt sanctions structures that can address these challenges to democratic ideals. For more, see yesterday’s story: The ACT has recorded four new locally acquired cases. Friday marks two years since Australia’s short-lived Medevac laws were repealed by the federal parliament – but dozens of asylum seekers and refugees who were transferred from Papua New Guinea and Nauru are still languishing in detention waiting for essential medical treatment. The medevac legislation, initiated by Wentworth independent MP Dr Kerryn Phelps, gave doctors (rather than home affairs department officials) primary decision-making power in the transfer of asylum seekers and refugees from Australia’s offshore immigration regime to Australia for acute medical treatment. For eight months in 2019, before they were repealed, the medevac laws saw 192 people transferred to Australia for medical treatment doctors judged they could not receive offshore. But a new report from the Public Interest Advocacy Centre, titled Healthcare denied: Medevac and the long wait for essential medical treatment in Australian immigration detention, highlights ongoing failures to provide basic medical care for people brought from offshore and detained in Australia. Lucy Geddes, the report’s lead author and a PIAC senior solicitor, said: The Medevac regime was intended to ensure that people detained in offshore facilities with serious health conditions could access essential medical services. It is absolutely appalling that two years later, people are still waiting for treatment for painful and debilitating conditions including severe gum disease, chest pain and heart palpitations. One of our clients suffered an excruciating knee injury while being detained on Manus Island. When he was finally transferred to Australia and able to see an orthopaedic specialist, the specialist found that his knee was inoperable due to the severe damage and prolonged lack of treatment. The report argues the commonwealth has a legal duty of care to the people it detains, and that continuing to hold members of the Medevac cohort in unsuitable facilities - including hotels - indefinitely, without adequate medical treatment, is in breach of these legal obligations. The report makes a series of recommendations to improve the quality, timeliness and oversight of healthcare within Australia’s immigration detention system. More than 40 refugees and asylum seekers, most of them medevac transferees, are still being held in Melbourne’s Park Hotel in Carlton. More than half of the cohort currently in the hotel was infected with Covid during an outbreak in October and November. Before it was a government-decreed “alternative place of detention”, the hotel, under its former name Rydges, was used for hotel quarantine and was the epicentre of Victoria’s second Covid wave. A government inquiry found “around 90% of Covid-19 cases in Victoria since late May 2020 were attributable to the outbreak at Rydges”. Geddes said: The combination of delayed treatment and long-term confinement to a hotel room has also exacerbated some existing medical conditions. Since being transferred to Australia, the conditions of onshore detention have resulted in our clients’ mental health deteriorating to the point they have been at risk of suicide. The PIAC report will be formally launched on Monday. We’re expecting an update from NSW premier Dominic Perrottet in a bit, to provide details on the potentially locally acquired Omicron case. So, lost a little in the flurry of updates this morning was the news NSW has recorded another case of the Omicron variant. NSW Health said it was concerned the case was locally acquired, making it the first case of Omicron spreading locally in Australia. The case is a student at Regents Park Christian School, and Health said its concerns were linked to the lack of overseas travel by the student, or any links to anyone with overseas travel history. Investigations are ongoing. Alywarre woman Pat Anderson has stepped down from her position of chair of the Lowitja Institute after nearly 20 years in the role. Anderson was one of the founding figures in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander-led health research. She is a powerhouse. Lowitja Institute CEO Dr Janine Mohamed said Anderson challenged and disrupted Western models of research. She was one of the strongest proponents of a principle that had come to guide First Nations research and policy: nothing about us without us. Pat has been a fearless advocate for justice and equity for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people for decades and an outstanding mentor and strong moral compass. She is a trailblazer and ceiling-breaker for all women. Like our founding patron and namesake Dr Lowitja O’Donoghue, Pat is a guiding light for all of us at Lowitja Institute, and we are so grateful she will continue to be involved with us as a patron. The Lowitja Institute board has elected Gungarri man Selwyn Button as the new chairperson. And before we’ve actually heard further details, the Greens have jumped at the announcement from Labor, releasing a press statement saying Labor has “given up on climate”. Greens leader Adam Bandt said: The climate crisis is getting worse but Labor is going backwards. Labor’s backdown shows the only way we’ll get climate action is kicking the Liberals out and putting Greens in the balance of power to push Labor to go further and faster. These targets take us past the point of no return. The Liberals are taking us over the cliff at 200 km/h while Labor’s promising to do it at 180 km/h. Both their plans mean Australia heats up by more than 3 degrees, which is game over for our country. So we are on standby to hear from opposition leader Anthony Albanese on the climate policies Labor will take into the next election, but you can read read a preview of the policies from Katharine Murphy at the link below. We already know they will take a 43% emissions reduction target for 2030, with the rest still up in the air: The PM is due to speak shortly, but not before he is photographed in a hi-vis vest, gloves and a hard hat. As you do. Kelly was asked if he was concerned over “large gatherings” at Christmas in light of the spreading Omicron variant, and said it was about striking a balance: We need to take that one step at a time. Closing borders a big the decision for government not taken lightly. We have all the other measures in place – test, trace, isolate, all of those matters we have, and crucially, the vaccine. And we are one of the most vaccinated nations in the world. We have no evidence at the moment that the vaccine does not work, and as far as we know the vaccine works against this new virus. I suspect within the next months Omicron will be the new virus in the world. The Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (Atagi) has not changed its recommendations on the booster shot timeline, chief medical officer Prof Paul Kelly has announced. As it stands, Australians can get a booster shot six months after their second dose of the Covid vaccine. Kelly noted there were nine cases of the Omicron variant in Australia but there was no firm evidence yet that it increased Covid’s severity. [South Africa] has no real evidence at the moment of an increase in severity. They are seeing a rise in hospitalisations in Pretoria and Johannesburg. But even hospitalisations they are seeing with the Omicron variant are not any more severe than previous waves. Labor is announcing its climate policy this morning, beginning with a new medium-term emissions reduction target for 2030: Victoria’s ombudsman has backed the state government’s pandemic bill, saying she is now “satisfied” with the safeguards included. Deborah Glass was initially critical of an earlier draft of the bill, saying it lacked independent oversight. Here’s what she told the Today show earlier this morning: This bill is very different from what we saw a couple of weeks ago when I was expressing, and a number of others, about the lack of independent oversight and review. What we’ve seen in this legislation now are some really significant amendments that will deliver, I think, that necessary independence to the whole process. I am now satisfied. And numbers are also out in Victoria, which has recorded 1,188 new locally acquired cases, a drop on yesterday’s numbers. The state also recorded 11 deaths overnight. New South Wales has recorded 337 new locally acquired cases today and no deaths. Federal health minister Greg Hunt has said all the Omicron cases in Australia have been “asymptomatic or very mild”. Hunt was on Sunrise this morning, saying authorities were “cautiously optimistic”. He also said early evidence showed the vaccines were “very good protection” against the new variant. Paul Kelly, Australia’s chief medical officer, is cautiously optimistic, saying: Often with diseases ... they become perhaps more transmissible but milder or less severe. If that is the case then that might be a positive direction. Federal defence minister Peter Dutton has backed Alan Tudge as he faces an investigation into his alleged conduct. Dutton was on the Today Show this morning and was asked about Tudge’s decision to step aside as education minister while he is investigated over abuse allegations that he denies. Here’s Dutton’s take: I certainly hope so. He’s a great minister. He’s got a great mind. I think if you speak to people within the Indigenous community, where he used to work, particularly in children’s education, he has a great passion for education. I’ve always found Alan to be a very honourable and decent man. He’s had an extramarital affair, a consensual one. He’s made a mistake. It’s cost him his marriage. There’s a lot of embarrassment on both sides, I have no doubt. But the matter is being investigated now, as it should be. But, you know, there are a lot of Australians who would find themselves in that position. It’s not unique to the parliament or to the Liberal party or the Labor party or the Greens. It involves human beings and people make mistakes from time to time and he’s fessed up to that mistake. I think we allow the investigation now to be conducted. The NSW Liberal party has set a quota of 50% women candidates to be preselected for the next federal election, but it has done this for nearly 10 years and has never reach the target. Senior Liberals are attempting to nudge the party into taking the issue seriously, although there is scepticism on its ability to meet the target considering past failures. A senior Liberal member of state executive told the Guardian: We set a target every election, then we fail to meet it. In the upcoming NSW local government elections we set a target of 50% women and we achieved 32%. We do this every election but we don’t achieve it, ever. Adding to the growing list of MPs choosing to quit politics at the next election, Nationals MP Damian Drum has announced he will retire. Drum, a former AFL coach, has worked in state and federal politics, taking the seat of Nicholls in 2016 after it being in Liberal hands for 20 years. In a statement this morning, Drum said it was “the right time” to go. I am very aware that this is a job where anything less than 110% is doing a disservice to the people who have put their faith in you to represent them. Sticking with MPs speaking on radio, independent MP Helen Haines is on RN Breakfast this morning, asked her thoughts on Scott Morrison’s take on a federal Icac: What we saw in question time this week was the prime minister brandishing what is essentially the same draft legislation the former attorney general put together more than a year ago ... And nothing’s changed. I would love the government to sit down with me ... to put together a committee of both major parties and the crossbench to come together and get it done for the Australian people because the government doesn’t seem to wish to do it by itself. This, of course, comes after Haines pushed to have a debate on a federal integrity watchdog last week and was blocked by a parliamentary technicality. Federal health minister Greg Hunt is on 2GB this morning after announcing he would not contest the next election, and is discussing his retirement plans: You’re only ever a part-time parent if you’re a parliamentarian. Despite, or because of, these absences [my children] are growing up to be amazing young adults. Ultimately, on my deathbed, I’ll be defined by my family. The NSW Liberal party has reportedly set a 50% target for female candidates in the upcoming federal election. The Sydney Morning Herald reported the party adopted the quota last night, in consultation with Scott Morrison. The report also says the target is exclusively for the 2022 election, and any further or more permanent quotas would need to be decided in the future. At this point, only around a quarter of federal Coalition MPs are women. Liberal MP Katie Allen is on RN Breakfast this morning. Asked what she thinks about the Jenkins report, she says there’s “a lot of very immediate things that are going to happen” and that it is a “necessary change to the culture”: We are meant to have a higher standard. People need to look up to us and know we are doing the best we can to lead the country in the best way possible. People should feel reassured that there’s a lot of very immediate things that are going to happen and have already been happening. This is a necessary change to the culture. Asked if the men in parliament “get it”, Allen said: I absolutely do, now. I think that this has been a real #MeToo moment in parliament. I don’t think anyone blames [Scott Morrison] for causing the problem but they want him to fix it. It’s a very difficult thing for men to talk about an issue that men seem to be part of the significant problem that’s happening. Is the Liberal party a “boys club”?: I don’t feel that way. I’ve been completely supported by my Coalition colleagues. I have to say, the opposition men have been difficult to deal with sometimes. They’ve been quite aggressive in parliament. There are reports a senator was granted an exemption to enter South Australia that is usually reserved for unvaccinated travellers. The Advertiser is reporting that Liberal senator Alex Antic is spending 14 days in quarantine, again usually required for unvaccinated travellers. When asked at the airport what his vaccine status was, he reportedly said: “It’s none of your business.” This comes after Scott Morrison said on radio last week that Antic was vaccinated: Alex is vaccinated and double dose vaccinated, and of course I’ve spoken to him over the course of this last week and been working with him. We’ve reached out to the PM’s office for comment. Good morning, Mostafa Rachwani with you today after what was another wild sitting week in parliament. We begin in NSW, where the Omicron strain is continuing to spread after two new cases were identified yesterday afternoon, including in a child, bringing the total number of cases of the new variant in the state to nine. Urgent genomic testing is under way for the parents of the child, who also tested positive to the virus. The family had arrived on a flight from Doha on Thursday. Western Australia has shut its borders to South Australia, after its neighbour recorded 18 new cases yesterday. Most were linked to a school reunion. In Victoria, the new pandemic laws passed the state’s upper house, with the powers to be given to the premier and health minister in a fortnight. Finally, the fallout in Canberra from Alan Tudge’s decision to step down pending a review of his conduct will continue. The decision came after Tudge’s former media adviser, Rachelle Miller, said yesterday the former education minister was emotionally and physically abusive. Tudge said he “completely and utterly rejected” the accusations. We’re also expecting Labor to unveil medium-term emissions reductions targets, and a suite of new policies this morning, depending on the decisions of the shadow cabinet. We’ll bring you updates on everything happening and everything in between as the day rolls on.Magnus Carlsen, the world champion, finally broke the tough resistance of his Russian challenger Ian Nepomniachtchi on Friday night as the marathon sixth round of their 14-game title match in Dubai ended with victory for the Norwegian after 136 moves. The endgame battle, where Carlsen’s rook, knight and pawn gradually outmanoeuvered his opponent’s lone queen, was the longest game in world championship history, surpassing the 124-move draw between Anatoly Karpov and Viktor Korchnoi at the “Battle of Baguio” in the Philippines in 1978. Carlsen’s victory took nearly eight hours and the game finished after midnight in Dubai. It was achieved in a style which has become a Carlsen trademark throughout his career, patiently nursing a tiny advantage for many hours – what the old masters used to call sitzfleisch – until his rival finally weakened. The tension was exacerbated because after the move 60 time control the players had to rely on the 30-second per move increment, and both were often down to two minutes. The many hours and days that Carlsen has spent perfecting his speed style on the internet played its part as he varied his pace, usually taking the full 30 seconds but occasionally letting loose with a barrage of quick moves. This is not a new technique and one which the former British champion and national trainer Bob Wade used to advocate for his pupils. Until Friday night Carlsen’s world championship draw sequence in classical games had started to become an embarrassment. It had reached 19, the last two of his 2016 series with Sergey Karjakin, all 12 of his 2018 defence against Fabiano Caruana, and the first five in Dubai, breaking the unwelcome record set by Karpov and Garry Kasparov during their “timeless test” series in Moscow 1984-85. Nepomniachtchi now has to try and recover his equilibrium after this morale-sapping defeat. As often in this match, he held his own well in the opening stages, defending confidently as Carlsen offered a surprise gambit in the Catalan, and keeping a level position until deep in the ending. He had his chance, too. During the flurry of moves to reach the first time control at move 40, both grandmasters erred and gave winning chances which were then missed. Earlier, Carlsen planned a fast start against an opponent he hoped would be nervous, but Nepomniachtchi, besides holding his own at the board, has also matched verbals in the post-game press conference. He revealed after game four that his aides and/or the Zhores super-computer had already prepared him for Carlsen’s intended surprise 18 Nh4!? planning to regroup the knight via g2 to e3 or even a4 targeting pawns. The concept behind 18 Nh4!? was reminiscent of a Czech talent test of long ago, with a white knight at a1 and black pawns at c6, f6, c3 and f3, where the knight has to go up the board to a8, rank by rank, while avoiding squares occupied or attacked by the pawns. The best talents, including the future world class Vlastimil Hort, could do this in two minutes. Game two has been the most revealing so far for what could happen with both sides outside their prep, as Carlsen misplayed his attack before Nepomniachtchi played too safe at a critical moment. Their memory banks and super-computer back-ups are in good shape, so the question is who will cope better as the nervous tension becomes acute in the last few games. The opening of the match so far is the Anti-Marshall 1 e4 e5 2 Nf3 Nc6 3 Bb5 a6 4 Ba4 Nf6 5 0-0 Be7 6 Re1 b5 7 Bb3 0-0 8 a4!? which avoids the Marshall Gambit 8 c3 d5. The variation’s last outing in a world title series was in 1993, when Kasparov won games one, three and seven against Nigel Short with it, effectively deciding the match at the start, although Short was unlucky in game one when he overstepped the time limit in the better position at move 40, the last before the time control. The fact that Nepomniachtchi, like Kasparov, got a superior position from the opening will probably make 8 a4 more popular, though Black players can easily avoid it by playing 7...d6 first, with 0-0 to follow. The games to date have been correct rather than brilliant, but the huge growth in quality and quantity of online websites has meant that this has been the best ever world championship for online audiences of all playing standards. For the casual viewer who knows little about chess and its top players, the Guardian’s own coverage by Sean Ingle and Bryan Armen Graham explains the plans, the controversies and the background without overloading the reader with too much technical detail, yet convey the excitement when either player senses a breakthrough. Keen newcomers to chess and average club players can find the ideas, attacks and defences analysed by the three-time British champion David Howell and England’s No 1 woman, Jovanka Houska, on Chess24, and the same site has coverage for advanced players and experts by the all-time No 1 woman, Judit Polgar, and the Netherlands world No 7, Anish Giri, who provide a mine of instruction, even though Giri talks too fast. Vishy Anand’s sage judgments as an ex-world champion are a feature of the official Fide site, while US viewers will be interested in the all-American commentary team led by Caruana, the world No 4, on chess.com. Jonathan Penrose, who died on Tuesday aged 88, won the British championship a record 10 times, defeated Mikhail Tal at the 1960 Olympiad, and nearly beat Bobby Fischer at the same event. Penrose was a true amateur, a college lecturer who only played tournaments during vacations, yet he will go down as one of the all-time greats of English chess. Three of his most memorable moments at the board came when he was just 16, his brilliant wins against Efim Bogolyubov and Savielly Tartakower at Southsea 1950, and his 10-move miniature featured in this week’s puzzle. 3792 1....Bxf2+! 2 Kxf2 Ng4+ 3 Ke1(if 3 Kg1 Qb6+ forces mate) Ne3 4 Qa4+ Bd7 and White resigned. If 5 Qa3/b4 Nc2+ wins the queen.Very few rock bands make it to 40 years. And for Shonen Knife, this landmark seems all the more unlikely – there haven’t been many all-women rock bands from Japan who turned their obsession with junk food, cute animals and Ramones into an international career. Their breakthrough came with 1992’s Let’s Knife, released in Britain by Creation Records shortly after a career-changing tour with Nirvana. It was a punk album like no other, featuring lyrical observations on the envy frontwoman Naoko Yamano felt for exotic American girls with blond hair and blue eyes, alongside pontification on life’s more frivolous joys: eating jellybeans, riding a bicycle, fishing for black bass, and – rather less relatably – becoming a cat and growing whiskers. “I was too embarrassed to write songs about love,” says Naoko, 60, as we sit in the Tokyo office of Shonen Knife’s Japanese record label to reflect on the past 40 years. “Instead, I wanted to write about the topics that were important to me, like sweets and delicious food, or cute animals. I’m not really a very deep thinker, so I just want to write music that will make people feel happy.” Shonen Knife formed in 1981 when Naoko and her schoolfriend Michie Nakatani cemented their love for the Beatles, the Jam and Ramones into something of their own. With Naoko on guitar and Nakatani on bass, they enlisted Naoko’s younger sister, Atsuko, on drums. The trio entered a tiny room at the Rock Inn rehearsal studio in Osaka for the first time on 29 December 1981. “It felt good to hear the guitar and bass coming through the amplifiers, and the loud drum sound,” recalls Naoko of that first rehearsal, where they played covers of songs by British punk and pop bands such as Delta 5, Buzzcocks and Mo-dettes. Then, in March 1982, they played their first gig at a small Osaka venue, where young Atsuko became so overpowered by nerves that she broke out in a rash. Among the seven or eight songs they played that night was Parallel Woman, the first song Naoko ever wrote. Later released on their 1983 album Burning Farm, Parallel Woman set the template for Shonen Knife’s approach to songwriting, with detailed observational lyrics about Naoko’s experience of working in a factory while dreaming of revealing her true identity as a rock’n’roll superheroine – the mundane writ fantastic. In a punk scene where bands snarled lyrics about class war, drugs, sex and violence, Naoko and Nakatani wrote songs that were overwhelmingly positive, innocent and fun, making their music all the more disarming. “Shonen Knife’s embrace of everyday kitsch showed that alternative music didn’t have to be doomy and impenetrable – and that well-constructed pop wasn’t just the preserve of crack backroom writers,” says Gus Lobban, of London-based pop band Kero Kero Bonito. He hails songs such as I Wanna Eat Chocobars as “colourful, ragged and hummable all at once – they still feel cheekily subversive today,” and says their attitude “altered my perception of what DIY expression could be”. With the advent of music streaming and social media still decades away, Shonen Knife managed to build a strong following in the US and Europe. During a visit to Japan in the mid 80s, Calvin Johnson – founder of K Records, a label at the heart of the indie, punk and grunge scenes in Washington state – discovered an early Shonen Knife record at a Tokyo record shop and, finding Naoko’s home address printed on the inner sleeve, wrote her a letter offering to release an expanded version of Burning Farm in the US. This 1985 cassette release led to endorsements from alternative-rock leaders Sonic Youth, L7, Babes in Toyland and Redd Kross, who all covered Shonen Knife songs for the 1989 compilation Every Band Has a Shonen Knife Who Loves Them. Then, at the personal request of Kurt Cobain, Shonen Knife toured with Nirvana in late 1991 – just as they were becoming the biggest band in the world. “I didn’t know who Nirvana were before that, but they looked wild, and I was so scared, so I didn’t want to tour with them at first,” laughs Naoko. “But by the end of the tour we became friends. Kurt Cobain gave it everything he had every night, screaming and playing guitar so hard, so I respected Nirvana’s attitude towards playing music a lot.” The other support band, Captain America, were pelted with cups by the audience at a gig in Kilburn, London. “But since we were all female and we had come from a faraway country, the audience treated us more politely.” Cobain, for his part, raved about Shonen Knife’s performances on that tour. “I’ve never been so thrilled in my whole life,” he told Melody Maker. “They play pop music – pop, pop, pop music.” One newly converted fan in the audience at London’s Kilburn National Ballroom on 5 December 1991, was the comedian Stewart Lee. “It’s easy to forget – before the internet – how Kurt Cobain’s patronage acted as a kind of bush telegraph,” recalls Lee. “Under normal circumstances, a female Japanese Ramones-inflected powerpop trio would be a hard sell in any capacity other than as a novelty, but Cobain used his celebrity to push loads of massively worthwhile music over the line. I’ve loved Shonen Knife ever since.” Lee booked them for the All Tomorrow’s Parties festival he curated in 2016. “They arrived, Naoko still at the helm at 55, in futuristic spacewear, and sent out great waves of 1-2-3-4 joy to the crowd. Women were marginalised figures in the era of music Shonen Knife emerged from, and they were, and still are, true pioneers.” After the Nirvana tour, the 1992 release of Let’s Knife was primed for western success, the first of many albums to be recorded entirely in English. The slight grammatical errors or strange pronunciations are part of Shonen Knife’s charm, enhancing the innocence of their sound. “I don’t want to sing perfectly in English,” says Naoko. “I prefer to sound original.” If a band this relentlessly cheery can have a dark period, for Shonen Knife it began in the mid 1990s. The band found themselves without a label in Europe for over a decade from 1994, then in 1999, Nakatani – the band’s bassist, co-founder and joint songwriter – quit after their wonderful album Happy Hour, citing the strain of touring. Despite this tough period, Naoko says she never once considered surrender. “Michie leaving was a little hard for me, but I felt I should go forward,” she says. “When people become happy through our music, that makes me happy too. That’s why I make music. That’s what gives me the motivation to keep going. I’ve never even thought about giving up.” After Nakatani left, Naoko’s sister Atsuko moved up from drums to bass, opening a revolving door of support drummers, and later in 2006 she herself left the band for an extended period to settle down in Los Angeles. Atsuko is back in the band now, but Naoko has been the only constant member. Despite all of these obstacles, Shonen Knife have consistently released music since they formed, and in 2009 they signed with UK label Damnably, ending their wilderness years in Britain. Having also joined Good Charmel, the US label run by Goo Goo Dolls bassist Robby Takac, this marked the start of a joyous new era in Shonen Knife’s career: they have released eight new studio albums since 2007 and toured the world repeatedly for a new generation of fans. “Over the years, I’d been involved with Shonen Knife first simply as a fan and then later as label owner, producer, roadie, van driver and after many releases and tours, as friends,” says Takac. “I’ve always been struck by the commitment, dedication and attention to detail Naoko and the group have shown.” Naoko and Atsuko are now joined by the forever-beaming Risa Kawano on drums. The band are already planning for their next album, which Naoko hints may have a late-Beatles-style psychedelic influence. “If people will look back and say, ‘There used to be this really fun band from Osaka,’ that’s enough for me,” she says of their legacy. I ask her what advice she would give now to her 40-year younger self. “I have no advice,” she laughs. “I’m very free and I’m not earnest. So even if I gave some advice to the 40-year younger Naoko, she would not follow it, and I would not follow hers!” I ask if she has a favourite Shonen Knife album or song, but she bats this away, too: “The next album will be the best one.” And so on. “I never look back and I never feel regret,” she says, adding she will probably never retire. “If I can live for another 40 years, I can be the oldest rock musician in the world,” she laughs. “The happiest memory is still in the future.” • Shonen Knife will play 18 shows around the UK from 13 AprilLast week, the energy company Bulb became the latest and largest victim of a bloodbath that has seen 25 firms go to the wall. Emergency procedures for “special administration” have been used for the first time, with Bulb effectively being bailed out by the taxpayer to avoid leaving its 1.7 million customers without power. As a result of the UK’s energy crisis, we face a situation where just a few large firms dominate the market, with millions of households expected to face hardship this winter as fuel bills soar. Sound familiar? Not so long ago, the outsized power of big energy companies was a major political issue. People in the UK paid more for their energy and were less satisfied with their suppliers than almost anywhere else in Europe. Thousands of people were dying every winter because they could not afford to heat their homes. We were told that more competition was the answer: the fresh air of the free market would ventilate the UK’s broken energy system and solve these problems at a stroke. When Ed Miliband first proposed an energy price cap in 2013, he was decried as a mad Marxist – only to see the Conservatives adopt his policy four years later. But recent events have brought us full circle. The competition experiment has well and truly failed. Once lauded as the solution to overcharging and fuel poverty, small challenger firms are now being castigated as irresponsible, reckless and “badly run”. Meanwhile, the Big Six are revelling in their new status as heroes, piously declaring that customers need “a sustainable and responsible supplier market” – in other words, them. Firms are also taking aim at the energy price cap, complaining that it has left them shouldering unsustainable losses as wholesale gas prices spike. So how can we make sense of all this? We need to start with a crucial but underappreciated fact: energy supply companies – the firms that we buy our electricity and gas from – do not own our energy system. They are essentially middlemen: buying energy on the wholesale markets, selling it on to you and pocketing the difference. They aren’t responsible for generating the power that keeps your lights on, or for running the networks that supply it to your home. In practice, some of the Big Six firms do some of these things – but the law requires them to run these activities through separate entities from the ones you pay your bills to. The obvious next question is why on earth you would design an energy system this way. The answer is ideological. In the 1980s, the Thatcher government had a problem. It was committed to privatising the power stations and grids that produced and supplied our energy. But its doctrine of efficient markets didn’t work for a system that, like the railways, was a natural monopoly. Its solution was to create a completely new, separate function of “energy supply”, whose sole purpose was to turn this natural monopoly into an artificial market. The theory was that this would force companies to compete for customers – driving prices down and boosting investment. The reality was rather different. Customers rarely bothered to switch and, as long as wholesale energy prices stayed low, the new system was a licence to print money. Even when competition did start to emerge, the odds were still stacked against new entrants. This is a business with high fixed costs and huge economies of scale. Companies need a “hedging strategy” to manage the risk of yo-yoing wholesale prices. This favours large firms that can afford to employ whole trading floors of people to bet on the future price of energy on financial markets. When Big Six firms brand failing rivals “less well run”, what they really mean is “less enormous”. It’s their sheer size and access to capital, not superior talent, that has left the old titans of our energy system as the last men standing. This has also demolished a different vision for how competition could fix the market, a view most clearly expressed by Lisa Nandy when she declared in the 2020 Labour leadership contest: “If I’m honest, I think nationalising the energy companies is a waste of money. Disrupting them by setting up municipal energy companies and energy co-ops around the country is a much better route.” She was not alone in finding hope in this prospect. Many were inspired by the progress made in Germany and Denmark towards local, democratic renewable energy, and thought the UK could emulate this through municipal firms such as Nottingham’s Robin Hood Energy. But these plucky young Davids were, in the end, no match for our energy Goliaths. All went under after a previous bout of market turbulence in 2018. Even had they succeeded, they could never have lived up to the burden that was placed on them. The phrase “municipal energy” painted a picture of cities producing their own energy and distributing it to local people. But without control of the grid, which is owned by a patchwork of private monopoly companies, it was not within local authorities’ power to do this. They were simply playing the wholesale markets in a game that was rigged against them. It’s not that progressives were wrong to aspire to a green energy system that is decentralised and democratic. While the grid itself is a natural monopoly, the energy that powers it can – and should – be generated by a range of democratically owned renewable sources, from community solar co-ops to large-scale public offshore wind. But trying to out-compete the Big Six while leaving the rest of the system untouched was never a plausible route to this future. What’s more, liberalised energy markets – a model now exported from the UK across Europe – have actually undermined such efforts: community energy co-ops have struggled to compete with corporate giants when bidding to supply the grid. The attempt to create competitive energy markets has caused more problems than it has solved. Opponents of public ownership need to explain how they plan to solve the problems that competition was supposed to fix. And big firms that declare that only they can manage the risks of fluctuating prices need to explain why this is preferable to having a single public utility. After all, as last week’s bailout shows, when push comes to shove these risks will be socialised anyway. The reason why the government cannot allow a firm such as Bulb to fail is simple: access to energy is an essential public good. So why don’t we treat it like one? Christine Berry is a freelance writer and researcher based in ManchesterLate morning at St George’s Park and the weather is perishing. Freezing rain is driving across the landscaped parkland that is home to England’s national football teams. At the back of the complex, apparently oblivious to the conditions, are the men’s blind team, thudding each other into the hoardings. “If you’re not talking, you’re not doing the right thing!” hollers the head coach, Jonathan Pugh, known by everyone as Pughie, as he watches his players go through their drills. This is the first day of a crucial training camp, with a number of new young talents to be bedded in and two fixtures against Germany squeezed in for good measure, but it also comes at an inflection point for the sport. If you have experienced blind football, perhaps the five-a-side competition that is part of the Paralympics, you will know it is mesmerising. At the top level, it is characterised by sinuous dribbling and rasping finishes. It is a game with a rhythm of its own. But to watch it, as a sighted person, gives only a partial sense of its complexity and challenges. It is a sport, its advocates insist, which offers transformative effects for those who play. Here’s one way in which blind football operates on a different level from other versions of the game. Perhaps obviously, given that every player must cover their eyes to ensure equality between people with differing impairments, it has a distinct aural dimension. Coaching instructions can be issued from three sections of the pitch: from the goalkeeper (the one sighted position), a coach at the halfway line and another behind the opposition goal. Each player must not only talk with their teammates but signal their intention to challenge for the ball. They must shout the Spanish word “voy” as they approach an opponent in possession or any tackle is illegal. Finally there is the ball, a hard handball-style object filled with ball bearings whose rattle players must tune into. On this wintry morning, that is particularly challenging: the rain has seeped into the lining and deadened the noise. “In blind football you’ve got to stay switched on all the time,” says Owen Bainbridge, the England captain and, at 31, one of the side’s most experienced players. “So as well as being quite physically tiring, it’s also mentally draining as well. Awareness and communication are massive. You need to have spatial awareness, orientation skills, echo location too. And we haven’t even mentioned the football skills.” Bainbridge gets up from the table, recovering from the chill, and shows off his ability to locate by echo, identifying correctly all the barriers around him, to the extent of picking out the corners on the window framing. Turning blind at the age of seven, Bainbridge never understood the complexities of football from a visual perspective. Others, whose vision changed later in life, have that appreciation but not the same internal awareness. Bainbridge says all share their different skills but each of their lives has benefited from taking up the sport. “It has massively improved my life skills,” he says. “Everything I use on the football pitch I use if I’m walking down the street.” Pugh, a former semi-pro player, began his career in blind football as a goalkeeper. Rocketing shots and toe-pokes are common, he explains, speed being of the essence in an attempt to catch a keeper off guard. “There are some players in the world who are unbelievably accurate in their shooting,” he says. “It’s really hard to even fathom how they know what they’re doing, but they just do.” After playing for England under the tutelage of Tony Larkin, the godfather of blind football in England, Pugh has been head coach since 2014. His involvement extends from grassroots to elite level. He finds himself deeply involved in a long-awaited expansion of the game. This autumn the Football Association announced its first strategy for the development of disability football. This meant an increase in funding and an emphasis on increasing participation. But in blind football the grassroots essentially remains to be built. There are only three teams. It includes about 50 players and “we’re talking all ages, sizes and genders”, Pugh says. One of the commitments in the FA’s Football Your Way strategy is to create a women’s international team. There is also, at grassroots level, FA-funded expansion into 19 new sites of what is called B1, a small-sided controlled version of blind football that seeks to introduce more visually impaired people to the game. B1, Pugh says, takes place in a “controlled environment” that means it can be safe. “Quite often people are turned off blind football because family, friends, guardians are worried it’s an aggressive game,” he says. “Sometimes [people choose] the safer sports because you get the same social interaction and some life skills along the way. But they’re not the same as those you get when you play football. I find that our players are not only stupidly independent but their life skills are such that you wouldn’t notice their disability. Which I think is amazing.” The UN-endorsed International Day of People with Disabilities falls on Friday. Its goals are to raise awareness but also encourage optimism and Pugh has that in abundance. He says a new approach to the grassroots will help blind football grow exponentially, with hundreds of people set to come into the game. “It’s going to change everything,” he says. “I don’t walk around hoping that people are going to be blind but sadly people will lose their sight either congenitally or throughout their life and we want to give them a chance, at any age. So I’m excited about the future.” Bainbridge went on to captain England to two 0-0 draws against Germany last weekend. He too is excited about the growth in the sport, allowing blind people to develop skills and expose themselves to risk on their own terms. “Going into blind football is mainstream football for us and now you’ve got kids who are playing it from seven years old. Can you imagine what kind of opportunities that is giving them?”Given recent government advice to avoid kissing strangers under the mistletoe this Christmas, there’s a sense in which the long-trailed festive hook-up between Ed Sheeran and Elton John counts as a reckless incitement to anarchy. For his part, Sheeran wants nothing more than a relentless tonguing beneath those poison berries this December: “Kiss me,” he sings; then later, “just keep kissing me!” (To be fair, this noted Wife Guy is unquestionably singing about his wife. Did you know he has a wife? He might have mentioned it.) In every other respect, however, Merry Christmas – in case the perfunctory title didn’t make clear – is the very exemplar of avoiding unnecessary risk during this perilous season. There are sleigh bells. Church bells. Clattering reindeer hooves. A kids’ choir. Sickly strings. The full selection box, and delivered with about as much imagination as that staple stocking filler. Old friends Sheeran and John encourage us to “pray for December snow”, and the overall effect is a blanketing avalanche of plinky-plonky schmaltz rich in bonhomie and derivative in tune. Post-Love Actually (which Sheeran parodied in an Instagram teaser for the song), post-department store festive ad arms race, the British cultural imagination around Christmas has been boiled down, like overdone sprouts, to the most banal set of tropes possible. And Ed’n’Elton have got the lot. Christmas is about love and drinking wine and lighting the fire and singing along to songs – preferably this one please, streamed indiscriminately. Of course, this Christmas is also about that pesky pandemic. “I know there’s been pain this year, but it’s time to let it go,” Sheeran sings, pitchily. Look, sorry Uncle Martin died of the Covid, but do stop moping and have a Lindt ball. “While we’re here, can we all spare a thought for the ones who have gone?” they harmonise, in the loosest sense of the word. Tonight thank God it’s them instead of you, eh? Adding to the flimsy sense of this being an Official Pandemic Christmas Song is the fact that Elton appears to be yelling his lyrics from the socially distanced safe remove of the back garden (rather like he did for that barked, Shooting Stars club-style version of I’m Still Standing he performed during the first lockdown). The rare cliche they skip is that Christmas is a season of goodwill to all men. And you may well ask: what’s the harm? Why the humbug? Especially since, during the 2021 Christmas period, all proceeds are laudably split between Sheeran’s Suffolk Music Foundation and John’s Aids Foundation. But Elton John made one of the greatest Christmas hits of all time. Step Into Christmas has that dialled-up, manic energy that all the best Christmas songs have (and which reflects the tenor of this time of year more than homilies about fires and snow). With the absolutely will-this-do Merry Christmas, Sheeran and John seem to operate on the idea that it’s the thought that counts. They really, really shouldn’t have.The prosecution: Rob Lakshmi spends her entire salary on the cats, then says she can’t afford to go on holiday with me I think of cats as pets, while my girlfriend, Lakshmi, refers to them as her “children”. We have Bella, Kiera and Fiona, who are a year old. Lakshmi and I usually live apart, but moved in together for the duration of lockdown. I had to move out of my home office, as it was turned into the cat’s bedroom. Lakshmi and I are very different in our attitudes towards the cats, but her stance affects us both. Lakshmi will spend her entire month’s wages on the cats. She has cancelled dinner dates, using the money to pay for cat food and vet bills. She recently spent £400 on a wifi-controlled catflap. When Fiona wasn’t eating normally, Lakshmi once spent £1,700 on scans, blood observations and checkups. It turned out Fiona was constipated. We had to cancel our holiday after that, as Lakshmi didn’t have enough money left to go. We’ve been together five years and keep our finances separate. Lakshmi will pay for a lot of the cat stuff, and I’ll take care of the human food. She spends loads on expensive cat food but gets annoyed if I don’t get the cheapest supermarket-brand food for us. I eat cheap ham, but the cats have the finest. She also gets mad if I point out that five daily dishes of dry cat food for three cats – as well as extra treats – is too much. I once said the cats were getting heavy and she didn’t talk to me for two days. We split the cost of our holidays and going out. Normally this works, but recently Lakshmi has complained about having no money. We want to have a long holiday to celebrate our five-year anniversary and I’m worried that she’ll cancel if some unexpected cat expense comes up. She once nearly missed a dentist appointment she’d waited a year for because Keira had a runny eye. Lakshmi should stop spending so much on the cats and prioritise her finances. It’s her choice how she spends her money, of course, but I’d like to know she can pay for her half of things if we are making plans together. The defence: Lakshmi I feel that I have to prioritise my cats’ health, wellbeing and diet over my own Rob’s exaggerating about me spending all my money on the cats. But I can choose to live it up or to help my cats – and I choose the cats. You have to prioritise their health, wellbeing and food before your own. Rob complains about eating cheap food, but he’s usually happy to shop at Lidl so I don’t get why he cares. I buy the finest for the cats and the cheapest for us. There’s no way I’d give the cats low-cost supermarket food. They have lovely, glossy bodies because they eat the best. The time Fiona wasn’t right, Rob agreed with me. The vet confirmed she wasn’t well, so I was right. Rob was just concerned about the money. I’m particular about the cats because I once missed Bella’s bad tooth. I had taken her for a checkup and the vet told me she had a rotten molar, and that she might have been in pain for eight months. I felt so guilty. Now, whatever I have to pay at the vets, I just pay it. Yes, you have the consultation fees, plus the medicine and an extra £100 if it’s out of hours, but I don’t mind. I save up. Once, Rob didn’t realise the cat had been bitten in the tail, and it got infected. Waiting can make things worse. Another time, Keira was blinking loads and Rob said: “Whatever it is, she’s not going to die from it.” It’s his favourite line. I wanted to take her to the vet out of hours, but Rob said to wait. The next day, it turned out Keira had a scratched cornea and needed eye drops. Again, I felt guilty as we could have gone earlier. Rob has less of a right to say anything about my cats – they are my responsibility. We live apart, but spend alternate weekends at each other’s houses. Rob is the cat’s “uncle”. He thinks it’s ridiculous that I spent money on electronic catflaps but why not? Rob and I are always going to disagree. I don’t earn as much as him, so I have to weigh things up. I do need to go to the dentist’s for a new crown, but Keira has watery eyes and Fiona might have dermatitis, so I’ve delayed it. I can live with a bad tooth but my girls can’t live with that. The jury of Guardian readers Should Lakshmi stop spending so much money on her cats? Lakshmi’s cat pampering is completely bonkers. Their rich diet may give them glossy bodies, but also dermatitis, constipation and runny eyes! Were Lakshmi to have to choose between Rob and the cats, I’d hazard the cats would win paws down. Emma, 44 Lakshmi can spend her money however she wants. Rob, on the other hand, may want to consider whether he wishes to be with a partner who struggles to afford romantic activities because of her pet obsession. Lewis, 38 Lakshmi and Rob don’t normally live together so it is Lakshmi’s decision as to how much she spends on her cats. However, a sense of balance, both in terms of care for herself and her relationship, seems lacking. Lakshmi could get ill from not taking care of herself and thereby let the cats down. Cher, 51 Lakshmi’s choices are affecting their relationship. It’s not healthy to put pets above everything, you have to look after yourself first. Rob isn’t being unreasonable to ask for balance, and for his feelings to be considered fairly. Nick, 41 Lakshmi is an adult and has every right to make decisions relating to her cats even if some of them are extreme. Rob needs to decide whether he can live as (at best) fourth choice, and as a consequence Lakshmi may have to live with being a single cat lady. Arya, 37 You be the judge So now you can be the judge, click on the poll below to tell us: should Lakshmi spend less money on her cats? We’ll share the results on next week’s You be the judge. The poll is now closed Last week’s result We asked if Tom should listen to his partner Jenny and spend more time with his baby. 2% of you said no – Tom is innocent 98% of you said yes – Tom is guilty Have a disagreement you’d like settled? Or want to be part of our jury? Click hereI don’t want to start this review by talking about Insecure, Issa Rae’s seminal HBO comedy about four Black twenty-to-thirtysomethings in LA that broke ground for Black female friendship onscreen and built a pipeline for Black creatives off it. Amazon’s Harlem, a 10-episode series about four Black thirtysomethings in the storied New York neighborhood created by Girls Trip writer Tracy Oliver, should be measured on its own merits. But it’s hard not to map one on to the other, from buzzy soundtrack to stylish wardrobes to similar themes – the lingering question of an ex who’s maybe or maybe not moved on, dating apps, annoying white people, parental pressure. Insecure echoes in the dynamics of the Harlem group: the self-involved but endearing protagonist, the careerist afraid of being vulnerable, the neurotic romantic, the ribald and unapologetic fount of comic relief. Which is not to say Harlem is simply a reset of Insecure in New York; the half-hour series is an easy, sometimes fun and occasionally intriguing watch that treads the still undervalued ground of single women in their 30s. But with characters whose bits wear thin, punchlines that frequently boil down to horniness and explanations of racist dynamics that feel pulled from an Instagram slideshow, Harlem often tests the limits of representation as justification. The show’s quartet, like the group on Insecure, are best friends from their college days (swap Stanford for NYU), 10-plus years ago. Camille (Meagan Good) is beautiful, headstrong yet chronically awkward, an assistant professor of anthropology at Columbia hungry for a tenured position, validation and another shot with her ex, Ian (P Valley’s Tyler Lepley), who unexpectedly returns to the neighborhood after several years abroad. Tye (Jerrie Johnson) is the most financially secure of the bunch, the masc lesbian founder of a dating app for queer people of color whose icy exterior shields an intense aversion to vulnerability. Quinn (Empire’s Grace Byers) struggles to keep her sustainable fashion line afloat, going to great lengths to find a man and to avoid asking her wealthy, derisive mother (Jasmine Guy) for more money; like Insecure’s Tiffany, she’s the type-A fashionista of the bunch, whose exacting standards and desperation (going to Long Island for a disastrous 11pm date, in one episode-long punchline) offer ridiculous contrast to her friends. Quinn financially supports Angela (newcomer Shoniqua Shandai), attempting to relaunch her singing career after getting dropped from a record deal five years ago; like Insecure’s much-memed Kelli, Angie is bigger, louder, more brash than her friends – perpetually horny, perpetually searching, the raunchy and gloriously self-confident deliverer of punchlines with comparatively less character development. Over the course of the season, the group navigates universal tribulations – dating, career setbacks, miscommunications – and neighborhood-specific ones: the gentrification of Harlem, the limited availability of single Black men, the fraught dynamics of interracial dating in a mostly Black neighborhood. The show can be enjoyable – the quartet’s chemistry infectious, the twists intriguing if sometimes overdone, the numerous men reliably hot, the soundtrack hip and the outfits never boring. Lepley and Good’s chemistry is more than sufficient to root for a reunion that would definitely cause a lot of problems for a lot of people, most notably his British fiancee. But the show sometimes feels stumped by what to do beyond calling out its representational politics. There’s something to mine in the “real life man shortage”, but the points dovetail into an awkward comparison to a tribe of women in Asia studied by Camille, and literal “yassss queen”-ing. Harlem is most interesting when the easy assumptions of righteousness are complicated: when Camille learns the gentrifying bistro she’s protesting (only to impress her new boss, played by Whoopi Goldberg, who’s disdainful of Camille’s social media fame) has hired Ian as its head chef. Or when Tye’s fair trepidation with dating a white woman collides with her fear of emotional intimacy, or Angie’s desperation to be a singer meets the reality of a pandering Get Out Broadway musical (Sunken Place song and dance included). As a white critic, I’m wary of assessing the politics of a show unapologetically for and about Black women. But the show’s didactic handling of racism – from Camille’s monologue about the trope of the Strong Black Woman to Tye’s struggle to have callous white doctors take her abdominal pain seriously – feels oddly aimed at white audiences and, in particular, white liberal guilt. Regardless of intent or effect, the show’s overt aims at representation don’t cover for characters who, for most of the 10 episodes available for review, stay stuck in the rut of a few broadly sketched characteristics. The series’ eighth episode, set five years in the past, explores the decisions which refract through the rest of the season, offering welcome context to each woman’s consistent hangups and regrets. By season end, there’s plenty of material to grow on and from, and ample reason to give Harlem a second season to do so. The answer to “how could representation improve in Hollywood” is often more – more characters, more shows, more storylines, more opportunities. It is undeniably a good thing that characters like Camille, Tye, Quinn and Angie can be messy, alternately annoying and appealing protagonists, for female friendship to be the backbone, for a show like Harlem to exist and evolve. I just wish the development of the characters kept pace with the show’s progressive foundation. Harlem is now available on Amazon PrimeThe Conservatives have held the safe seat of Old Bexley and Sidcup in the first in a series of closely watched parliamentary byelections. Louie French was elected as the new MP, replacing the well-liked former cabinet minister James Brokenshire, who died in October from lung cancer. After a relatively short campaign, French won 11,189 votes – ahead of the closest challenger, Labour’s Daniel Francis, who got 6,711. The Tories’ majority in the 2019 general election of nearly 19,000 was cut to 4,478 – but given turnout was deemed to be low, at 34%, the vote share will be pored over more closely. There was a 10.3% swing to Labour. The Conservative party chair, Oliver Dowden, acknowledged that some voters may have been swayed by recent allegations of sleaze. He told Sky News: “Of course, people have concerns mid-term with any government’s performance. And, of course, people have been concerned about what’s happened over the past couple of months.” But he called the outcome “a good result for a governing party mid-term”. He added: “This idea that Labour have made some surge ahead is really for the birds. They’ve actually got about the same vote share as they secured under Jeremy Corbyn in 2017. Keir Starmer couldn’t even be bothered to turn up to the byelection, so I am really not terribly worried about Labour.” Votes for the Conservative candidate were down 13.06% from the last election, while Labour’s share rose 7.4%. Richard Tice, who stood for Reform UK, secured a first-time vote share of 6.59%. French paid tribute to his “good friend” Brokenshire and in a victory speech after the count said it was a “huge honour” to wear his former colleague’s blue rosette. It was a “tough contest … fought with dignity and respect,” French added, vowing that as a new MP he would “work with the government” to deliver on voters’ priorities – name-checking protecting green spaces, as well as improving school and hospital services and standing up to London’s Labour mayor, Sadiq Khan. French called his election to parliament “the greatest honour of my life”, and thanked his family, supporters and the Conservative party, vowing to “work tirelessly to repay the trust you put in me”. Francis told the Guardian after the result that if there were a similar rise in Labour’s share of the vote at a general election, “a very large number of Conservative MPs would be losing their seats”. He added: “We’re on a path back to government.” Voters began to mention more towards the end of the campaign “the sleaze that surrounds the prime minister and his competence”, Francis said. “That’s really been shown tonight in the number of Conservatives that have either stayed at home or switched across to us that we’ve seen in the swing.” Although the south London constituency has been blue for decades and was represented by the former Tory prime minister Ted Heath in the Commons, the result will help calm jitters within the party about Boris Johnson’s leadership. Some Tory voters who spoke to the Guardian during the campaign voiced dissatisfaction with the prime minister’s leadership – particularly in the wake of the damaging sleaze scandal. Other Conservative canvassers and aides reported hearing similar frustrations from some people who normally backed the party, in the run-up to the first byelection to be held in London since Johnson romped to victory in the 2019 general election. Labour insiders had talked down the prospect of a shock result like that seen in Chesham and Amersham in June – when the Liberal Democrats took the seat from the Conservatives – even though governments are traditionally punished at midterm byelections. Labour had sought to get the Conservatives’ vote share under 50%, but failed to do so and effectively conceded within minutes of the count getting under way. Ellie Reeves, the shadow solicitor general and MP for Lewisham West and Penge, said after the result: “Boris Johnson’s incompetence and broken promises have come into sharp focus in a staunch Conservative area. “This result that should worry the prime minister. A swing of 10.3% in a Tory stronghold, carried across the country in a general election, would have Labour within reach of a majority government.” Starmer has been bolstered by a recent levelling off in the national polls, seeing Labour equalise with the Conservatives for the first time since the start of 2021. Old Bexley and Sidcup has been held by the Conservatives since its creation The result in Old Bexley and Sidcup will ease immediate pressure on Johnson; however, there are further byelections to follow. Later in December, the Tories will try to hold North Shropshire – a seat vacated by Owen Paterson after the disgraced former MP was found to have committed an egregious breach of paid lobbying rules. A byelection will also be held in Southend West after the murder of its MP Sir David Amess. However, the Conservatives are expected to be the only major party to contest it as Labour and the Liberal Democrats plan not to field a candidate out of respect.Like Miles Davis, the Chicago drummer, remix producer and “beat scientist” Makaya McCraven senses that celebrating the jazz past means sympathetic reinvention by today’s improvisers, not turning long-gone performances into set-in-stone repertory music. Deciphering the Message, McCraven’s pithy homage to the Blue Note Records hard-bop catalogue of the 1960s, is seamlessly assembled from a mix of sampled live shows by his fine band, clips of the originals and his own hip-hop-schooled gifts for making cutting-edge beats out of almost any recorded sound. These 13 short tracks include classics by drums legend Art Blakey, pioneering jazz-funk pianist Horace Silver and pre-Rollins tenor sax heavyweight Dexter Gordon, ingeniously stitched into what could pass as a single live show. A Slice of the Top (by saxophonist Hank Mobley, an early-Coltrane disciple with a gift for sounding impassioned without exertion) appears here over McCraven’s dark, liquid drums-and-bass shuffle – quite different from a traditionally snappy bebop groove, but the laidback horns and piano parts just happen to have been played by Mobley, Lee Morgan and McCoy Tyner. In its deep-drums reverberations, Wail Bait sounds like McCraven’s drummer-leader hero Art Blakey’s band, but navigating a morphed-Latin ebb and flow; Coppin’ the Haven (from Dexter Gordon’s One Flight Up) makes the original’s languid groove less sassily hip, more silkily sensual. Autumn in New York – a dream-walk through the chord changes when played by guitarist Kenny Burrell in 1958 – has a sharper kick in McCraven’s mingling of Joel Ross’s vibes and Burrell/Grant Green descendent Jeff Parker’s guitar. Jazzers who know every twitch of the originals won’t abandon them now, and some, this writer included, will miss the fascinating long-form stories of resourceful improvisers on these barely two-minutes-plus tracks. But McCraven is balancing jazz’s precious tradition and its present and future here, and that’s a priceless contribution. Also out this month Formidable Phronesis pianist Ivo Neame unleashes a tour de force of lockdown woodshedding creativity with Glimpses of Truth (Whirlwind), home-brewing an uncannily live-sounding virtual big band, including Canadian trumpeter Ingrid Jensen and London tenorist George Crowley to play accessibly mind-boggling, rhythm-bending orchestral scores, reminiscent of those of Kenny Wheeler and Michael Gibbs. Swiss-born guitarist Nicolas Meier vivaciously mixes jazz, flamenco, Turkish and north African music on Magnificent (MGP Records), and Norwegian guitarist/singer Hedvig Mollestad fuses ghostly choral vocals, hand-clappy sax-honking grooves, metal-guitar clanging and hair-raising storm effects on the atmospheric and ruggedly lyrical Tempest Revisited (Rune Grammofon).The Fair Work Commission has ruled a Covid-19 vaccine mandate for all workers at BHP’s Mt Arthur coalmine was unlawful because the company did not consult adequately with its workers. Approximately 50 mine workers were stood down without pay last month after they were told they would be required to have had at least one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine to enter the work site after 9 November, and that they would need to be fully vaccinated by 31 January next year. The dispute between management of the Mt Arthur open cut coalmine in NSW’s Hunter Valley and the Construction, Forestry, Maritime, Mining and Energy Union (CFMMEU) was escalated to a hearing by the full bench of the Fair Work Commission in November. The commission’s president, Iain Ross, said in the ruling on Friday that the company’s vaccine mandate was not “a lawful or reasonable direction” mainly due to the mine management’s failure to consult with its employees about whether such a site access requirement was necessary. The company’s management is obliged to consult with employees over site access requirements under the Work Health and Safety Act. “We acknowledge that employers face a difficult task in managing the risks for their workers in such a dynamic environment [as the Covid-19 pandemic],” the ruling said. Without a public health order or a specific provision in an employment contract or legislation, the commission found, the legal basis for a vaccine mandate as a condition of entry to work premises could only come from “the implied contractual term that employees obey the lawful and reasonable directions of their employer”. BHP is the first Australian company to have its vaccine mandate overturned. There were a range of reasons that were in favour of the mandate, the ruling said, including the health and safety basis for the order and the company’s investment in vaccination arrangements for its employees, including the establishment of a vaccination hub. Had the company consulted with employees and been able to satisfy the commission that the mandate was “the outcome of a meaningful consultation process”, it would have had a strong case for a finding that it was a reasonable direction, the ruling said. In his additional remarks, Ross also said that directions by employers to their staff that are for health and safety purposes are likely to be lawful, provided the direction was reasonable, “because it falls within the scope of the employment and there is nothing illegal or unlawful about becoming vaccinated”. “The consultation deficiencies we have identified can be addressed by Mt Arthur consulting the employees in relation to the question of whether or not the site access requirement should be imposed at the mine. Any subsequent dispute will need to be determined having regard to the particular circumstances at the time,” the ruling said. The mine’s management was expected to be in a position to make a decision about whether a vaccination mandate was necessary as a site access requirement by the time Covid restrictions ease in NSW on 15 December at the latest, per the current NSW state government roadmap. The commission’s deputy president, Tony Saunders, had previously rejected an application from the CFMMEU for interim relief in which unvaccinated employees would be allowed on to the site to work while the matter was being heard, saying the risk of serious illness or death to others from contracting Covid-19 outweighed the inconvenience to those workers. Mine management agreed not to otherwise discipline employees on the basis of their noncompliance with the vaccination order until the commission had ruled on the matter. Approximately 1,000 people are employed at the mine under the company’s enterprise bargaining agreement, with another 1,000 working as contractors. All were subject to the mandate. BHP said in a statement at the time of making the mandate that it was “a necessary health and safety control to help protect our people, their families and communities – including remote Indigenous communities – while continuing to safely run our operations”. Peter Jordan, CFMEU Northern mining and NSW energy district president, said in a statement on Friday that BHP had been “arrogant” in making the mandate “without genuine workforce consultation or the backing of a public health order”. “The decision is a win for the rights of workers to be genuinely consulted about matters affecting them under state workplace health and safety laws,” Jordan said. “We will continue to work through the detail of this decision and represent the interests of our members – especially those who have been stood down without pay as a result of this unlawful direction.” A spokesperson for BHP said in a statement on Friday: “We note the decision from the Fair Work Commission, which acknowledges the risks presented by COVID-19 and has outlined that further consultation should occur. “The science is clear that vaccination saves lives. BHP supports widespread vaccination as the path forward for the Australian economy. We are assessing the implications of the decision and will work with the commission, our people and union representatives to ensure our workplace remains as safe as possible for our people, their families and the community.” Vaccination will remain a condition of entry at the Mt Arthur coal mine while the company undertakes the necessary consultation.Far from the Light of Heaven by Tade Thompson (Orbit) Space is vast but spaceships are by nature claustrophobic: Thompson plays cannily on that contrast. Passengers aboard the starship Ragtime are in suspended animation on their way to the distant planet Bloodroot, but 30 people have been murdered in their sleep. Thompson’s tale is cleverly plotted and tensely told as the investigating captain must work against her own crew, bio-contagion, violent robots and a demonic AI to uncover the murderer’s identity. The book does more than the description “locked-room mystery in space” suggests: not only wrong-footing the reader as its mystery unfolds, but creating a series of believable, compelling worlds with some genuinely alien aliens. The Actual Star by Monica Byrne (Voyager) This ambitious, inviting novel ranges from the declining Mayan civilisation in the year 1012, via a storyline set in 2012 in Belize, to the year 3012, when humanity lives in “a global system of nomadic, anarchist self-organisation”. By “inviting” I mean that it offers itself to readers as a way of thinking how to move beyond what the novel calls the “four great evils: capitalism, whiteness, patriarchy, nationalism”. Whether or not you agree that those are the four great evils, you will be swept into Byrne’s meticulously worked world-building by her compelling storytelling and rich prose. This is a book about the profound interrelations of past and present – the Mayan sections are marvels of vividly rendered research – and the hi-tech, mystical, sex-positive, post-climate-collapse diversitopia of its imagined future is simply extraordinary. Cwen by Alice Albinia (Serpent’s Tail) Although in the last few decades there has been an almost pathological obsession with dystopia, utopian writing is a much older mode. Not that there’s any wishful thinking about Alice Albinia’s feminist community, set on an archipelago “somewhere off the east coast of England”. When the de facto leader leaves for the uninhabited island of Cwen, named for its presiding goddess, what she has achieved on the archipelago is picked apart. Albinia engages throughout with the difficulties of trying to work for something better than what we have: the inertias and frictions of our world, its resistance to emancipation. She combines this with a wonderful vision of Britain’s deep history of myth and matriarchy. The Employees by Olga Ravn, translated by Martin Aitken (Lolli Editions) The Six-Thousand interstellar spaceship is a workspace; this short novel’s characters are workers. “You’d probably say it was a small world,” one of the characters says, “but not if you have to clean it.” The arrival on board of a number of strange alien objects galvanises a jumble of mundane and transcendent memories and provocations: intensities of taste and touch, of smell and consciousness. The book owes something to the Strugatsky brothers’ Roadside Picnic (or to the film Andrei Tarkovsky made of it, Stalker), though its alien artefacts are more compelling, and the ship more recognisably a place of office politics and corporate-speak. Coolly but artfully written, The Employees is a remarkable piece of work. Shards of Earth by Adrian Tchaikovsky (Tor) Since 2015’s breakthrough Children of Time, in which humans encounter a species of sympathetically rendered, sentient spider, Tchaikovsky has consolidated his position as the finest purveyor of high-quality space opera around. His new series, The Final Architecture, kicks off with this masterly example: space battles, cosmic mystery, alien superstructures, a ragtag crew of humans and aliens piloting a battered but trusty ship. Earth has been transformed into a vast “flower” and destroyed in the process: the war with the mysterious Architects is not as over as people think. The story treads some familiar ground, but does so with an expert touch, and the whole is deft and clever, expansive and readable, all informed by Tchaikovsky’s superbly baroque imaginative fecundity. • Browse all the featured books and save up to 15% at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.The second album from Modern Nature – a project helmed by Blackpool-born musician Jack Cooper, previously of indie duo Ultimate Painting – is designed to leave its audience awed. Noodling instrumentation, reverent silence, vaguely mystical lyrics and almost-whispered vocals all gesture towards profundity – as does the album’s conceit, with Cooper using The Tempest as a springboard for thoughts about a fictional island of his own. It also makes use of the talents of free jazz stars, namely saxophonist Evan Parker and pianist Alexander Hawkins. Island of Noise, in other words, has all the signifiers of a very serious and very worthy creative endeavour. It might have proved irritatingly pretentious were the end product not quite so mesmerising: abstract enough to spark the imagination, straightforwardly melodic enough to hold the attention. The emotional register is both hopeful and melancholic; the space both minimal and dense – tracks such as Ariel envelop without overwhelming. There are moments, especially when the island’s weather and wildlife are invoked in a more literal way, when it feels as if the album could be put to work as a meditation soundtrack – but it is, ultimately, too compelling for that. That’s partly thanks to Cooper’s vocal melodies, which feel both instinctive and counterintuitive, and partly thanks to his collaborators. The album opens with Parker’s squiggling sax, strange and small – eventually joined by ponderous piano and gravelly violin – and the instrument crops up in subtler but just as curious guises elsewhere. It helps make Island of Noise a treasure trove of interesting musical ideas, as well as a source of transportive, restorative solace.When he first read the script for You Don’t Know Me, Samuel Adewunmi assumed that the TV drama was set in the US. “It didn’t strike me as something that would air during primetime on the BBC,” he says. “It had so many Black characters at the forefront.” Once he clarified that the show was set in London (albeit filmed in Birmingham) it was “a must-have role. The whole story just felt truthful. I thought, this is a really interesting guy – his dignity, his identity, his morality – and the story was told from his perspective.” The four-part series opens with Adewunmi’s character, identified only as Hero, in the dock. On trial for murder, the hitherto law-abiding car salesman looks out at the jury and – in a desperate plea for their sympathy and mercy – begins to tell his story. In relaying his version of events to the court, he hopes to overcome what facts and evidence, both circumstantial and forensic, have suggested – and to avoid a life sentence. The series is based on a novel by the criminal barrister Imran Mahmood and was adapted by Vigil writer Tom Edge. “There’s this vein of anger in Imran as he writes it,” says Edge. “This is a world full of characters with intelligence and a capacity to work hard whose lives are squandered.” The show plays out in flashback, as Hero recounts the events leading up to his arrest, his courtroom address acting as a useful framing device and a comment on how the justice system works – and whose interests it serves. “[The novel] carried a real moral authority,” says Edge. “Lives are more than a collection of unfortunate circumstances, and we shouldn’t infer too much [about people].” That the speech is potentially Hero’s final act as a free man not only heightens the tension but serves as a reminder that the courts are where we tend to see young Black people penalised, rather than given a chance to communicate. Given that, as a group, men like Hero are nine times more likely to be locked up in England and Wales than their white peers, the ensuing lack of sympathy from the judge, jury and gallery is unsurprising. The complexity of the show lies in the subjectivity of Hero’s account. The audience, like the jury, is left to decide whether his motives – and indeed the characters he describes – are genuine, or the fabrications of a desperate man. The question of why key elements of his defence have been left to the concluding statement lingers over proceedings. That the protagonist is nameless only adds to the ambiguity. It feels appropriate, however: Hero (a tour de force from Adewunmi) is just one of the thousands of young men who find themselves at the sharp end of the justice system every year. Beyond its accomplished exploration of racial prejudice in that system (it brings to mind the early episodes of HBO’s The Night of, starring Riz Ahmed), the show also highlights much young Black British talent. Now 27, Adewunmi’s breakthrough came in the 2019 film The Last Tree (directed by Shola Amoo), a tender coming-of-age story of a young British-Nigerian boy growing up in Lincolnshire, London and Lagos. He also starred in “punk rock thriller” The Watch, an ambitious TV take on Terry Pratchett’s Discworld series. “It was much bigger budget than anything I’d ever done,” he says. “Much bigger sets and a fantasy, all very different to The Last Tree.” He says the relatively smaller scope of You Don’t Know Me was a welcome return to the sort of character work that truly excites him, although he felt the pressure of leading a primetime drama. “You’re constantly reminded that everyone’s gonna be watching,” he says. “But that’s not what’s important about the work.” Adewunmi is in practically every scene in the show, charged with overcoming both the jury and – perhaps – the viewers’ preconceptions about the accused. “I’m just a young guy from Camden Town, but there’s a massive responsibility on all of us to acknowledge that people’s minds are shaped by what they watch,” he says of the responsibility of programme-makers. “We have to vet the things we put out.” As in The Last Tree, his character is Yoruba, a West African ethnic group numbering 42 million globally, more than 100,000 of whom are in the UK, including Adewunmi’s family. “It was very important to me that people who come from where I come from – my friends and family – were going to be looking at real characters and their real lives.” Besides, he says, “it helps to have that element of personal attachment there”. In You Don’t Know Me, Adewunmi’s mother and sister are also played by actors of Yoruba heritage, Yetunde Oduwole and Bukky Bakray respectively. Much of the action takes place around Hero’s kitchen table, where the family flit between two languages. “That specificity was very important for it to feel authentic,” says Adewunmi. “These things were written in English but Sam [Sarmad Masud, the series director] especially wanted to imbue the story with elements of Hero’s home life by using the Yoruba language. It allows audiences a deeper view into the full scope of Britishness. [The fact that we keep] part of our original cultures is the beauty of London.” Bakray plays Hero’s sister, Bless, an observant “old soul”, who serves as his moral compass. It is only her second professional acting job, following her lead role in the coming-of-age film Rocks in 2019, a performance that saw her nominated for best actress at the Baftas and pick up the prestigious rising star award (former winners include Tom Holland, Letitia Wright and Daniel Kaluuya). “I still can’t believe that moment happened,” says the 19-year-old, who was discovered in a school drama lesson and says she had “no ambitions to be an actor” despite a lifelong love of film, particularly before-her-time classics of Black cinema such as Boyz n the Hood, Malcolm X and Training Day. “I’m very lucky with how the first few years have gone. I’ve met amazing people – directors, DOPs and editors as well as actors – who I try and learn from every day. [Making this show] was more like going to masterclasses than going to work.” She was particularly impressed by her co-star Michael Balogun, in the role of Face, the terrifying gang leader who plays puppet master in the second part of the series. Balogun discovered his passion for acting while he was in prison and working on licence in the kitchens at Rada. He later won a place at the drama school, graduating in 2017. “It was so great to experience the level of discipline someone like Michael brings to it. This is his craft and [from him] I learned that all you have to do is focus on one thing. I’ve carried that with me on to all the other jobs I’ve done.” Key to becoming Bless was creating a playlist for the character (“If I didn’t have music, I wouldn’t be able to act!”), an eclectic mix of Lauryn Hill, Frank Ocean, Al Green, Loyle Carner, Sade and Bon Iver. “I always have music that I draw on,” she says. “It’s the lyrics. There’s a song called Ottolenghi by Loyle Carner; he says: ‘Trying to exist and hide your face’. I feel that Bless is a character who feels marginal to everything and she’s always trying to hide.” In conveying the message of the series – that the justice system, as it stands, is not fit for purpose and that is evident in its outcomes – the cast put in assured and compelling performances. As for his lead, Edge describes him as “an amazing talent with a massive future ahead of him. As a writer, when you see how much depth an actor has, you don’t want to squander any moment you have with them.” • This article was amended on 3 December 2021. Samuel Adewunmi is on the right in the main picture, not the left as stated in an earlier caption; and a reference to the “British” justice system was removed as these systems are devolved in the UK. You Don’t Know Me begins on Sunday at 9pm, BBC OneAnother mountaineer might have scoffed. They might have raised a frostbitten thumb over their pack-strapped shoulder at the 8,000m peak in the distance and the set of tracks winding down from its snow-capped pinnacle to their soggy boots and huffed, Can I at least catch my breath? They might have waved off the notion of venturing back to that frozen hellhole to rescue a stranded climber, who doubtless would have been alert to the myriad risks of scaling the world’s 10th-highest point. On top of all that Nirmal Purja had other mountains to climb – and the clock was ticking. Loudly. But Purja, who goes by Nims for short, isn’t built like the rest of us. For a start, there’s something deep within him that simply won’t countenance the idea of leaving a person in peril. So even though a fresh cresting of Annapurna I, the giant in the Himalayan massif with a notoriously deadly legacy, had wrung him out physically and psychically, Nims was dutifully airlifted back up the peak with his crack team of Sherpas. As the pitch dark night and bitter wind pushed the already freezing temperatures even lower, Nims and his teammates had to slap themselves to stay awake to finish the mission in time for the next helicopter pass – which they made with five minutes to spare. That stranded climber would have been unlikely to survive if Nims hadn’t been on that ridge, too. But Nims doesn’t make a big deal out of his no-man-left-behind ethos. Mostly, he shrugs. “If I don’t apply that in my civilian stuff, whatever I’m doing, then I don’t think I’m moving forward,” he tells the Guardian from Kathmandu. The emotional tug-of-war between the greater glory and the greater good is what lies at the core of 14 Peaks – the recently released Netflix documentary chronicling Nims’ attempt to summit the world’s 14 highest peaks (all of which stand 8,000m or higher) in seven months during 2019. For context, the previous record was seven years, and among the first men to set it was Reinhold Messner – easily one of the most accomplished explorers in recent history. At first this expedition – dubbed Project Possible – doesn’t just sound ludicrous; it feels way too big for Nims, a relative newcomer to mountaineering whose hard-partying, Instagram-influencing reputation would seem at odds with the gravity of his goal. But through the skillful direction of director Torquil Jones, who was behind the exhaustive doc on England manager Bobby Robson, we quickly learn that Nims is no social climber. Rather, the 38-year-old from Nepal is a military veteran with a glittering career as a Gurkha (beginning at 18) and in the Special Boat Service. In December 2012, while on leave, he fell in love with climbing during a trek to Everest base camp, twisting his guide’s arm (figuratively, we think) until he helped him summit the 6,119m Lobuche East peak. That was the beginning of a career built to topple climbing records. But Nims, a self-styled “Usain Bolt of peaks” known to set climbing records hungover, isn’t only looking to distinguish himself. He’s equally driven to win recognition for Nepalese Sherpas, who have operated too long and too faithfully in the shadow of the white western mountaineers reaching for immortality. It hardly spoils 14 Peaks to reveal that, despite his rarified perch in the mountaineering world, even Nims gets used. “I would be at the front with my team setting fixed lines, carrying probably 30-35 kg, trailblazing around in waist-deep snow at the death zone, and some either European or western climber with nothing to carry would just, like, follow behind,” Nims says. “And at the end, they wouldn’t even say thank you. They wouldn’t even speak openly in their social media about it. And I think if people could do that to me, imagine what they could do to someone older or uneducated?” The thing that shines through over the course of 14 Peak’s 99 minutes is the smile with which Nims greets rudeness and roadblocks. When his fundraising campaign for Project Possible dead-ends, he takes out a second mortgage on his house – then hits the jackpot when his photo of a traffic jam of climbers on Mount Everest goes viral and lands on the front page of the New York Times. When he trundles into the defeated camp at the base of K2, where other climbers commiserated over their failed attempts to summit the 10th peak on Project Possible’s to-do list, he blazed an apogee trail for everyone else to follow. When China initially denied him access to Shishapangma, the last peak on the list, Nims brought down that great bureaucratic wall by appealing directly to the Nepalese government and bombarding their Chinese counterparts with glowing recommendation letters. All the while in the background, he reckoned with strife at home (his anxious wife, his ailing mother, an angry older brother who resented his decision to leave the military to chase this fever dream) and that other giant peak – the ever-growing mountain of sponsorship obligations. And then of course there was the documentary shoot he was actively producing, an added responsibility that should justify his decision to scale those peaks under the assistance of oxygen – a point of contention in the climbing community. “In the whole of this project, climbing was the easiest thing I have done,” he says. You don’t have to be a mountaineering enthusiast to enjoy 14 Peaks. The extreme force of Nims’s infectious personality makes that easy enough. But what’s likely to have you returning to the film time and again is the warmth at the heart of Nims’s Mother Abbess-like mission, a testament to the levels a person can ascend if they don’t let negativity stand in the way of their big dreams. “It’s about achieving the impossible in life,” says Nims, who went from growing up poor and watching TV through his neighbors’ windows to starring and producing “one of the biggest mountaineering films in the world … that has been translated into 31 different languages. So, you know, you don’t need to go to film school and all that stuff to create this. You just need to have a vision.” All the same, 14 Peaks will be tough to top.The Chinese ride-hailing firm Didi is to move its listing from the New York stock exchange to Hong Kong, as Beijing cracks down on the country’s biggest technology companies. The company said it would start “immediate” preparations to delist in New York and prepare to go public in Hong Kong. “After a careful study, the company will start delisting on the New York stock exchange immediately, and start preparations for listing in Hong Kong,” the company posted on its Weibo account on Friday, a Twitter-like service in China. It comes less than six months after Didi made its $4.4bn (£3.3bn) flotation in New York, making it the biggest listing by a Chinese company in the US since Alibaba in 2014, only to see investors sharply sell off shares days later as China’s internet regulator ordered its ride-hailing app to be taken off domestic app stores. It was also banned from signing up new users, and subjected to a “cybersecurity review”, as Beijing flexed its muscle to curtail Didi’s international expansion plans. In August, Didi suspended plans to launch in Europe and the UK, where it had secured licences to operate in Manchester, Salford and Sheffield. Didi, which is so dominant in its home market that Uber pulled out of China in 2016 in exchange for a stake, said its board had authorised the company to ensure its shares “will be convertible into freely tradeable shares of the company on another internationally recognised stock exchange”. Didi’s delisting is the latest development in a long-running crackdown on the rising power of China’s tech companies by Beijing. Last year, regulators stepped in at the last minute to block the $34bn flotation of Jack Ma’s Ant Group, which would have been the biggest ever corporate fundraising. In April, Ma’s Alibaba paid a record $2.8bn fine to settle an investigation by Chinese regulators into anticompetitive practices at the e-commerce company. Authorities began to focus on businesses owned by Ma, one of China’s most popular, outspoken and wealthiest entrepreneurs, after he gave a blunt speech last year criticising national regulators, which reportedly infuriated the president, Xi Jinping.School closures in India during the pandemic have left their mark on more than the children who have seen delays to their learning. In one Kashmiri village the impact has been catastrophic on employment. Pick up a pencil anywhere across India and it is likely to come from the poplar trees of Ukhoo. This village, with an abundance of trees, about 10 miles south of Srinagar city in Kashmir’s Pulwama district, supplies more than 90% of the wood used by India’s pencil manufacturers, which export to more than 150 countries. Before Covid, more than 2,500 people worked in the village’s 17 pencil factories and the industry supported about 250 families. But, after nearly two years of school closures and a dramatic drop in demand for the village’s products, factory owners reduced their workforce by more than half. Workers were dismissed without pay, while many of those who kept their jobs had migrated from other parts of India, and were cheaper to employ. Now the village and its workforce are waiting eagerly for the market to revive. Rajesh Kumar, 26, from Bihar, has worked in Ukhoo for seven years. Like other migrant workers, he lives in a room on the factory premises and works 10- to 12-hour shifts. During lockdown last year, the factory owner provided food and accommodation when production shutdown for about three months. He is one of the luckier ones to be back working now. “I hope the pencil demand increases and these factories are full of workers again, as many of our friends and people from our villages find work [here] and are able to make a living,” says Kumar. Farooq Ahmed Wani, 27, from the city of Jammu, has worked as a machine operator in Ukhoo for the past five years. “We are hoping that schools reopen throughout the country so that there is more demand for pencils in the market,” he says in an optimistic tone. “Then these factories can employ more young people and more migrants can also get some work here.” Pencil wala Gaon, or “pencil village”, attracted the attention of India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi. In his monthly radio programme, Mann Ki Baat, last year he said the district was an example of how to reduce the country’s dependency on imports. “Once upon a time we used to import wood for pencils from abroad but now our Pulwama is making the country self-sufficient in the field of pencil making,” Modi said. A recent ministry of home affairs report said that the village would be developed as a “special zone” for manufacturing. “Now the whole country would be supplied finished pencils, manufactured completely in Pulwama,” the report noted. But the pandemic has shown how overreliance on one product in a region brings its own problems. Abrar Ahmed, a unit supervisor at one of Ukhoo’s factories, says everyone has suffered. “Even the sawdust from woodcutting machines is usually taken by the local villagers who then sell it to poultry farms and for other purposes in the village.” Manzoor Ahmad Allaie owns one of the biggest factories in Ukhoo. “We are only doing about 30% to 40% [of normal levels of] business now because of the Covid lockdown impact from last year, which means we produce about only 80 bags of pencil slats a day,” says Allaie. “Earlier we could produce about 300 pencil slat bags [a day] in the factory, which were transported out of Kashmir.” He is eagerly looking forward to India’s schools fully reopening. It has been a hard two years for the pencil villagers, he says. Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:The importance of world-leading clinical research has never been more apparent than over the past 18 months. In 2020-21, more than 1.39 million people in England took part in studies sponsored by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR), the largest number the government body has had, and close to double that for 2019-20. Around 1 million of that total were recruited to take part in research investigating new treatments and developing vaccines for Covid-19. “Research is one of the most exciting areas of healthcare,” says Dr Peter Phiri, research and development manager at the Southern Health NHS foundation trust in Southampton. “It’s about enquiry, finding solutions and testing assumptions. And when you hear about the impact, it’s so rewarding. Because we’ve all been benefactors of research conducted at one time or another.” Southern Health is part of the Wessex Clinical Research Network (CRN), one of 15 CRNs that deliver health and social care research across England – much of which is funded by NIHR. Southern Health is currently running a large observational study, with Prof Shanaya Rathod and Phiri on the team, to investigate the psychological impact of the Covid-19 pandemic and the restrictions imposed on people worldwide. More than 188,000 participants have been recruited in the UK and internationally, with the initial findings of a smaller, mainly UK-based, sample suggesting that healthcare workers have experienced mild depression and anxiety in higher proportions than others. “We recognise the pandemic will impact everyone differently,” says Phiri. “Therefore identifying specific mental healthcare requirements is key.” Beyond the impact of Covid-19, the trust conducts studies into many areas of mental and physical health, including psychosis, depression, stroke, diabetes, cardiac conditions, dementia and long-term neurological conditions. “Our research portfolio is very broad, whether it’s finding cures or better treatments or improving the quality of care for patients,” says Phiri. “Research has benefits for our organisation and employees too. Our vision is to encourage and embed a culture of research that gives every patient, carer and member of staff an opportunity to take part.” Technology is essential, not least because of the sheer volume of data collected from thousands of participants. Data management systems have become essential for the team, and Qualtrics Core XM has been a gamechanger in terms of designing and distributing study questionnaires since they started using it in 2020. “Prior to using Qualtrics, we had another platform for staff surveys but we couldn’t use it for patient-related research because of strict data-privacy rules,” says Phiri. The platform also comes with its own statistical analysis package, which Phiri has found useful for evaluating whether the participant cohort is weighted too heavily towards one particular group. “That’s one of the biggest challenges with observational studies,” he says. “Sometimes you get more of one group – whether it’s younger or older people, women or men – completing the surveys. In Qualtrics, you can quickly see that distribution, so you can do more recruitment and advertising targeted at a specific group. It’s really useful and unlike any other platform I’ve used before.” Collaboration is streamlined whether other research teams are based elsewhere in the UK or abroad. That proved particularly helpful during the team’s recent Covid research. “I can open a study and invite other partners to collaborate without having to actively share the data with them. It all stays within the platform,” says Phiri. Moving forward, facilitating this secure data sharing will have wider benefits for healthcare research. Southern Health is one of the 14 NHS mental health trusts UK-wide that are part of the Clinical Record Interactive Search system (CRIS) network. The research platform harnesses more than 2m de-identified patient records to advance research into dementia and mental health. “It means we can analyse big data in one area,” Phiri says. “I can run a study in Southern Health, and link up with the other 13 trusts to run the same study there digitally. That means the results are going to be generalisable across the country.” It also speeds up the application of theoretical research to real-life settings. “There’s always been this notion around research that it takes 17 years to translate from the lab to clinical practice,” Phiri says. “We’ve been working hard to reduce that transition phase. These types of platforms are one key way for us to do that.” He sees potential for the use of digital questionnaires in other areas of healthcare. Outcome measure assessments, for example, are usually conducted using paper-based questionnaires when the patient enters a service, and at regular intervals to measure progression and treatment outcomes. “That’s always been a challenge for clinicians across the country,” Phiri says. “Collecting paper-based outcome measures, uploading them on to a system and then linking them up with electronic patient records. With Qualtrics, the questionnaires are automated, can be used on any device and are easily linked with the patient’s clinical data. There are lots of untapped opportunities.” After an unprecedented 18 months, he is optimistic about the future of clinical research, bolstered by technology. “The acceleration of use of these platforms enables us to meet patients wherever they are,” he says. “We’re already considering running fully remote or hybrid trials. It brings about flexibility, so we can provide multiple solutions to different groups of people who wouldn’t otherwise participate. And it enables us to link the available data so we can get a fuller picture of an individual’s treatment plan.” SAP solutions help clients optimise processes, deliver better public value, stay agile, and be ready to change quicklyThe government failed to guard properly against fraud in its £47bn Covid emergency lending programme for small businesses, opening itself up to billions of pounds of losses, a watchdog has said. The bounce-back loan scheme launched in May 2020 and did not include credit checks or fully verify the identity of small businesses applying for loans, the National Audit Office, which scrutinises public-sector spending, said. “Government prioritised getting bounce-back loans to small businesses quickly but failed to put adequate fraud prevention measures in place,” said Gareth Davies, the NAO’s comptroller and auditor general. “One impact of these decisions is apparent in the high levels of estimated fraud.” The government launched the scheme at the start of the pandemic to stop the collapse of small businesses. Firms could borrow up to £50,000 or or a maximum of 25% of annual turnover from accredited banks. About a quarter of UK businesses applied to the scheme, and 1.5m bounce-back loans – which were 100% guaranteed by the government – worth £47bn were made. In March, Britain’s business ministry, which ran the programme via the British Business Bank, a state lender, estimated that 37% of the loans would not be repaid and that 11% came from fraudulent applications. A subsequent investigation by the accountancy firm PwC in October revised the fraud rate down to 7.5%, although the NAO said it had not had time to check this estimate itself. Other countries are also investigating the misuse of emergency loans issued during the pandemic. Meg Hillier, the Labour chair of the cross-party public accounts committee, said the government had done too little to reduce “colossal risks of fraud and error”. “It’s now focusing on recovering money from organised crime, yet many of the smaller-scale fraudsters will have slipped through its fingers,” she added. The business ministry said loans and other support had helped millions of firms avoid laying off staff. “We are working closely with lenders and enforcement authorities to minimise fraud and ensure those that have committed fraud face consequences,” a spokesperson said.It might be the unlucky play for British theatre rep types. But for movie directors, Macbeth has been a talisman, a fascinating and liberating challenge – for Akira Kurosawa, with his version, Throne of Blood; for Roman Polanski; and for Justin Kurzel. Even Orson Welles’s once-scorned movie version from 1948, with its quaint Scottish accents, is admired today for its lo-fi energy. Now, Joel Coen, the co-creator of masterpieces such as Fargo, The Big Lebowski, A Serious Man and No Country for Old Men, has directed a starkly brilliant version entitled The Tragedy of Macbeth, shot in high-contrast black and white, an eerie nightmare of clarity and purity, with Denzel Washington as Macbeth and Frances McDormand (Coen’s wife) as Lady Macbeth. Intriguingly, Coen came to this demanding film project without his brother and longtime collaborator, Ethan, working solo for the first time in nearly 40 years. I meet up with Coen in the library of a boutique hotel in central London, where he is snuffling his way through a little pack of tissues – due to a cold, he was quick to establish, not Covid. It is the second time we have met. The first was in 2004, after the Cannes premiere of the Coens’ interesting if flawed remake of the Ealing comedy The Ladykillers. He told me about his British grandfather, Victor Coen, a barrister in the London Inns of Court, who retired to Hove, on the East Sussex coast, where young Ethan and Joel used to go on visits. How did he come to Macbeth? The answer is: via McDormand. “At one time, Fran was not considered right for Shakespeare by the New York theatre community,” says Coen. “That changed at a certain point. She asked me if I would direct Macbeth on stage and I said I wouldn’t have the slightest idea what to do. So she went ahead and did it anyway. It was seven or eight years ago in San Francisco, playing Lady Macbeth with Conleth Hill” – that is, the Olivier-winning Northern Irish actor from Game of Thrones – “directed by Dan Sullivan, who is excellent. I told her it was something that I could get my head around as a movie.” Coen has never made any formal study of Shakespeare, but he worked with an old friend, the Shakespeare scholar Hanford Woods from Dawson College in Montreal. “I’ve read a lot of Shakespeare and seen a lot of adaptations, a lot of the Oliviers and Welles’s Chimes at Midnight.” A key influence was Trevor Nunn’s 1979 staging of Macbeth for the RSC, with the young Ian McKellen and Judi Dench – it is available on YouTube. His main concern was boiling down the text without reducing its identity. “I wanted to do Shakespeare for people who don’t want to see Shakespeare, or who might even be intimidated by it. But I wanted to preserve the power of the text, because that’s the melody of the thing – and I wanted to figure out how to get the rhythm that goes relentlessly through the whole thing like a murder movie.” Macbeth, he says, is the first movie thriller. “It’s amazing how this play prefigures 20th-century pulp noir tropes.” Could it be that this Macbeth is like the Coens’ black-and-white noir thriller, The Man Who Wasn’t There? He is cautious: “That was about a barber and this is about kings and queens.” I tell him that I love the toughly modern line readings he encouraged from his cast, particularly the exchange between Macbeth and Lady Macbeth when they are tensely imagining what could go wrong: Macbeth: “If we should fail?” Lady Macbeth: “We fail?” In reply to Washington’s agonised tension, McDormand turns the question mark at the end of her line into an exclamation point so her reply has an aggressive energy. Joel laughs: “Yes, that’s Fran! That’s what she brought to it. Her Lady Macbeth says: ‘We fail? OK, so we fail! Big fucking deal! That’s life!’” He also reveals he made one tiny change to Shakespeare’s lines, which I hadn’t noticed, relating to the eternal mystery of the Macbeths’ childlessness. “This is a post-menopausal Macbeth. Macbeth originally says to her: ‘Bring forth men-children only / For thy undaunted mettle should compose / Nothing but males.’ We changed it so Denzel says ‘should have composed nothing but males’. They are an older couple, past childbearing age. Time, mortality and the future are vital themes.” But what about tackling all this without Ethan? “Very strange. I missed him. That’s the bottom line. Of course I missed him. I’ve worked with him for over 35 years, and if ever there was a problem on set we would look at each other first. But this isn’t a movie that would have interested him. I had a personal interest in it and he didn’t.” And is it a permanent split? “Look, here’s the thing. When we started working together, we never asked ourselves if this was permanent, and we don’t think about this in that way, either. We just thought we should do some different things for a while. But I could get hit by a bus tomorrow. I’m in my late 60s. Hopefully, I can do this for a while – but who the fuck knows?” He gives a wheezing laugh. Meanwhile, Coen is relishing the pause that the lockdown brought, despite the initial panic, when the production had to be shut down in the middle of principal photography and there were worries about getting the cast back to finish work on sound stages in Los Angeles that would have to be dismantled at some point. But it gave him the leisure to complete the editing at his own pace. Did he use the solitude of lockdown to contemplate himself? “No!” he laughs. “I am completely uninterested in any part of myself that I didn’t know before; I just wanted to cut the movie and it was business as usual.” He has no plans to do Shakespeare again; he is just happy to see the result on the cinema screen. “It was fabulous to do once. It’s been gratifying. Really gratifying to see something with a big audience!” • The Tragedy of Macbeth is in UK cinemas from 26 Decembers andon Apple TV+ from 14 JanuaryThe Biden administration’s move to revive Donald Trump’s “Remain in Mexico” policy will subject thousands of people to “enormous suffering” and leave them vulnerable to kidnap and rape as they languish in dangerous Mexican border cities, migration advocates have warned. After reaching a deal with Mexico, the US will by 6 December start returning asylum seekers from other Latin American countries to Mexico, where they will be obliged to wait while their case is assessed. Under the policy, first implemented by Trump, asylum seekers were left stranded in violent Mexican border cities where they were routinely targeted by organized crime groups for rape, robbery, extortion and abduction. The US government is promising to improve the scheme to allow asylum seekers legal representation and to conclude their claims “within six months of an individual’s initial return to Mexico”. Mexico said US officials met its concerns over funding for migrant shelters, protection for vulnerable groups and access to medical checkups and Covid-19 vaccines. It also promised to take “local safety conditions” into account before accepting asylum seekers – a pledge that provoked disquiet among migrant advocates. But advocates argue that the main shortcomings of the programme are unchanged. “The violence faced by migrants in Mexico is going to outweigh any sort of promise made by the Mexican government to try to make this better,” said Linda Rivas, executive director of Las Americas Immigrant Advocacy Center in El Paso, Texas. “There aren’t enough shelters. People are continuing to be kidnapped – sometimes in their own shelter … Mexico can try [to protect migrants] but the reality is Mexico doesn’t have the means of doing it.” The scheme, known euphemistically as the Migrant Protection Protocols (MPP), was part of a barrage of Trump policies aimed at undercutting the asylum system. The Trump administration also invoked a previously obscure public health law, Title 42, in order to carry out summary expulsions because of the supposed health risk posed by migrants during the Covid pandemic. Biden campaigned on putting a friendlier face on US immigration policy – but in office he has kept Title 42 in place. In August, a federal judge ordered the US government to revive the Remain in Mexico programme – a decision the Biden administration is appealing. “You now have two policies [Title 42 and Remain in Mexico] which are no longer Trump policies, but Biden policies,” Rivas said. “Biden has the ability to end Title 42 and he hasn’t done it. We’re seeing enormous suffering along the border.” Asylum seekers and migrant advocates have given horrific accounts of violence visited on people sent to Mexico under MPP. Taxi drivers in Ciudad Juárez have picked out foreigners in the city and delivered them to criminal gangs. Children have disappeared from migrant shelters. Women have been raped and murdered. Human Rights First, a US human rights group which investigated the abuses of Remain in Mexico, documented more than 1,500 cases of kidnappings and attacks against migrants who were sent across the border to Mexico. Many of the asylum seekers being returned to Mexico, Rivas said, were not informed by US border officials of where they were headed until the last minute. The misery of the MPP scheme was encapsulated in a tent camp along the Rio Grande in Matamoros, opposite Brownsville, Texas, where asylum seekers endured floods, freezing weather and extortion by local gangs. “It’s inevitable these migrants will form these camps again,” said Father Francisco Gallardo, director of migrant ministries in the Diocese of Matamoros. “All of the border cities are going to fill up with migrants.” Reviving MPP may cause some political headaches for Biden, but the issue has received little attention in the Mexican media. President Andrés Manuel López Obrador did not address the issue at his morning press conference on Thursday, even as he in effect abandoned his 2018 campaign promises to not “do the dirty work” of other governments on immigration. “The Mexican government is very aligned with the legacy that Trump left – of immigration control,” said Tonatiuh Guillén López, a former immigration commissioner, who resigned in 2019 after Mexico caved to Trump’s threats to stop migration through the country or face crippling tariffs. “Mexico became an apparatus of [US] immigration controls.”The Biden administration, in the midst of a major push to encourage the take-up of electric vehicles, has been provided a sobering reminder of how badly the US is lagging in the adoption of zero-emission cars. The White House has set a goal for electric vehicles to make up 50% of all new car sales by the end of this decade in order to slash planet-heating emissions and help avert disastrous climate change. But a new report has found that electric cars will make up just 4% of American sales in 2021, compared with 9% in China and 14% of new sales in Europe. This is in line with a distinct recent trend – while electric vehicles are on the rise in the US, with the fleet climbing at an annual rate of 28% between 2015 and 2020, the other major car markets have pulled significantly ahead. The electric vehicle fleet grew at 51% a year in China over the same five-year period, while Europe has seen a 41% annual increase. A lack of federal government support for electric vehicles, cheap gasoline prices in the US and a paucity of charging infrastructure is holding back progress, the report by ING found, with a drastic increase to nearly 9m zero-emission car sales needed by 2030 to hit the administration’s goal. “What happened is that Europe set new carbon dioxide limits for cars while Donald Trump took the US backwards,” said Margo Oge, who previously oversaw vehicle regulation at the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), in reference to the former president’s decision to weaken pollution standards for new vehicles. “The policies of the Trump administration are reflecting the US being behind. But the US can catch up if it does the right things.” Joe Biden has sought to throw his weight behind electric cars, recently taking the new electric Hummer for a test drive at a GM plant in Michigan and declaring it “one hell of a vehicle”. On Sunday, Pete Buttigieg, the president’s secretary of transportation, further touted electric vehicles by stating that anyone buying one “will never have to worry about gas prices again”. The administration is pinning its hopes on a vast $1.75tn reconciliation bill, which has yet to pass an evenly divided Senate, to drive uptake. The legislation provides tax credits of up to $12,500 for car buyers if they choose an electric vehicle. A separate infrastructure bill passed last month provided billions of dollars towards a Biden goal of installing 500,000 electric vehicle chargers across the country. Meanwhile, the EPA is preparing to issue new regulations, set to be unveiled before Christmas, that will require more stringent fuel efficiency standards for new cars. The EPA is also expected to act upon an executive order signed by Biden that demands the 50% electric vehicle target is met. The legislative and regulatory actions will, Oge said, help push carmakers such as Ford and GM, which have already set their own goals to phase out gasoline and diesel cars, to follow through with their promises. “If the White House gives that strong message I think companies will start really moving on this,” she said. It’s still uncertain what level of electric vehicle incentive will come from the reconciliation bill, however, with the centrist senator Joe Manchin, a crucial swing vote, expressing opposition that the maximum $12,500 rebate depends on electric vehicles being made in the US by a union workforce. Some carmakers have objected to this too, pointing out that barely any electric cars are currently made by unionized workers in the US. The plan would “severely limit consumer choice and adaptability”, according to a letter sent to senators by a dozen auto companies including Volkswagen, Honda and Toyota. Biden has said he wants “those jobs here in Michigan, not halfway around the globe” during a visit to a training center for UAW, the auto union, in October.Thirty is definitely not the best age to kick off an esports career. In that world I am aged, with lower-back pain and reflexes about as sharp as a wooden spoon. But nonetheless, earlier this year, I found myself standing in a dimly lit east-London bar, huddled among the city’s greatest players of Super Smash Bros, Nintendo’s beloved fighting game. As the throng of competitors reminisced over previous tournaments and shared high-level techniques, I stared apprehensively at my name on the tournament ladder, hoping that nobody would find out that I only started playing Smash last year. At the risk of sounding like the narrator of a 90s teen film, let’s rewind. My Smash obsession began during the joyous era of lockdown one. As Covid-19 exploded devastatingly and invisibly, the humble Bow flat I shared slowly morphed from fun-loving party pad into cramped, claustrophobic prison. We did our best to keep things light with bike rides, poorly measured portions of weed brownies and increasingly ridiculous themed nights – but Super Smash Bros Ultimate was what really got me through the mind-numbing ordeal that was 2020. As one of the few games my long time friend and flatmate Akbar played, this bonkers-looking fighter became our multiplayer meeting point, our big night out. Furloughed, stressed and with few ways to channel my growing frustration, being humiliated by Akbar’s roster of cartoon characters was a welcome escape for me and our other flatmate, Andrew – much to our non-gamer friends’ dismay. Because Akbar been playing since the series’ genesis on N64, and I struggled to grasp even the basic principles of the game, these living-room showdowns were hardly a fair fight at first. But over 10 gruelling months, we collectively poured 600 hours into the brawler. I found myself reading Smash patch notes, watching pro player videos, and “training” on my own. When lockdown lifted, I moved into my own flat – but my hunger for Smash was far from satiated. So I signed us all up for an this tournament – a move that my third Smash brother Ed called “being dragged into Tom’s public humiliation fetish”. One of three regular London Smash tournaments, East London Smash (ELS) featured the smallest bracket (20 competitors) and most modest prize pool (£40). The disarmingly nice event organiser, known only as Aggressive Duck, informed us that they host Power Ranked players – recognised as the best in the UK and Europe. No pressure, then. At the tournament, pints in hand, we perused the competitor list. Up against such formidable fighters as Crispy, DAT: RePtile and GimpBizkit, it was clear that we had our work cut out. To make matters worse, as my ragtag ensemble played some friendlies to warm up, we met someone who had competed in four UK-based tournaments in the last week. Some of our opponents had travelled from Cyprus and Italy. Of my four-strong lockdown Smash squad, one chickened out. But Akbar Jabar and Ed, competing under the professional alias “bumbumbum”, both stuck with me. The friendlies were out of the way, and it was time to get serious. Inexplicably seeded into the second round, I found myself playing the Cypriot champion, a friendly-looking chap with disarmingly good form as The Legend of Zelda’s Link. Despite whittling his pointy-haired avatar down to the last life in the first round, his relentless barrage of projectiles and clever off-stage play proved too much for my rudimentary playstyle. Instantly picking up my movement and attack patterns, over the next two games, he proceeded to completely wipe the floor with me. Thankfully, my lack of pro techniques eventually proved an asset. Facing a tournament regular who battled as the fearsome Diddy Kong, my erratic moves and random aggression proved baffling to him. Much to my surprise, after an incredibly intense 10-minute showdown, I managed to bait my opponent into a trap, spiking him off the stage to win. My smash crew erupted in cheers. The next two games were close, but my monkey-loving foe ultimately reigned supreme. Still, to me that was beside the point. Against all odds I had done the seemingly impossible and won a tournament game. My friends played admirably, too. While group favourite Akbar got repeatedly disrespected by a Wii Fit Trainer player named Joe, our young hopeful Ed consistently managed to survive, down to the very last life; he lost every match, but only by a hair’s breadth. But regardless of our less-than-heroic performances, we all came away feeling euphoric. We’d held our own! After weeks of training with my chosen fighter, Kazuya, it felt like all those hours I’d poured into this strange little game had been worth something. My lockdown obsession had led to a life-affirming night out. London’s Smash players are a passionate and friendly community, a collection of people from different backgrounds united by a shared love for a niche video game. Thanks to a refreshing lack of elitism, machismo or gatekeeping, it all felt surprisingly wholesome for a competitive environment. As someone who never had the ability, training or fitness to play actual sports, it scratched an itch I didn’t know I had. Thanks for tolerating us at your event, Aggressive Duck. You can bet I’ll be back - whether I win, or (inevitably) lose.In the 14 June 1939 edition of the New York Post, Hy Turkin wrote a story on Morris Arnovich, the Philadelphia Phillies left fielder leading the National League with a .398 batting average. Morris was “chock full of hustle,” Turkin wrote, and a “sure bet” to make that season’s All-Star team. Then, in the fifth paragraph, Turkin made reference to Arnovich’s religion: “Jewish,” Turkin wrote, plainly. “Orthodox.” Even if Arnovich, commonly referred to as the “Son of Israel” during his playing days, became less observant in his later years, as his family told the Guardian, he has long held a place in history as the most religious Jewish major leaguer. That could change soon. In July, the Arizona Diamondbacks selected Jacob Steinmetz, a 6ft 5in right-handed pitcher from Woodmere, New York, No 77 overall in the MLB draft. In the process, Steinmetz became the first known Orthodox Jew to be taken in the MLB draft since its 1965 inception. In the 20th round, the Washington Nationals drafted catcher Elie Kligman, a product of Las Vegas and also an Orthodox Jew. Steinmetz and Kligman’s selections were a reason for celebration in their community, but there is a reason for the lack of precedent. The Orthodox practice a strict observance of Jewish law, normally defined by regular Torah study, adherence to a kosher diet and observance of the Sabbath, which calls for practitioners to not perform any “work” from sundown Friday through sunset Saturday. The demanding routine often pushes them to the outskirts of an increasingly secular nation. “To juggle school work, to juggle being an Orthodox Jew, and to put in the amount of time it takes to get to the next level, it’s something most people don’t have the desire to do, or the drive to do,” says Jason Meyer, Steinmetz’s coach at the Hebrew Academy of Five Towns &amp; Rockaway. “Somehow Jacob and Elie made it work.” Jewish observance and baseball have butted heads before, most notably in the case of Sandy Koufax, the Hall of Fame pitcher for the Dodgers who famously refused to pitch Game 1 of the 1965 World Series because it fell on Yom Kippur (his replacement, Don Drysdale, had an awful game and told his manager: “I bet right now you wish I was Jewish, too” as he was pulled from the field). Hank Greenberg, a Hall of Fame first baseman who played in the majors from 1930-47, also refused to play on Yom Kippur. What makes Steinmetz and Kligman different is their daily devotion to Jewish law (Koufax, Greenberg and other less observant Jewish players regularly competed on the Sabbath throughout their careers). Kligman, who is honoring his commitment to Wake Forest before turning pro, will not play on the Sabbath during the season, but as a catcher won’t be expected to play every day anyway. Steinmetz, who is from the more moderate Modern Orthodox branch, will play on the Sabbath but plans to walk to games rather than use transportation, to avoid violating Jewish law. Steinmetz and Kligman’s careers will function not just as case studies on the collision of religion and sport, but on what happens when the foundational elements of a young person’s life come into conflict. The players, and their families, believe they’re equipped to navigate the road ahead. Steinmetz and Kligman are fortified by their faith, as well as something Arnovitz didn’t have: A friend who understands. “There’s only [two people] on the planet, currently, who can share the same thoughts and feelings about everything,” says Kligman’s father, Marc, “and that’s Jacob and Elie.” *** Steinmetz and Kligman grew up on opposite sides of the country, unaware of the other’s existence. As they worked to accomplish what had not been done before, they relied on their families. One summer 2018 evening, on a drive through the Arizona desert, Marc Kligman took a reading of his son’s heart. Elie, a rising high school sophomore, had just turned heads yet again at a tournament. Marc knew college coaches were going to start calling to ask Elie about his game but also about his observance of the Sabbath. Marc, a longtime MLB player agent, had been tipped off that the ritual could hurt his son’s scholarship opportunities. “Will you have the strength to keep Shabbos?” he asked. “People might say you shouldn’t do this.” Elie, his father recalled, was resolute. The Sabbath is about honoring God, and as an observant Jew, that was his foremost responsibility. Baseball would come second. That won’t change at Wake Forest, or if he makes it to the major leagues. “It’s a holy day,” Elie said, simply. For as accommodating as coaches have been, from youth league through high school – some pushed Friday night games up and Saturday afternoon games back to avoid Shabbat – Kligman has missed out on plenty more contests. And scholarship offers too. But his sacrifice has also borne fruit. Last January, after Kligman was featured in a Chabad.org article, his first national exposure, Marc’s phone started to buzz with calls and texts from Jews across the country. Some of the older readers, Marc said, told stories about their playing days, and how they gave up the game because they felt they couldn’t balance it with their religious commitments. And he heard from parents whose children now considered Kligman a hero. Kligman developed a friendly rapport with a boy named David, whose grandfather was an old friend of Marc’s, and sent David a signed photo. “This thing has taken on a life of its own,” Marc says. “It’s really about telling your story to people, where they just don’t have to put God second. You can be who you want to be.” As Kligman rose through the ranks, Steinmetz was burnishing his own resume on the other side of the country. Juggling his faith and athletic dreams never seemed out of reach. In April 2014, his father, Elliot, took over the men’s basketball team at Yeshiva University, leading the program to the Division III NCAA Tournament. As Elliot scribbled plays on the sideline with a yarmulke atop his head, he showed his son it’s possible for sport and religion to mix. That example powered Steinmetz on a journey that reached new heights this spring. With the high school baseball season in doubt because of Covid-19, Steinmetz spent two months at the Elev8 Baseball Academy in Delray Beach, Florida. It was there, Elev8 executive director and head coach Todd Moser says, that Steinmetz put the finishing touches on his mechanics that bumped him to the third round of the draft. Professional scouts who came to games were impressed. “He did enough in front of the right people here,” Moser says. “He’s a high character guy, and I think that has a lot to do with his faith.” Steinmetz, much like Kligman, plans to continue to honor his faith during his professional playing career, which started on 13 September when he pitched 1.1 innings for the Diamondbacks Rookie-league affiliate. The 18-year-old will maintain a kosher diet, keep his head covered and, whenever possible, find a quiet place to pray. *** That Steinmetz and Kligman’s rises have happened amid renewed antisemitism in the United States – the Anti-Defamation League recorded 2,024 antisemitic incidents in 2020, the third-highest rate since tracking began in 1979 – is not lost on their community. For Steinmetz and Kligman, continued success is their answer to hate. “The best thing you can do to combat any hate or antisemitism, or any racial stuff, is just keep being a great example and doing what you believe is right,” Marc says. “I don’t think it has to do with standing on a soap box and screaming about it. I think it’s more about action.” Steinmetz watched the MLB draft in a house surrounded by friends, who burst into cheers when his name was called. Kligman, meanwhile, was on a bus with Team Israel – he was a practice player for their Tokyo 2020 Summer Olympics tuneup games – when manager Nate Fish announced over the loudspeaker he’d been selected. “We all went crazy and started cheering him on,” says Ian Kinsler, a four-time MLB All-Star who obtained Israeli citizenship in March 2020. “He was blushing a little bit. He had a nice smile.” Kinsler believes Steinmetz and Kligman’s stories deserve more attention, though he acknowledged that’ll be more likely to happen if they make the majors. The odds are not in their favor, even without considering how their religious responsibilities may bring obstacles: from 1981-2010 only 17.6% of players who were drafted and signed ever made the major leagues, according to Baseball America. Steinmetz and Kligman remain undeterred, in part because they know they won’t be alone. In December, after Steinmetz returns from a trip to Israel, they’ll meet in person for the first time after months of texts and Zoom calls. They’ll attend a Yeshiva University men’s basketball game, and maybe sit down for Shabbat dinner. “It’s nice,” Kligman says, “to have a guy on the same path as me.” Before they part, Kligman hopes, they might even slip on their gloves and toss a ball back and forth, and not just for themselves, but for those who came before them that gave up the game, and for those who come after them that will play.I was backpacking in Panama over Christmas in 2018, and planned to climb Volcán Barú. At 3,474m, it is the highest peak in the country and one of the only places on earth from where you can see the Atlantic and the Pacific Oceans at the same time. It is an active volcano, but last erupted around 1550. I set off before sunrise. It was a little chilly, so I had pulled on tights under my trekking trousers. I intended to reach the top by midday, then return before dark to get a lift to my hostel. I’ve always felt safe travelling as a solo woman, which I’ve done since my 20s. I love the freedom. When I got to the base of the volcano at 7am, the ranger was reluctant to let me go alone, but relented because an American couple were behind me. The first part of the climb was beautiful. It was not dry or barren as you might imagine a volcano might be – there were trees and vegetation all around, and a dirt road for the farmers who work around there. I walked for an hour and had reached a fair height. The views were impressive, so I stopped to take a photograph. Suddenly I heard ferocious barking behind me. I turned and saw two dogs running aggressively towards me. I expected them to stop, but they didn’t. As they got closer, I could see that they were black dobermans. Their teeth looked sharp, and they looked angry. There was nowhere for me to run. I tried to keep calm, but my heart was racing. I’d never been bitten by a dog, and I couldn’t help but fear what would happen. They stopped a dozen feet from where I stood and kept barking. I knew they could move fast, so I didn’t want to try to outrun them. I kept walking, saying, “Good dog, calm down,” as evenly as possible. But I was terrified. Then one dashed up and sunk his teeth into my leg below the knee. I was shocked. He held on for a few seconds. I tried to stay calm, but he came back and bit me again. The pain took my breath away as I felt his fangs in my flesh. I considered bending down to get a rock to fight him off, but was nervous in case he went for my neck or the other one launched at me. I was thinking I might not get out of this alive. I tried to keep walking, and he finally let go. Then he was behind me, growling menacingly. I’ll never forget that sound. I kept going, my body shaking, until after about 15 minutes I was out of their sight. The path got narrower and the forest became dense. Every time I heard a noise, I jumped: I knew pumas lived up the volcano. When I thought it was safe, I stopped. I rolled up my trousers and saw blood. The leggings had acted as a bit of a barrier but there were fang marks on the left side of my knee, seeping blood. I managed to stop the bleeding and cleaned up as best I could with tissues from my bag. I couldn’t walk up the volcano, but I couldn’t go back down either because I’d have to pass them again. I imagined being stuck by myself all night. My phone had no reception. I was really scared. I heard rustling and froze. The noise got louder until a pickup truck appeared, driven by an old farmer. He was confused and couldn’t speak English. I knew some Spanish, but couldn’t remember it in my panic. He had a dog in the back, so I pointed to it, and to my leg. He looked incredulous, but I must have been as white as a sheet, so he told me to get in. The relief was unbelievable. Suddenly we saw the dogs in the road where I’d left them, barking. As we drove past they jumped up at the truck, with the farmer’s dog barking furiously. A few minutes later, we saw the American couple. They’d seen the dogs, and turned straight back. They assumed I’d passed before the dogs got there. They got in the truck, too. When we reached the gate, the farmer told the ranger what had happened. I’ll never be able to express what he did for me. He saved my life. Looking back, I think the dogs were territorial and perhaps they had been mistreated. I still have the scar from the bite, and it’s fair to say I’ll never attempt that volcano again. But it has not put me off volcanoes altogether – it will take more than a dog to diminish my love of travel. • As told to Sophie Haydock Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.comThe hack Using banana peel to relieve that most persistent beauty bugbear: dark circles (or periorbital dark circles, if we’re being fancy) under the eyes. The promise An old trick revivied on TikTok makes an under-eye mask from banana peel. The test The causes of dark circles vary – genetics, age, lifestyle and skin type can all play a part. Using a retinol-based product to stimulate plumping collagen can help a little, but I get the allure of the banana skin hack, because it is known to be nutrient-rich – and some retinols can irritate the skin. I take the skin, and scoop out the white fibres inside with a spoon – some users then suggest mixing this with aloe vera gel – before applying it under my eyes for 10 minutes. While I understand that the mildly exfoliating salicylic acid in the banana skin could lighten my dark circles, after a week, and three tries, I can see no difference at all. I try using just the peel itself, cut into strips and placed directly under my eyes. Instead, I end up with a “phloem bundle” (a banana string) stuck in my eyelashes. The verdict If you have a banana skin handy, why not? But realistically, using a retinol-based eye cream and a concealer such as Monica Blunder’s Beauty Blunder Cover (£45) – and seeing a specialist if you’re concerned – is the way to go.A review into the disorder that tarnished the Euro 2020 final at Wembley has painted a terrifying picture in which fatalities and widespread injury were only narrowly avoided after authorities failed to plan for the “worst-case scenario” despite a series of warnings. Led by Louise Casey, the Football Association-commissioned report examines the day of 11 July, when thousands of people without tickets tried to storm the national stadium to see England played Italy, and tens of thousands more created scenes of anarchic disorder on Olympic Way. The review describes what unfolded as a “national shame”. “I am clear that the primary responsibility for what went wrong at Wembley that day lies with those who lost control of their own behaviour that day, not with anyone who did their best but lost control of the crowd,” Lady Casey said. “Nevertheless there are always lessons to be learned. No one was fully prepared for what happened that day and it can’t be allowed to happen again.” The report, which makes several recommendations to limit future risks, lays bare the details of the day, revealing a situation far worse than had been previously assumed. The report finds that more than 2,000 people gained access to Wembley without tickets, with 17 mass breaches of security, and a systematic targeting of disabled entrances as means of access. Previously unreported is the existence of a 6,000-strong crowd who stood outside Wembley throughout the final, waiting to charge the gates in the event of an England victory. A crowd safety expert described the prospect of this group colliding with legitimate fans leaving the ground as a “frightening one” whose “consequences need little imagination”. Crowds are described as gathering along Olympic Way from as early as 9am, with the copious consumption of alcohol and cocaine apparent to bystanders. These numbers, the review argues, were not expected by the authorities and were combined with a separate, organised attempt by individuals to storm Wembley without tickets. The beginning of the Wembley invasion is timed as being 5.25pm, when 100 men charged an outer security perimeter on the Spanish steps, the central point of access to the stadium. Wembley officials described the incident as “a bang” which “came from left field”, with police and stewards assailed by streams of punches. By 6.30pm the security operation – with 553 police at the stadium – is described as being “under intense pressure”. During this time there were a number of “near misses” where lives were at risk. In the charge on the Spanish steps a young man was knocked over and trampled by the crowd. He managed to escape the crush but collapsed and went into a seizure. Meanwhile, at Gate G, a young woman was knocked over and trampled on, before being rescued by a fellow supporter. At the same gate, a rush into the stadium forced a man carrying a small child on to the floor, until he was rescued by a steward. One ticketless fan tried to impersonate a steward and hijack a disabled child, separating the boy from his father, to trick his way in. The father said: “Just as we got to the door we twigged what was going on and it turned out he’s just an England fan in a high-viz jacket that was literally hijacking a wheelchair to get into the stadium.” “The prevailing view in the aftermath was that the scenes at Wembley had been ugly and disgraceful,” Casey writes. “Many of those present said … what they witnessed or experienced was more serious and, in some instances, extremely dangerous.” Wembley officials described attempts to breach security as being “constant for six hours”, with the crowds persisting even as the game was under way. This was when authorities began to anticipate a further push in the event of a home victory. A police helicopter estimated the crowd to be 6,000 and one FA official described them as “zombie”-like, adding to the fear among officials. “They were just standing there, not even watching the game on their phones,” the official said. In the end, England lost and the heavens opened, something witnesses say they were extremely thankful for. Casey describes the events as a “perfect storm”, of a kind not seen before. But she makes clear that planning had failed to consider anything more than an iterative increase on what had happened previously during the tournament and that, combined with other external factors including the impact of Covid regulations, an unsustainable situation was created. “Multiple stakeholders told the review that the frequency of matches meant a habit had formed of viewing these problems as discrete tactical issues to be fixed by practical measures rather than considering the wider strategic implications,” Casey writes. Casey observes that there was a lack of clarity over who had responsibility for controlling “Zone X”, in effect the Olympic Way area, with the ability to introduce security measures also hampered by the ownership structure of the land. She criticises the police for inflexibility, with the main tranche of police numbers only arriving on site at 3pm. There is criticism, too, for the government, who first denied requests for extra fan zones to defuse crowd pressures, then insisted that the FA expand the restricted capacity of the final to 67,000 to prevent tournament Uefa moving the match to Budapest. While insisting that the situation faced by stadium officials was “impossible”, the FA’s chief executive, Mark Bullingham, apologised for the experience endured by tens of thousands of people. “I am truly sorry for the terrible experiences that many of you suffered,” he said. “A day that should have been so special became horrible for many at the moment they arrived on Olympic Way. That hurts us deeply. “We fully accept the findings and recommendations of the review, in particular the main one: that we, the police and all of the agencies involved should have looked at the planning for the event through a different lens. Rather than planning for the biggest ever football match at the modern Wembley as we did, collectively we should have viewed the event as one of national significance.” He believes “no stadium would have coped with that pressure from such an aggressive crowd trying to get in” and said: “We didn’t get everything right but given the circumstances many of our team performed incredibly well under extraordinary pressure. Without them and their actions, as the review makes clear, the situation could have been much worse. I sincerely thank them.”Ralf Rangnick would be open to becoming Manchester United’s permanent manager should the club offer him the role when an interim tenure that begins with Sunday’s visit of Crystal Palace ends in the summer. The German has a two-and-a-half-year contract, with the intention being that he stays in a consultancy role after this season. Asked whether he would consider remaining as the long-term manager Rangnick said: “The people here have been very clear talking about a six-month role. We have never spoken about what happens in summer. I’m fully aware they might be looking for a new manager. If they will then speak with me about that we will see.” The 63-year-old then joked about when he worked as sporting director for RB Salzburg and RB Leipzig: “Maybe if they ask my opinion and everything goes well and we develop the team I might even make the same recommendation to the board that I did at Leipzig twice when I recommended it might be a good idea to keep working with me for one year. But this is all hypothetical. We cannot speak about that. For me now it’s about winning the next games.” Rangnick admitted the precise description of his consultancy role had not been detailed. “We haven’t spoken about that in all the conversations we had with John [Murtough, football director] and also with Ed [Woodward, executive vice-chairman]. I also had a long phone call with Joel Glazer [co-owner] for more than half an hour. But we haven’t spoken about what will happen in the next two years from next summer until summer 2024.” Rangnick described as “nonsense” that he would earn a bonus were he to sign Borussia Dortmund’s Erling Haaland, with whom he worked at RB Salzburg, and ruled out a January move for the striker. “We have excellent offensive players here already,” he said. Rangnick offered an insight into how he may advise the club as manager and consultant when criticising the transfer strategy since Sir Alex Ferguson retired in May 2013. “The club has had no continuity in signing new players and sticking to the DNA of the club,” he said. “In the future, the board members and myself have the same opinion. It’s important not to have many changes in management.” Rangnick takes over a side three points behind West Ham in fourth, and 12 behind the leaders, Chelsea. Rangnick was at Thursday’s 3-2 win over Arsenal, a United display as uneven as those over the past two months. Rangnick cited the managerial abilities of Chelsea’s Thomas Tuchel, Liverpool’s Jürgen Klopp and Manchester City’s Pep Guardiola as being a difference. “It’s definitely a good squad enough to compete in the top four. If you look at the top three teams they seem to be very stable, probably some of the best coaches in the world. When Jürgen came to Liverpool the squad he inherited at the time was definitely not a better squad than the one I inherit at United. “Whenever I came to other clubs in the middle of the season, which was the case in Stuttgart or Schalke twice, you have to make sure that you have the biggest chance to win the next game. Then step by step let the players participate. They have to go together with me, they have to follow not only my instructions but they have to buy into the idea that I can offer them how we should want to play.” Rangnick has previously stated that he turned down an offer from Chelsea to be the interim manager because the players might view his temporary status as a weakness. “We spoke only about the interim manager for four months, without any perspective to work in the long term,” he said. “Here now we have only played one-third of the games in the Premier League and we have agreed on a two-year advisory role and when a club like Manchester United contacts you, you cannot possibly turn it down.” After Michael Carrick left United on Thursday after 15 years, having been the caretaker manager for the past three matches, Rangnick indicated he intended to bring in his own staff. “I will obviously try to find one, two, maybe three people who can join us in one or two weeks but due to the Brexit regulations it’s not too easy.” Rangnick is expected to implement a high-pressing style. He played down the 36-year-old Cristiano Ronaldo being unable to execute this. “Having seen Cristiano yesterday in the second half at the age of 36, an amazing top professional. What I saw from Cristiano yesterday, he is more than willing to put his input into the team.” Regarding strengthening the squad next month, Rangnick said that was not in his thoughts for now. “Winter is not the best possible time for sustainable transfers,” he said.The neglect and murder of six-year-old Arthur Labinjo-Hughes was possible because vulnerable children “slipped from view” during the pandemic, the former children’s commissioner for England has said. Anne Longfield told the BBC she was “heartbroken and totally sickened” by the case, in which Arthur was subjected to what prosecutors called a “campaign of appalling cruelty” and murdered just two months after social workers found no evidence of safeguarding concerns. A court heard that Arthur was violently shaken and suffered an “unsurvivable brain injury” when his head was banged against a wall by his stepmother, Emma Tustin. After his death in June 2020 he was found to have 130 injuries. Tustin was found guilty of murder and Arthur’s father, 29-year-old Thomas Hughes, was found guilty of manslaughter on Thursday. On Friday, Tustin was sentenced to life in prison with a minimum term of 29 years, and Hughes to 21 years. Longfield, now chair of the Commission on Young Lives, said the case suggested a failure to put in place lessons from past failures such as the death of Victoria Climbié. “Very vulnerable children have continued to slip from view, and for anyone who looks at the serious case reviews, or hears about them … after a child’s death, you will see the same things coming up,” she said. “Time and time again, missed opportunities, lack of coordination, lack of data sharing, the things that professionals need to have at hand to be able to protect these children, still aren’t in place. But whilst there is learning from the serious case reviews, it’s not enough to change what happens to protect these children.” She said Arthur was particularly vulnerable because of the coronavirus lockdown in place in the months leading up to his death. Noting that a high caseload and inexperienced staff could also be factors, she said: “What of course was also the case here was that it was a pandemic. “So a lot of the services went on to the screens for children, and this child in particular, Arthur, wasn’t in school. And it’s much easier for families who want to evade view to do that when they haven’t got someone in the room. So there’s a big lesson there, instantly about if there is a crisis, there are children who are going to slip from view and we have to make sure they have the protection, which does need face to face contact.” She said the best way to keep children like Arthur safe was to intervene early when warning signs were visible to social workers. But she said that cuts to funding made that harder to do. “Long-term help is what is needed, and again that’s something that’s been there less and less over recent years, and that means that more children are falling into crisis,” she said. Tim Loughton, the Conservative MP and former children’s minister, said he shared Longfield’s exasperation and said he felt “a sense of deja vu”. He said the focus on adult social care meant that “we’ve slightly taken our eye off the ball … we fail to acknowledge that we’ve still got some serious problems with children’s social care.” He agreed with Longfield that the pandemic had put Arthur and other children at increased risk. He said: “There was an increase in child abuse because of course they were off the radar. Cases such as this, that might have been detected better at school, or outside, it was all going on behind closed doors.” He said he did not think any individual social worker was to blame for Arthur’s death and said “it’s the system that has failed to protect this child”. Loughton claimed funding for children’s social care had gone up, “but the demands on children’s social care have gone up disproportionately, as well, and so too often what is happening is that we are intervening late … it may be that the social workers here just didn’t have the time to get over the [in-person intervention] threshold.” Arthur’s paternal grandmother, Joanne Hughes, had seen bruises on Arthur’s back, with the boy telling her that Tustin “called him an ugly, horrible brat” and shoved him into the stairs. She alerted children’s social services to the bruises in April, weeks before Arthur’s death. But two social workers who saw Arthur at Cranmore Road reported that they had “no safeguarding concerns”. Solihull’s Local Child Safeguarding Partnership is carrying out an independent review of the circumstances surrounding the “terrible tragedy”, including the actions of Solihull council’s social services. Outside court on Thursday, Arthur’s maternal grandmother, Madeleine Halcrow, read a tribute from his mother, Olivia Labinjo-Halcrow, which said that after the verdicts she wanted to “celebrate the beautiful little boy I knew and loved deeply”. “The details of Arthur’s case are harrowing and incomparable – but I want people to know who Arthur was. From his huge smile and his personality to his gentle caring nature,” the statement said. “All mothers are biased and believe their children are the best, and I’m no different.”Stuart Broad labelled next week’s Ashes curtain raiser at the Gabba a lottery given the lack of meaningful time in the middle for both England and Australia during the buildup. Rain has restricted the tourists to just seven sessions of cricket since their advance party landed in the country on 6 November, with the final day of intra-squad action against the Lions on Friday descending into glorified middle practice. As such no official scorecard resulted from England’s final innings before they begin nets at the Gabba this weekend, although Ben Stokes top-scored with a 56-ball 42, retired, in his first outing with the bat since undergoing a second finger operation. Rory Burns compiled 37 against an attack that featured Chris Woakes and Mark Wood, but there were troubling failures for Jonny Bairstow and Jos Buttler – two late arrivals after the T20 World Cup – with both men out twice for just 11 runs apiece in total. Haseeb Hameed and Joe Root similarly had second attempts after initial failures but with Australia also light on preparation – a proposed three-day affair against Australia A was shelved in favour of training – Broad sees little advantage here. “It’s a bit of a lottery,” said the 35-year-old. “I don’t think anyone knows how the pitch will play or how batters will settle having not faced a red ball for months. “It’s going to be a mental game. Mistakes will be made by both sides and it will be a case of whoever can capitalise on the key moments.” Australia’s approach has drawn scorn from Jeff Thomson, with the former fast bowler seemingly un-fussed by the recent T20 World Cup victory that has denied Mitchell Starc in particular any first-class action at a time when he is being pushed for his spot by Western Australia’s Jhye Richardson. Thomson told Brisbane’s Courier Mail: “I’ve seen Richardson bowl and I can understand the push to play him but this would not even be an issue if Starc had played a few Sheffield Shield games and taken a few wickets. “But like the rest of them he’s done nothing and I think it’s crazy. I mean the T20 World Cup is hit and giggle stuff. Honestly, who gives a shit? “If Australia had not won the T20 World Cup no one would have cared but compare that to the fallout if Australia loses the Ashes. Heads will roll if that happens. The Ashes just means more.”It is hard to pin down exactly what Lord Whitney does. On paper, the Leeds-based artist studio has built music video sets for Nicki Minaj, art-directed promo footage for The Voice, built a fantastical world for Chambord liqueur, recreated scenery from hit Netflix shows and transformed the underbelly of Leeds Town Hall into a forest. Its founders, Amy Lord and Rebekah Whitney, refer to themselves as “connoisseurs of make-believe”, but this title is as evasive as our rambling Zoom conversation, during which they discuss reading children’s books, choosing the perfect pitch for a piece of music and playing with ice skates in a stately home. Until you step into one of the magical worlds they have conceived and constructed, perhaps it’s hard to make sense of what they do. But inch a toe under the dusty half-light of an old gardener’s office at Harewood House, touch the fading documentation peeling off crypt walls under Leeds city centre and breathe in the cherry blossom fragrance wafting through the Great Hall of Chatsworth, and the wonder of what Lord Whitney creates is immediately apparent. Even their studio, a renovated mill in the Meanwood area of Leeds, is a playground featuring a treehouse, an indoor greenhouse and a cabinet of curiosities. “It really does have quite a profound effect,” says Whitney of being in their immersive worlds. “Even though I understand it all and my head is in it to the tiniest detail, I find it incredibly moving, being in something that takes on all of your senses.” She is referring specifically to their latest commission, Upon a Christmas Wish at Harewood House in West Yorkshire. The combination of a Christmas brief and an 18th-century stately home does not initially sound very original but Lord Whitney has avoided the traditional focus on festive aesthetics by collaborating with poet Toby Thompson and sound designers Buffalo to drop audiences into an imaginarium of cine footage, fascinating artefacts and whispering walls. Despite this, they are adamant it is true to the Lascelles family property. “It is really rooted in the building, you couldn’t put it on anywhere else,” explains Lord. “We started looking for a seed of a story in Harewood’s history. Once we started digging through the archive, we found all these little bits of history, and then we started tying that in with all our own references.” After 13 years working together and with a pandemic (hopefully) behind them, the pair are more certain than ever of the value of their work. Built into the heart of their make-believe worlds is a desire to quell anxiety and stop us in our tracks, inviting us to put down our phones, forget about the shopping list and simply experience the space embracing us. “I personally find sitting down and doing mindfulness really hard,” says Whitney. “I am not very good at meditating; my brain is too busy. In entering immersive experiences – not just ours, immersive experiences in general – it allows your brain to switch off for a while. I think that pause is so, so valuable.” Valuable for what? “Mental health,” says Lord. “People forget that as much as going to the gym and eating healthy food is important, allowing your mind time to drift and play can be healing as well. I think there are so few opportunities in life to do that. We are used to sitting in front of the TV or maybe going to the theatre, but what we want to do is to take it to the level where you are stepping into a whole other world, so you really come out of it feeling like you’ve been on a journey.” Whitney then delves into the empowering possibilities of viewing the world with both logic and innocence, and talks about William Blake’s “mythic consciousness”. Later Lord emails me a quote about it, which originated from a project exploring folklore and traditions in the north of England. This is how Lord Whitney work. Or rather, this is how Amy and Rebekah work: together, pulling strands out of the imagined, unseen world and into the daylight. Their method of collaboration is as vital as their ability to wield a glue gun or a roll of gaffer tape. Throughout our conversation they continually refer back to each other, detailing how they overcame Lord’s lockdown creativity drought and Whitney’s post maternity leave impostor syndrome by hopping on Zoom and talking, talking and talking until the new ideas came spilling out. “I don’t think I realised how much I needed Lord Whitney. It is not just a job it is such a huge part of me,” says Whitney. Bathed under the twinkling lights and dancing shadows of Harewood house, it is easy to see why we might all need a bit of Lord Whitney too. Upon a Christmas Wish is at Harewood House, Leeds, until 3 JanuaryWhen tourists reach the northern Canada community of Churchill they have long been greeted by two sounds: the howling of sub-Arctic winds and the rattle of diesel engines. Over the years, hundreds of thousands of visitors have come to the “polar bear capital of the world”, in the hopes of spotting the predators. They journey on hulking, spacecraft-like tundra vehicles that rumble over the stark landscape. Now, one of the town’s tour companies has unveiled the locale’s first-ever electric version – a vehicle that can move almost silently into areas where the polar bears congregate. It has an estimated range of three days’ worth of tours and can operate in frigid temperatures. Frontiers North Adventures, which provided transport to the Guardian and other media outlets to view the vehicle in Churchill, plans to convert the remainder of its fleet of diesel Tundra Buggies to electric motors; it believes this could reduce carbon dioxide emissions by more than 3,600 tonnes over the next 25 years – the equivalent of 353,635 liters of diesel fuel. The company pitched it as part of a move to address the climate crisis, which experts have long said will have an outsized impact on polar bears. The company’s maiden voyage for its electric transporter came as the area remained ice free for the first time in years – a scenario that may prove deadly for the bears. A handful of kilometers from where the vehicles parked, the dark waters of Hudson Bay lashed at the shore – a rarity for late November and a warning sign for 800 or so polar bears in the region waiting to begin their hunt on sea ice for ringed seals. In recent years, that wait has grown longer and longer. While the timing of the ice formation varies from year to year, experts say the trend over recent decades is cause for concern. That is bad news for the bears, which don’t feed for the months leading up to ice formation. Instead, they laze around the bay, conserving their energy. “We’re not getting the good years of sea ice formation that we used to have. We’re getting bad years and OK years,” said Andrew Derocher, a professor of biology at the University of Alberta. “When you do that over a long enough period of time, you can expect that your population is going to decline.” It had been 156 days since most of the bears last ate. At 180 days, starvation begins to set in. Ice is also breaking up earlier in the season, meaning bears are forced to return to land weeks earlier than normal and have a smaller window for hunting. Over the last decade, the bears have lost nearly a total of 12 days of ice on either end of the season. “We’ve always been concerned about an early break-up with a really late freeze-up,” said Derocher. “And that would be the worst-case scenario for polar bears.” Already, the bears are showing warning signs. The weight of pregnant polar bears has declined over the years, as have new births. Bears typically lose one kilogram of weight each day they remain on the tundra instead of ice – further adding pressure on the population. The bear population has dropped by nearly 30% since 1987. If current trends hold, the bears are predicted to undergo a reproductive failure by 2040, accelerating the species’ demise. “Eventually, you’ll pretty much have like a zombie population of polar bears that just can’t sustain themselves and it’s a matter of time before they’re extirpated. When? That’s the million-dollar question,” Derocher said. With warming in the north tied to mounting worries over carbon emissions, the longtime Churchill mayor, Michael Spence, has praised the company’s electric vehicle prototype, the EV Tundra Buggy, calling it a vision for “where tourism is going and where our climate is going”. But the contrast between a futuristic vision of electric vehicles in northern communities and the stark reality of disappearing sea ice, highlights the challenges the region faces. Churchill once pinned its hopes on a world-class sea port, only to see that vision end in disappointment after the only rail track was washed out by floods. Some in the community of 1,000 hope that the changing climate will enable it to become a major grain port, but much of the town’s economy still relies on tourism . According to government figures, the industry brought in more than C$35m (US$27m) in 2017, mostly related to polar bear safaris. Manitoba does as much as it can to protect the bears on the ground. Hunting is prohibited, tour vehicles have a narrow set of tracks they can follow to spot the mammals and human-bear interactions, including garbage dumps, have been minimized. But the late freeze-up is a glimpse at the reality that local operators and scientists are forced to grapple with: the landscape will probably undergo significant changes in the coming years – and polar bear populations will suffer the most. While other at-risk species can benefit from human intervention – for example fishers in Atlantic Canada are experimenting with rope-less gear to help endangered whales – saving the disappearing sea ice is a far more difficult task. “There’s no easy fix. We can’t just put a park somewhere. And while it’s a nice idea and indicative of the kind of solutions we need, an electric Tundra Buggy isn’t going to save the world,” said Derocher. “The only levers that we have left that we can pull are the human behavior ones.” • The map in this article was amended on 5 December 2021 to correctly name Québec City as such, not as Québec. On 8 December the formal Tundra Bunny trademark name was inserted.Boris Johnson has come under pressure to explain allegations that a staff party was held at No 10 on 18 December. At the time, London was under tier 3 restrictions – the top level – meaning the only permitted indoor social mixing outside your own household was with a support bubble. We would like to know what you were doing on the evening of 18 December 2020. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.This is such a gorgeous winter one-pot dish. Don’t be alarmed by the long cooking time: the oven does the work, and this slow-cooked beef pie will look after itself with just a couple of short interventions from you. The amount of time you’ll spend in the kitchen is minimal, which is exactly what you want when you’ve got friends over for drinks and dinner to celebrate the run-up to Christmas – and it really does look spectacular when it comes bubbling out of the oven. Instantly shop all these ingredients from ocado.com/spicedbeefpie Slow-cooked spiced beef pie Prep 15 min Cook 3 hr 5 min Serves 4-6 For the filling 2 onions, thinly sliced 2 inches ginger, grated 4 cloves garlic, grated 800g organic beef stewing steak 3 heaped tsp ras el hanout 1 tsp sea salt flakes 2 tbsp olive oil 400ml beef stock 1 x 400g tin tomatoes For the topping 1kg maris piper potatoes, very thinly sliced 80g butter, melted 1 tsp sea salt flakes 100g cheddar, grated Freshly ground black pepper To prepare, preheat the oven to 220C (200C fan)/425F/gas 7. Tip the onions, ginger, garlic, beef, ras el hanout, sea salt and olive oil into a wide-based casserole dish or roasting tin, and mix well. Rearrange the beef pieces so they form one layer on top, then transfer to the oven to brown for 20 minutes. Turn the heat down to 170C (150C fan)/300F/gas 2. Remove the casserole dish from the oven, and add the beef stock and the tomatoes. Stir well, cover, then return to the oven for a further hour and a half. Remove the dish from the oven, and turn the heat up to 190C (170C fan)/375F/gas 5. Mix the thinly sliced potatoes with the butter and salt in a large bowl, and arrange on top of the beef, pressing down gently to let the lower layers submerge in the cooking liquid. Scatter over the grated cheese and freshly ground black pepper, and return to the oven for another hour and 15 minutes, until the potatoes are golden brown and cooked through. Let it stand for 10-15 minutes, then serve up with some greens – I like a mix of garlicky spring greens and tenderstem broccoli. Pairs well with a bordeaux or Argentinian malbec. Shop all these ingredients fresh from Ocado.com, which offers more choice than any other UK supermarketRoyal Dutch Shell will move ahead with seismic tests to explore for oil in vital whale breeding grounds along South Africa’s eastern coastline after a court dismissed an 11th-hour legal challenge by environmental groups. The judgment, by a South African high court, allows Shell to begin firing within days extremely loud sound waves through the relatively untouched marine environment of the Wild Coast, which is home to whales, dolphins and seals. Campaigners filed an urgent legal challenge against the seismic survey, which was scheduled to begin on Wednesday, but the last-minute interdict was dismissed by a judge on Friday morning. Green groups fear exploring for oil could disrupt the sea mammals’ habitat and damage the ecologically diverse and sensitive environment of the Wild Coast, which runs along the Eastern Cape province. The oil company dropped plans to help develop the Cambo oilfield in the North Sea on Thursday after escalating criticism of the project, but has defended its plans for the South African coastline despite strong local opposition. Lawyers for the South African campaigners, from the law firm Cullinan &amp; Associates, argued that Shell’s exploration campaign amounted to “unjust administrative action” because it was approved using an outdated approval process that had since been replaced by stronger environmental protections. But the court found the applicants had failed to prove there was a reasonable apprehension of “irreparable harm” without an interdict against Shell’s plans, and found in favour of the oil firm because of the financial costs of a delay. A spokesperson for the company said: “Shell is pleased with the court’s decision, which will help move this seismic survey forward.” The work is expected to begin within days. After the court’s decision, the campaigners behind the legal challenge – Border Deep Sea Angling Association, Kei Mouth ski boat club, Natural Justice and Greenpeace Africa – said their fight to safeguard the Wild Coast was “far from over”, and said that a “nationwide resistance” against the Shell’s plans would continue. Happy Khambule, a senior campaigner for Greenpeace Africa, said: “The decision to allow Shell to continue with its plans to destroy the Wild Coast is very disappointing. Not only will the blasting destroy precious biodiverse ecosystems, but it will also destroy the livelihoods of local communities, all in the name of profit. “We will continue to support the nation-wide resistance against Shell and pursue the legal avenue to stop Shell, We must do everything we can to undo the destructive colonial legacy of extractivism, until we live in a world where people and the planet come before the profits of toxic fossil fuel companies.” In a statement, Shell added that it had “long experience in collecting offshore seismic data” and taken great care to prevent or minimise the potential impacts on fish, marine mammals and other wildlife. “South Africa is highly reliant on energy imports for many of its energy needs. Should viable resources be found offshore, this could significantly contribute to the country’s energy security and the government’s economic development programmes,” it said.Good morning. Joe Biden is planning to pull no punches when it comes to the emergence of the Omicron variant of Covid in the US. The president has announced new actions to combat the coronavirus, including a nationwide campaign encouraging vaccine boosters, an expansion of at-home tests and tighter restrictions on international travel. Buffeted by political backlash from Republicans, the US president visited the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland, yesterday and laid out a pandemic battle plan for the winter months which includes steps to ensure that the nearly 100 million eligible Americans who have not yet received their booster shot do so as soon as possible. “My plan pulls no punches,” Biden said. “It is a plan that should unite us.” There is fresh urgency to the effort after the first US case of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 was identified in California on Wednesday and a second in Minnesota yesterday. The emergence of Omicron has demonstrated the tenacity of the virus, which continues to drag down Biden’s political fortunes. Voters are divided on his handling of the pandemic, with 47% approving and 49% disapproving. Alec Baldwin questions how bullet got on Rust set in emotional ABC interview Alec Baldwin has questioned how the bullet that accidentally killed cinematographer Halyna Hutchins ended up in a gun on the set of the film Rust, speaking out about the fatal shooting in a lengthy and emotional interview. The actor said he did not pull the trigger on the gun that killed Hutchins, 42, and injured director Joel Souza, 48. The gun he was holding, which Baldwin believed to be safe, went off during rehearsals for the western, in an incident that shocked Hollywood and prompted a reckoning over production safety and the use of weapons on set. “There’s only one question to be resolved, and that’s where did the live round come from?” Baldwin said in an ABC interview with George Stephanopoulos that aired Thursday night. The interview was first time the actor has spoken in-depth on camera about the 21 October shooting. What else did he say? He said he didn’t pull the trigger. He “let go of the hammer” on the weapon, he said, and the gun went off. “I never pulled the trigger,” he repeated. Will there be any criminal charges brought in the case? The district attorney in Santa Fe, New Mexico, said in October that criminal charges in the shooting have not been ruled out. Sidney Powell filed false incorporation papers for non-profit, grand jury finds A federal grand jury investigating Donald Trump’s former attorney Sidney Powell has uncovered evidence that Powell filed false incorporation papers with the state of Texas for a nonprofit she heads, Defending the Republic, according to sources close to the investigation. In the incorporation papers, Powell – who filed lawsuits across the US questioning the 2020 election result Trump lost to Joe Biden – listed two men who she said served with her on the organization’s board of directors, even though neither gave Powell permission to do so. As a private attorney, Powell, in the service of Trump, has gained notoriety as she has increasingly embraced implausible conspiracy theories such as that the FBI had attempted to frame Trump to drive him from office, and that Biden’s election as president of the US was illegitimate. Her lawsuits to overturn the outcome of the 2020 presidential election have all failed. During one of the cases, a judge sanctioned Powell for alleged ethical misconduct and referred her to the Texas state bar for investigation. There is also a broader federal criminal inquiry into Powell, which has since last fall been examining allegations of fundraising and financial fraud. In other news … A request on Thursday to proceed on gun control legislation in the Senate following the Michigan school shooting has been blocked by the Iowa senator Chuck Grassley, the leading Republican on the Senate judiciary committee. The Biden administration’s move to revive Donald Trump’s “Remain in Mexico” policy will subject thousands of people to “enormous suffering” and leave them vulnerable to kidnap and rape as they languish in dangerous Mexican border cities, migration advocates have warned. Abu Zubaydah, the Guantánamo detainee, has petitioned a federal court for his release on grounds that America’s wars in Afghanistan and with al-Qaida are over. Zubaydah was tortured close to death by the CIA and has been held without charge by the US for nearly 20 years. The former house manager of Jeffrey Epstein’s Palm Beach home said Ghislaine Maxwell warned him that he should “never look” his boss in the eyes, describing a work environment where he faced the grim task of cleaning up their sex toys amid stifling micromanagement. Don’t miss this: George Clooney on paydays, politics and parenting It seems safe to assume that George Clooney could, if he were a bit less cool, start every morning by diving into a pile of gold coins like Scrooge McDuck. When asked if he ever thinks he has enough money now, he leans forward, unruffled, and tells Guardian writer Hadley Freeman: “Well, yeah. I was offered $35m for one day’s work for an airline commercial, but I talked to Amal [Clooney, the human rights lawyer he married in 2014] about it and we decided it’s not worth it.” If Clooney has a brand, it is carefully cultivated classiness. … or this: Doors guitarist Robbie Krieger says the ‘music will outlast the crazy Jim stuff’ This year marks half a century since the storied singer of the Doors, Jim Morrison, met his untimely death. Or at least that’s what most reasonable people believe happened. Due to a combination of wishful thinking and conspiracy theories, however, some people believe that Morrison still lives. According to the Doors’ guitarist, Robbie Krieger, that’s just one of many outrageous misconceptions or outright lies surrounding the band. In his new memoir, he aims to tell the true, uncensored story of one of the greatest bands of all time while dispelling some long-running myths. Climate check: British Airways looks to recycled cooking oil fuel to cut jet emissions British Airways has signed a deal for aircraft fuel made from recycled cooking oils and other household waste to be produced at scale in the UK and to be in use as early as 2022 to help power its flights. The airline revealed yesterday evening it had reached the agreement with a refinery in north Lincolnshire, England to purchase thousands of tonnes of sustainable aviation fuel (SAF), which it said would add up to the equivalent of 700 transatlantic flights on a Boeing 787 with net zero carbon emissions. Last Thing: snowstorm in Denmark forces dozens to bed down in Ikea An Ikea showroom in northern Denmark turned into a vast bedroom after six customers and about two dozen employees were stranded by a snowstorm and forced to spend the night in the store. Up to 30cm (12 inches) of snow fell, trapping the customers and employees when the department store in Aalborg closed on Wednesday evening. “We slept in the furniture exhibitions and our showroom on the first floor, where we have beds, mattresses and sofa beds,” store manager Peter Elmose said.Seattle area, notorious for its wet, overcast days, has logged its rainiest fall season on record after weeks of back-to-back downpours, capping a year of weather whiplash that saw the region endure a record breaking heatwave over the summer. Between September and the end of November, the Seattle metropolitan area accumulated about 19 in of rain, the largest amount since records began in 1945 and surpassing its previous record chronicled in 2006 by less than an inch, according to Matthew Cullen, meteorologist at the National Weather Service forecast office in Seattle. Unlike Seattle’s more typical drizzles, the recent rain has been far more torrential and engulfed the city, especially severely in late October and for several days in a row in mid-November. Cullen explained that there have been a series of “atmospheric rivers” or narrow bands of moisture in the atmosphere that have traveled across the Pacific Ocean and ended up aimed over the area, unloading heavy rain over narrow areas, “almost like a fire hose”. “It’s our wettest time of year, and it’s very common to get several of these systems in a row,” said Cullen. “What is a little less common has been just the back-to-back intensity.” The extreme rainy season comes in a year that has seen Seattle and the surrounding area besieged by unusual weather events, including a historic heatwave over the summer. In late June, the city reached a record-breaking 108F (42C) after a deadly “heat dome” engulfed the region. At the same time, for much of the summer, Seattle was extremely dry, going 51 days without measurable rain – tied with 1951 as the second longest period on record. Just weeks later, its record-breaking rainy autumn would begin. These whiplash-inducing extremes have left lasting marks on an area known for its moderate weather. The scorching temperatures, which experts said were exacerbated by global heating, resulted in more than 100 people dead in Washington state, crops destroyed and salmon covered in angry red lesions and white fungus. The dry conditions also left lands vulnerable to fires, which burned in several areas across Washington. The recent heavy rains caused some road closures in Seattle. But in cities farther north, near the Canadian border, the impact was much greater. In Whatcom county, dozens of roads were closed due to flooding and some residents had to be evacuated. The Lummi Reservation, which is also in that area, was cut off when its roads were overtaken by water. Across the border in Canada, heavy rains and winds in British Columbia have resulted in flooding, landslides and thousands of evacuations. Mike Farnworth, minister of Public Safety and solicitor general, described the situation as “utter devastation”. On 15 November, Washington’s governor, Jay Inslee, issued a severe weather state of emergency in King county, which includes Seattle, and 14 other counties across the state in response to the heavy rain and flooding. Nick Bond, state climatologist for Washington, explained that the back-to-back La Niña conditions, a climate pattern that can disrupt weather throughout the world, could be causing the rainfall. He said climate change was probably also a factor, since warmer air is able to hold more water vapor compared with cooler air. “As the climate has warmed, then it means when everything comes together, and when conditions are right to produce precipitation, that it comes down that much harder,” he said. The question now is whether these extreme weather conditions could be an indication of what the region will experience in the future. Karin Bumbaco, University of Washington research scientist and Washington’s assistant state climatologist, said these types of extreme weather events could become more typical. “This is a preview of what could be a normal year a couple decades down the road,” she said. “This year fits the pattern of what we expect to see in the changing climate with wet fall, following an especially dry summer.” Bond said it’s important to look at the weather over the past year, figure out what happened and what can be done about it. He explained that one major takeaway is recognizing that future water problems “are not necessarily the amount of water but the timing of the water. Too much when we don’t need it as much and too little when we really need it.” The area has historically relied on mountain snowpack to get through the dry season. But with temperatures warming, in some cases the snowpack won’t be as healthy as it once was. So, he recommended looking into increasing reservoir capacity, and even ways to store water in groundwater. “Hopefully we can learn from this,” he said. “And I’m sure we are. And how do we go forward anticipating that this sort of stuff is going to continue to happen, and that we can do something about it. There’s always going to be some hardships. But that doesn’t mean that you can’t minimize the hardships.”As health officials confirmed the first US case of the Omicron variant in California this week, the state’s rural north and Central Valley were still battling a wave of cases linked to the Delta variant and low vaccination rates. In Siskiyou county, near the Oregon border, cases were up 245% this week and an automated message from the public health department warned officials were overwhelmed with calls linked to the latest surge. Much of the north of the state is considered at very high risk of Covid-19 transmission and in some areas, ICUs are nearly at capacity. Public health experts caution that much remains unknown about the Omicron variant, including the severity of the illness it causes, its effect on unvaccinated people and how it responds to vaccines. But a rise in cases could further strain health systems in parts of the state struggling with Covid, despite the widespread availability of vaccines. “We know that viruses mutate. We don’t know much about this variant. We want to be careful before we sound the alarm,” said Rachel Abbott, a spokesperson for Yuba county, where 46% of residents are vaccinated. “Regardless of the variant, we’re recommending vaccinations and boosters as well – that’s the best way to protect yourself.” In California, 67.9% of residents five and older are vaccinated, but vaccination rates lag behind in some parts of the state, which experts have attributed to vaccine hesitancy, misinformation and access. “California, like other states, has pockets of unvaccinated individuals,” said Dr Lorena Garcia, an epidemiologist with the University of California, Davis. “That is problematic because there are under-resourced communities, communities where individuals have limited access to services. These tend to be rural communities.” In rural Siskiyou county, where cases have climbed in recent weeks, 50% of residents are vaccinated, according to New York Times data, and officials there have pleaded with residents for months to get the shot. “Please get vaccinated. We ask this from the bottom of our hearts,” Dr Aaron Stutz, the county health officer, and local healthcare providers wrote in a letter to the community in September. “Please trust us with this. We are not asking you to do anything that we have not already done ourselves.” Some rural and conservative parts of the state have also resisted public health restrictions – and in some cases vaccinations – throughout the pandemic. Oroville, in Butte county, recently declared itself a “constitutional republic” in response to state and federal Covid rules. The threat that Omicron poses is uncertain, experts say, particularly among unvaccinated individuals. But vaccinations and safety measures such as masks and social distancing are crucial, they warn. “We need to be cautious, we still need to learn more about Omicron,” Garcia said. “While it may be more transmissible, we don’t know that it’s more severe. What we do know is what we can do to protect ourselves.” Increasing vaccination rates is also key to preventing the development of new variants of Covid-19. “As long as we have large pockets and large numbers of individuals that are unvaccinated we will get new variants,” Garcia said. Madera county in the Central Valley just reached a 50% vaccination rate after a months-long campaign. “We’ve been working extremely hard to get over that 50% mark,” said Stephanie Nathan, the assistant public health director. “I think it comes down to an equity issue,” Nathan continued. “The counties that have lower vaccination rates have things in common. We have a population where we have to work hard to make the vaccine as accessible as possible and combat any of the myths that exist.” Additional surges will primarily affect the unvaccinated and those at high risk, Garcia said, but also healthcare systems, which struggle to respond to a mass volume of patients arriving at hospitals and clinics within a short time period. That was the case for Butte county in September as a surge in cases brought more patients to Enloe medical center than at any other point during the pandemic. About 80% to 90% of people arriving at the center were unvaccinated, the Enterprise-Record reported. Cases in Butte county, which has a vaccination rate of 49% according to New York Times data, are trending downward but officials expect to see a rise with the holiday season. “The numbers are still higher than we would like,” said Lisa Almaguer, a spokesperson for the public health department. “With this news of the Omicron variant, there are more questions than answers at this point. Information does not change the current recommendations,” she said. “For variants the best thing people can do to limit the spread is to get vaccinated, and if you haven’t gotten the booster, now is the time to get boosted.” This week the Yuba county health department announced that three more residents had died of Covid, all of whom were unvaccinated. “The pandemic is still here,” Abbott said. “We still have community members dying. It’s still very real.”“I was handed the phone and Roberto Mancini was on the other end – he said: ‘How would you feel about coming to Man City?’” recalls Diego De Girolamo. The striker had just made his Sheffield United debut aged 17, played for Italy Under-18s in a tournament in Russia and had had offers from clubs around Europe. The big move never materialised for De Girolamo, who will lead the line for seventh-tier Buxton – the lowest-ranked team in the FA Cup second round – at home to Morecambe of League One on Saturday. The journey from calling a European Championship winner a teammate to the Northern Premier League has been relatively quick for the 26-year-old after an anterior cruciate injury and falling out of love with the game. The accent is Derbyshire but his name’s origins are unmistakable, leading to a call-up from Italy when he was 17. “At first I thought it was a joke. I wasn’t driving at Sheffield United, I made my debut a couple of weeks beforehand and my dad picked me up from Shirecliffe and said: ‘You’re going to Russia next month.’ I asked what for and he explained: ‘You’ve been picked to play for Italy Under-18s.’ After about 10 to 15 minutes it sunk in. “It was amazing. Don’t get me wrong, when you’re a young lad coming up the ranks at Sheffield United, you do get treated very well but when you play for your national team, you get treated like kings; anything you want or need, it was just brilliant. Going out and playing was an unbelievable feeling, I remember scoring in my first start in that tournament and I looked over to see my dad going mad.” De Girolamo played alongside Bryan Cristante for Italy and spent last summer following his former teammate at the European Championship, including at the final at Wembley, in which the midfielder came on. There were no divided loyalties for De Girolamo, despite his links to a number of the England squad. “I was putting it on my story and celebrating but in the England squad were Dominic Calvert-Lewin, Aaron Ramsdale, Harry Maguire – that’s three lads I’ve played with – and they all follow me on Instagram and I thought: ‘They’re not gonna want to see this after losing the final. I might have to delete this.’ But on the other hand I played with Cristante. It was weird. I was in the stands going mad like a fan but there were lads out there that I know.” There is little chance of a Wembley return with Buxton but De Girolamo is enjoying his football after a tough time in the professional game triggered by a serious injury. Being sent out on loan four times by Sheffield United put the writing on the wall, and the club offered to pay up his contract before Chris Wilder put him on the transfer list in 2016. “I couldn’t play football for a year,” he says. “I had a few setbacks as you never come back from an ACL injury and return flying; I had problems with my hamstrings and calves, so it did set me back a year or two, but I can’t complain. I didn’t get the big move that I wanted but I still managed to go out on loan for a couple of seasons in League Two and scored goals.” An 18-month spell at Bristol City without a first-team appearance slowed down De Girolamo’s progress. “A day after I signed, Lee Tomlin arrived, who was virtually the same player as me but a lot better, older and more experienced. I knew straight away I would have to get myself out on loan to get some game time.” In 2018 De Girolamo stepped away from the professional game, despite options in the Football League, after becoming disillusioned, deciding to manage football commitments alongside work as a self-employed tiler. Coincidentally, Morecambe offered him the chance to move to the fourth tier after he left Macclesfield but Buxton could pay more and allowed De Girolamo to reunite with his brother Nico at the club. “No disrespect to Buxton but I was thinking I would be playing in League Two that following season. I had fallen out of love with football and thought I would go play with my brother, try to enjoy it again and see what happens. I am really glad I did that. Any footballer will tell you that you play your best football when you’re enjoying yourself and want to play, which is exactly what happened at Buxton.” For many it will be a shock if the unbeaten Derbyshire part-timers win but they are a confident bunch, with some quality among their ranks. The former Cardiff defender Ben Turner has Premier League experience and Jamie Ward spent most of his career in the Championship, making it no surprise the club are flying high in the league. “The standard of training is brilliant – it is on par with all the professional clubs I’ve played at. The standard we play at, not wanting to sound arrogant, is a level above the league we are playing in but it is showing. The lads and the gaffer are all confident that it’s potentially a winnable game and we can go on to the third round.”US infectious disease experts largely agree with the Biden administration’s newly announced emphasis on Covid-19 testing in the wake of the emergence of the Omicron variant, but questions remain over whether the president’s plan goes far enough to ensure that testing stops the spread of the virus. President Joe Biden announced new actions to combat the coronavirus in the US on Thursday, including a nationwide campaign encouraging vaccine boosters; a forthcoming rule requiring private insurance to reimburse the cost of at-home testing; a promise to provide 50m free at-home tests to health centers and rural clinics for those not covered by private insurance; and a requirement that travelers to the United States, regardless of nationality or vaccination status, provide proof of a negative Covid-19 test within one day of boarding flights. “The bottom line, this winter, you’ll be able to test for free in the comfort of your home and have some peace of mind,” Biden said during a speech Thursday at the National Institutes of Health. Epidemiologists agreed that the testing should be a point of emphasis at this stage in the pandemic and say they are confident that existing tests will detect Omicron, a novel variant detected in the United States on Wednesday that had already sparked fresh concerns across the world. “We appreciate and concur with the importance of testing, particularly increasing access to testing through the various different coverage and reimbursement means,” said Dr Nirav Shah, president of the Association of State and Territorial Health Officials. But the doctors still questioned whether people will have enough access to tests in order to regularly use them and whether testing requirements should also be instituted on domestic travel. In parts of Europe, at-home Covid tests are cheap and widely available, but in the United States, people have had difficulty finding at-home tests at drug stores or making appointments to get tested. In October, the Biden administration announced that it would buy $1bn worth of tests to address the shortfall. The new plan calls for private insurers to begin reimbursing people for at-home tests in January. But some infectious diseases experts say that doesn’t go far enough and point to Great Britain, where the at-home kits are free and Germany, where they cost about $3. The reimbursement plan “is a move in the right direction”, said Dr Celine Gounder, an infectious disease specialist and epidemiologist at New York University. “I think ideally what [the Biden administration] would be doing is providing them for free for everybody. I think anytime you ask somebody to fill out paperwork, it creates a barrier.” At-home kit manufacturers in the United States also charge significantly more than in other countries. For example, a QuickVue test costs $23.99. “Reimbursing folks for what these tests retail for just pads the coffers of diagnostic companies, rather than taking a more government-led approach to negotiate the actual cost and provide them for its people,” said Susan Butler-Wu, a clinical microbiologist at the Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern California. “I worry that this will end up costing way, way more money than actually contracted and negotiating with manufacturers to provide the tests themselves for free/low-cost.” The new plan also tightens the requirement for in-bound international travelers to the United States to have a negative Covid test taken with 24 hours of departure, whereas previously it was within 72 hours. But Gounder said she sees the distinction between domestic travel and international travel, when it comes to testing, as an “artificial line” and thinks the same requirements should be instituted for domestic flights. “That’s this false idea that virus doesn’t cross the artificial boundaries, and it does, and it really doesn’t matter if it’s an international boundary or a state boundary,” said Gounder. Another uncertainty surrounding the push for increased testing is whether that effort could cause the same backlash as masking and vaccination recommendations and requirements have faced. Shah, who also serves as director of the Maine Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, pointed out that testing in schools has not caused widespread resistance. “The asterisk to that is if we get to a world where the options on the table for employers or schools are vaccinate or test … we could see testing take on a distinctly more political dimension,” said Shah. If testing becomes a ubiquitous part of life in the United States, that doesn’t necessarily mean the number of Covid cases will significantly decrease, said Butler-Wu. She pointed to the UK and Germany, which have seen a recent surge in Covid cases despite the widespread testing. “In order to be impactful, rapid tests must be combined with other measures,” Butler-Wu said. “They are one tool in the toolbox, but they’re often discussed as if they’re the entire toolbox itself.”In the last week of August, I called my favourite country pub to book a big table for a Boxing Day lunch. Because, yes, I am that person – the fruitcake outlier on every WhatsApp group, wanting to make Christmas plans four months in advance. Hiya! As I write, we’re still in bonfire season, yet I am already consulting daily with my packed shelf of Christmas cookbooks (I’m planning to start practising a gingerbread martini) and signing off messages with the new female Santa emoji, my digital daemon from now until the new year. So I am accustomed to the polite bafflement with which my early-doors Christmas enthusiasm is usually greeted. What I’m not used to is being told, as I was that day in August, that the pub was fully booked for Boxing Day already. This year I am no longer the fruitcake outlier. After last year, when Christmas was semi-cancelled by a last-minute lockdown, the world has gone crazy for Christmas. If you are planning on an audience with Father Christmas this year, you’d better be top of the nice list. From Holkham Hall in Norfolk to the Tong Garden Centre in West Yorkshire, Santa’s grottos have sold out in record time. In London, the Liberty department store’s Christmas shop has been selling 38 baubles an hour since it opened, and is on track to sell 110,000 over the season – its highest figure ever. The Liberty beauty hall is set to sell enough fragrance to fill an Olympic-size swimming pool. By mid-October, “Advent calendar” was regularly among the top search terms on the Selfridges website. (These days, you can count down the December days with cheese or nail polish if chocolate isn’t your thing.) The mood this year is “Christmas – amplified,” says Meave Wall, store director at Selfridges. “Big, sparkly, all-round joyful.” “There is more excitement for Christmas this year,” agrees Gareth Banner, managing director of London hotel The Ned, whose grand marbled lobby will soon be home to a Christmas tree almost seven metres high and twinkling with 6,000 white lights. “I think most people feel they were cheated out of Christmas last year, especially after the last-minute U-turn by the government.” He is seeing an unprecedented number of bookings for private parties, festive weekends, and restaurant tables. The consumer research department at Marks &amp; Spencer confirms that the British want “a bigger Christmas” this year. Its most recent data shows 39% of families planning to do more to mark Christmas than they did before Covid-19. This year, 68% of people hope for “a big family Christmas”. The vibe for Christmas this year, in other words, is as if we were an entire nation of six-year-olds, all overexcited and on tenterhooks for Santa. After the handbrake turn of last year’s 11th-hour rule change, attempts to save Christmas Day tended to focus, for most people, on keeping the magic alive for children. And the grownups felt they missed out. “After sacrificing so much last year, our customers want to pull out all the stops and be fully immersed in Christmas tradition,” a Marks &amp; Spencer spokesperson told me. It’s not just children who are getting treats: by mid-October, M&amp;S was selling a bottle of its light-up snow globe gin, with flakes of edible 23-carat gold leaf suspended in clementine-flavoured Christmas spirit, every three seconds. The uncertainty of last Christmas has generated an appetite for festive pre-planning of the kind that usually gets normal people rolling their eyes. Street WhatsApp groups are alive with plans for neighbourly get-togethers. End-of-term ballet shows are oversubscribed with parents wanting to bring four grandparents, three godparents and the cat. After last year, Christmas feels precarious and precious, creating an anxiety not to be caught out by empty shelves. Amid early scares of Christmas tree shortages, John Lewis saw a 14% uptick in sales of twig trees, as more of us invested in a plan B. Every retailer is reporting brisk business in frozen seasonal food, from turkeys to canapé-size mince pies. Christmas spirit can’t be stored in the freezer and defrosted at will. It can’t be guaranteed with a credit card deposit, and it can’t be bottled and stoppered, with or without edible glitter. Christmas is togetherness and kindness. It is hopefulness on the darkest of days. It is everything, in other words, that the past two years have crystallised as being all that matters. But Christmas is also about life being out of the ordinary. It is wolfing down chocolate from your stocking under your duvet before dawn breaks or, for a slightly older audience, opening the first bottle of fizz straight after breakfast. It is eating brussels sprouts and Christmas pudding, which you wouldn’t dream of doing any of the other 364 days of the year. Christmas has its own timetable, whether that’s midnight mass or eating lunch at 3pm. It has its own menu, whether it begins with lumpy tangerines in the stocking or with smoked salmon. It has its own dress code, whether that is pyjamas or paper hats. The whole point of Christmas is that it should be different from every other day of the year – which is what made last year’s scaled-down Christmas feel odd, when most of us ended up spending it with exactly the same people we’d spent the rest of 2020 with. In other words, Christmas is supposed to feel very slightly crazy, which is why those who roll their eyes at making the dog wear reindeer ears or risking life and limb on top of a wonky stepladder to get the fairy to sit just so miss the point. But sustainability is changing the way we do Christmas. Showstopping gift wrap that creates a mountain of shiny, non-recyclable waste – think Rowan Atkinson in Love Actually, with his cellophane bags and curls of shiny paper – is making way for squares of fabric that can be saved by the recipient for next year’s presents. Selfridges has resale and rental options on its partywear floor. Collectible, heirloom-worthy tree ornaments are taking over from pop culture glass aubergines and neon Beyoncés. We want linen tablecloths and napkins instead of the disposable kind. Christmas is bliss for anyone who loves making rooms look nice. At Christmas, I get to wrap the banisters in holly and other greenery, despite this serving no practical purpose except to fill dusty corners with wrinkled berries. I get to curate such an over-the-top mantelscape of scented candles and lights that it takes a good 10 minutes of fussing with matchboxes and fiddly switches to get the house out of darkness when I get home from work. I’m sure I’d tire of this level of aesthetic micromanagement if I did it year-round, but for one month a year, it is heaven. Decorating for Christmas once meant baubles and tinsel on a tree, but has expanded into a hobby that covers the house – wreath on the front door, festively pimped mantelpiece, curated table. Christmas always reflects the time that precedes it, and this year’s has taken inspiration from 18 months of staying in. A British countryside aesthetic has superseded our recent Scandi passions for the cosiness of Scandi hygge and the wholesome outdoorsiness of friluftsliv. (To recap: hygge is a scented candle and a fine knit; friluftsliv is a fire pit and a rugged sweater.) John Lewis Christmas buyer Jason Billings-Cray says his team “found inspiration a little closer to home than usual”, adding: “We had all reconnected with the world around us and found the joy and beauty in our little pockets of nature, from windswept coastlines to babbling rivers.” As a result, robins are the new reindeers. There’s an online waiting list for the store’s £30 neon robin light, and for its £4 mince pie plate with painted robin in stripy scarf. If you are quick, you might snag the last £7 beach hut bauble, complete with miniature bucket and spade. The more foodie we get as a nation, the larger Christmas looms. Gone are the days when a gourmet Christmas meant not drying out the turkey. At Selfridges, this year’s lean-in to nostalgia and familiarity can be see in the personalised Toblerones with retro artwork – but the pop up Great Feast food market will feature a liquid-nitrogen ice-cream parlour with Willy Wonka-style festive flavours. Personally, I suspect that this may be the year that I finally succumb to my absurd but persistent yearning for a Christmas tree-shaped Bundt pan in which to attempt Nigella’s Spruced Up Vanilla Cake. The Always Pan by Our Place – think Le Creuset, but in millennial pink – is at the top of a number of fashionable wishlists, along with electric woks. (Cindy Crawford swears by hers.) Which brings us neatly to fashion. On this front, you will be glad to hear, there is to be no ramping-up of the festive arms race. Higher heels and tighter dresses will not make you feel more festive. Quite the contrary, in fact. Christmas glamour is as it ever was. Fair Isle sweaters and cosy slippers. Cashmere in Quality Street brights, and velvet in crimson or black. Look-at-me pyjamas, whether they’re in soft brushed tartan or satin with feather cuffs. And – for 10 minutes at the start of lunch, while you read out the cracker jokes and pass around the bread sauce – a paper hat. This year, Christmas comes with all the trimmings.Warning: spoiler alert… In his 20-year career Paolo Sorrentino has orchestrated scenes of indelible virtuosity and grandeur: the pageantry of the pope in the Vatican, poolside orgies where ecstasy pills rain from the sky, a giraffe among Roman ruins, Michael Caine conducting a field of cows. But in his latest, The Hand of God, Sorrentino stages a scene arguably more challenging than any of them, and one that few film-makers could ever contemplate: a reenactment of his own parents’ deaths. Initially it appears to be a picture of domestic contentment. Sorrentino’s fictionalised parents (played by Toni Servillo and Teresa Saponangelo) are enjoying an evening on the sofa by the fire in their new holiday home, outside Naples. They start to feel tired and peacefully doze off in each other’s arms. It is only afterwards we realise they are being poisoned by carbon monoxide fumes from a faulty heating system. The 16-year-old Sorrentino was not with them that night. His father had bought him a ticket to see his football team, Napoli, and their sensational new star: Diego Maradona. “He’s the one who saved you!” An uncle tells the young Sorrentino at his parents’ funeral. As in the film, Sorrentino only found out what had happened after the match, by which time his parents were dead. “When I went to the hospital, I realised that something was happening that was the most important thing in my life,” he says over Zoom, as he smokes a cigarillo in his office in Rome. “I remember everything that happened.” The tragedy itself is almost unimaginable; recreating it 35 years later, equally so. How did he get through that scene? “It was extremely difficult,” he replies in a mix of English and Italian through an interpreter. “But in the end, what prevails are the very concrete and tangible issues of shooting a scene. You don’t want your crew to be waiting or to raise difficulties with your producer. You just shoot it. You rely on the techniques that you learned over the years and you go for it.” It feels intrusive to be even asking Sorrentino about these intensely personal events. He knew very well that making this film would involve talking about them repeatedly to virtual strangers, as he is now. “I was very, very afraid to talk about this movie,” he says. “My wife said to me: ‘Are you sure? It’s not easy to talk about your private life.’” But he is no longer talking about his life, he says. “My story is now something that belongs to a movie, like other movies I did, like other movies I watched in my life. So this puts a distance between me and my story. This is useful for me, to keep my emotions out of the conversation.” The Hand Of God is a different type of film from Sorrentino’s previous, and possibly sheds new light on them. The 51-year-old has established one of the most distinctive signatures in cinema: fluid, audacious camera moves, grand tableaux vivants, montages cut like music videos, garish grotesques and sleek, modernist spaces. His cinema has often grappled with existential themes – power, spirituality, fate, meaning – and his protagonists are invariably lonely, melancholic men. In his 2013 Oscar-winner The Great Beauty, it was Jep Gambardella (also played by Servillo, his regular leading man), the urbane, acid-tongued writer whose decadence and despair mirror that of his native Rome. Sorrentino’s subjects have been solitary mafiosi (The Consequences of Love), blocked musicians (Michael Caine in Youth, Sean Penn in This Must Be the Place), flawed political leaders (Giulio Andreotti in Il Divo; Silvio Berlusconi in Loro), and religious ones (his HBO series The Young Pope and The New Pope, starring Jude Law and John Malkovich). This time the isolated male is Sorrentino himself, or at least his alter-ego, Fabietto, played by Filippo Scotti. An awkward teen with a pair of Walkman headphones constantly around his neck, Fabietto seems to lack friends, direction and sexual experience. “I was like that before the death of my parents and I’ve never changed,” says Sorrentino matter of factly. “It’s my nature. I’d rather be alone. It’s true: loneliness and melancholy are two traits of mine that I tend to put in my characters as well.” Sorrentino had been turning this film around in his mind for a decade, he says, but it was only about three years ago, while writing The Young Pope, that he began to work on it in earnest. “After four months writing about cardinals and popes and the Vatican, I decided to take a break for a couple of days. I said: ‘OK, let’s try to write another thing, just for fun.’ And suddenly, I found out that this story was very easy to write, very moving for me but also very funny in the first part.” Before the pivotal tragedy, The Hand of God plays almost like a lighthearted coming-of-age story. We meet Fabietto’s colourful family: his parents (who are blissfully in love, despite some major fault lines), his cooler older brother, his virtually absent sister (in a running gag, she’s always in the bathroom), and his many aunts and uncles – not least Aunt Patrizia, uninhibited object of Fabietto’s adolescent lust, and a woman with clear mental health issues. There is also a bizarre scene in which Fabietto loses his virginity to a much older woman. “I tend to not say how much is true and how much is not true, but let’s say that almost everything is true,” says Sorrentino cryptically. The lively domestic dramas and alfresco family meals feel closer to classical Italian cinema than Sorrentino’s usual detachment. “This is a completely different movie for me,” he admits. “I was scared to do these kind of scenes that I never did before. I normally adopt a certain style: I move my camera around because I’m searching for the truth. In this case, the approach was completely the opposite. Because I already had the truth, I didn’t need to go and look for it. I decided that if I kept my camera still, [the actors] would feel freer to express themselves with sincerity and authenticity, which is what they did.” Aptly, Maradona is a semi-divine presence in the story. It wasn’t just Sorrentino but all of Naples that saw him that way: a footballing god sent to save their nondescript team (which he did, leading them to their first league title in 1987). Neapolitans also rooted for Argentina against England at the 1986 World Cup, when Maradona scored his infamous “hand of God” goal, four years after the Falklands war. (“It was a political act,” declares Fabietto’s uncle.) Sorrentino already paid homage to Maradona in his 2015 movie Youth, albeit in an unflattering cameo as an ailing, overweight has-been (it was an impersonator). He was hoping to show Maradona, who died last November, the finished movie. “Maradona said something very beautiful about football, which applies also to film-making,” says Sorrentino. “He said it’s a game that is based on tricks: you pretend you go left, and then you go right. The same thing with cinema.” It is impossible to speculate what might have happened had his parents survived, but The Hand of God suggests the tragedy was also a form of liberation and creative catalysis for Sorrentino. Inevitably, young Fabietto/Sorrentino decides he wants to be a film-maker, even though he has only seen three or four movies. He has a fateful encounter with a local film-maker, Antonio Capuano (played by Ciro Capano), who went on to hire and mentor Sorrentino in real life and gives Fabietto some tough advice: “You’ve got to have something to say.” Sorrentino is a long, long way from the lost young man he depicts himself as in The Hand of God. It would be simplistic to imagine the movie was some kind of “healing experience”, but such a soul-baring film must surely represent some kind of turning point. Has it changed his perspective on those events? “I don’t think that you are able to actually process a loss of that kind,” he muses. “You can try to take steps forward. You can improve your life. You can grow up. I’ve become a parent myself and that forced me to ponder on different issues, but you never come to terms with it. I am still today the result of that traumatic event in my adolescence, and a film is not enough to solve it … “You just learn to live with it, little by little, but it’s always there.” The Hand of God is in cinemas now and on Netflix from 1 December • The caption on the main image in this article was amended on 3 December 2021. An earlier version had the names of Teresa Saponangelo, Marlon Joubert and Toni Servillo in the wrong order.Why will I love it? Monstera adansonii is cute and full of character. The heart-shaped leaves look like Matisse has been using them to create his cutouts – it’s easy to see where one of its common names, Swiss cheese plant, is derived. Light or shade? It prefers bright, indirect light. Where should I put it? Mine sits on a sideboard in an east-facing room. It has medium-sized leaves (smaller than those of its cousin Monstera deliciosa, the classic Swiss cheese plant) and loves to trail, so an elevated position is ideal. Hailing from the rainforest, Monstera adansonii is used to receiving shade from the tree canopy so can tolerate being some distance from a window. How do I keep it alive? As a tropical plant, it appreciates humidity and warmth. Mist frequently, keep temperatures around 18-27C (minimum 12C) and water weekly. The species has aerial roots, so use a bamboo stick to support growth. Did you know … Its name, Monstera (Latin for “monster”), alludes to the leaves’ unusual appearance. However, due to the presence of insoluble calcium oxalates, its leaves are mildly toxic to humans and pets and can cause stomach upsets if ingested.My friend Andy Howell, who has died of cancer aged 64, was a Labour city councillor in Birmingham for 12 years, and a chair of the education committee who made a big difference to the city’s schools. He was deputy leader of the council from 1999 to 2003. During Andy’s three years chairing the education committee he saw that investment in education rose. He worked closely with Tim Brighouse, then chief education officer, persuading local schools to stay in the Birmingham family instead of opting for the central funding of grant-maintained status. Cooperation and collaboration between schools were strengthened. Exam results improved across the city. Andy was born in Birmingham to Brenda (nee Willson) and Denis Howell. His father was a councillor in Birmingham before becoming MP for Birmingham All Saints from 1955 to 1959, and Birmingham Small Heath from 1961 to 1992. His mother was a housewife. He was educated at George Dixon grammar school. As a teenager in 1974, when his father was a Labour minister in the Harold Wilson government, Andy witnessed the lucky escape of his mother and brother from an IRA bomb that had been placed under the family car. The bomb was dislodged when his mother drove off, and exploded close by. Andy went to North Staffordshire Polytechnic (now Staffordshire University) to study law but left after two years and moved to London. He worked in a bar and then, returning to Birmingham carved out a career in the voluntary sector. He was elected Labour councillor for Moseley and Kings Heath ward in 1991. Following his successful stint in education, Andy became deputy leader of the council in 1999. He worked hard to see the city continue to develop from a declining manufacturing economy towards finance, business tourism, and a centre of finance, culture and sport. He was deselected by the local Labour branch in 2003 after he stood in opposition to its then leader, Sir Albert Bore. Since leaving the council in 2003 Andy had been a freelance consultant working with local authorities and voluntary sector agencies. He worked part time for the Scarman Trust, advised Waltham Forest Labour Group, and led the Birmingham Arts Partnership between 2015 and 2016. He had recently been appointed chair of New Roots, a housing provider in Birmingham. Andy was happiest when walking in the Scottish Highlands, often wild camping with only basic facilities. In the last few years he edited a walking blog, Must Be This Way, which became popular with long-distance walkers. He also loved music and was an accomplished guitar player. Andy enjoyed discussing the big issues of the day over a late night curry in Birmingham’s balti belt. Andy met Kate Foley in 2001 when he was deputy leader of the council and she worked for Unison. They married in 2016. Andy is survived by Kate, by his son, Kieran, from his first marriage, to Ceri Ogden, which ended in divorce, and by his sister, Kate, and brother, Mick.When the cricketer Cecilia Robinson, who has died aged 97, made her Test debut against Australia in Adelaide in 1949, it was over a decade since England’s women had last played any match at all. Things did not go well for the visitors. Beset by the spin of Betty Wilson, who took 6 for 23, England were all out for 72, and only Robinson reached double figures. Her dogged 34 was compiled over three and a half hours, which was three hours longer than anyone else lasted at the crease. England lost the match, and ultimately the series – but they found an opening batter whose patience and determination would be a pillar of their game for the next 14 years. Robinson’s predecessor as opener was Betty Snowball, who had established one of the most famous batting partnerships in the history of the women’s game with Myrtle Maclagan. When Snowball dropped down the order after the war, Robinson became Maclagan’s new foil, and at a time when women’s internationals were few and far between, her 829 Test runs, including two centuries, represented a significant haul; her close-fielding contributions, either at silly mid-on or slip, were equally invaluable. Robinson was born in Canterbury, Kent, the daughter of Beatrice (nee Moore) and Arthur Robinson. She was besotted with cricket from her early childhood. She was only four when her elderly father, a canon at Canterbury cathedral, died; her older brothers, John and Edward, allowed her to join in with their backyard games so long as she acted as chief ball retriever. It did not take long for her to surpass them in potential; she had already made the first XI at St Paul’s school for girls in London when the second world war upended her family life. Her mother’s house was requisitioned by the army, while her school was evacuated to Wycombe Abbey in Buckinghamshire, and those circumstances meant she never got to follow her brothers to university as she would have liked. Qualifying as a PE teacher in 1945, Robinson made her first-class debut for Home Counties women when cricket resumed after the war the following year; her domestic career would go on to span three decades, to 1967. Taking up her place on England’s 1948-49 tour of Australia and New Zealand meant giving up her first teaching position, and she worked at a poultry farm to raise the considerable funds required to finance the six-month trip. The tour was an eye-opening adventure for a young woman from an ecclesiastical family, as packed with socialising as it was with playing and travel; invited to “tea” at the tennis club in Perth, Robinson and her teammates found themselves mortifyingly underdressed for Western Australia’s upper crust. Her maiden Test century came at Scarborough in 1951, in a blaze of elegant strokeplay she attributed to the coaching of the former Sussex players John and James Langridge. But it was her second overseas tour, in 1957-58, that proved the highlight of her England career. Following an incident-filled voyage to New Zealand – the ship the team was on collided with a freighter in the Panama Canal – Robinson was one of the most prolific England batters on the tour, scoring 454 runs at 41.27, including, in the third Test against Australia, the slowest international century by a woman. In the final Test, she took on the captaincy after Mary Duggan was ruled out through injury, carrying her bat through the second innings to help save the match: her quick-scoring 96 not out was a reminder that she could play attractive attack as well as stoic defence. She sparked many a sporting passion through her long tenure as cricket coach, games teacher and housemistress at Roedean school, in Sussex, but even the least athletic of her charges were inspired by her kind-but-firm mentorship. Her niece Catherine, with whom she lived in her final years – the daughter to Cecilia’s brother John, who became bishop of Woolwich – points out that the family motto her aunt inherited was a daunting one: “Not for ourselves alone but for the whole world were we born.” For all her sociability, says Catherine, it was rare for anyone to penetrate Cecilia’s emotional reserve, and the great love of her life was, as far as anyone knew, her golden retriever Islay. After retirement, Robinson moved to Tenterden in Kent, where, in the time-honoured tradition of cricketers, she polished her golf game, and became ladies captain of her local club. She was made an honorary member of MCC in 2000 and, in 2020, Kent finally awarded her a county cap. The club had to admit they had no idea how many runs she had scored for them in total, because the official records (1,109 runs at an average of over 50) failed to include a good many of the games she played. Robinson’s longlived dedication to the game, at a time when women’s place in sport was so woefully dismissed, is as powerful a legacy as the runs she scored. She is survived by two nieces and two nephews. • Cecilia Robinson, cricketer, born 22 May 1924; died 3 November 2021The recent breaching of the United States’ embassy in Yemen’s capital city of Sanaa by rebel forces, and the detaining of Yemeni employees of the embassy, is the latest escalation in a war that has gone on for far too long. It is a war that the United States has supported and remains deeply involved in. It’s time for that complicity to end. For more than six years, Saudi-led military intervention into Yemen’s civil war on behalf of Yemen’s exiled government against Yemeni rebels has been a key driver of the largest humanitarian disaster in the world. “The country’s economy has reached new depths of collapse, and a third wave of the pandemic is threatening to crash the country’s already fragile healthcare system,” United Nations humanitarian relief coordinator, Martin Griffiths, said in September, with millions “a step away from starvation”. Under first the Obama and then the Trump administration, the United States was Saudi Arabia’s partner in this horrific war. In 2019, Congress made history by passing its first War Powers Resolution through both chambers of Congress, pressing Donald Trump to end this support. It marked the first time that Congress invoked the War Powers Resolution of 1973 to direct the president to withdraw troops from an undeclared war. We were proud to lead this effort. The passage of that resolution has implications far beyond Yemen and opened a much broader and extremely important debate about how and when the United States uses our military to wage war, and the sole constitutional authority of Congress to authorize that use. We welcomed the Biden administration’s announcement earlier this year that it would end support for “offensive” military operations led by Saudi Arabia in Yemen and name a special envoy to help bring this conflict to an end. But the crisis has only continued. American defense contractors continue to service Saudi planes that are waging this war and the United States just announced new arms sales to the Saudis. We are aware that ending US military support for Saudi Arabia’s brutal assault will not alone end the multi-sided conflict in Yemen. The Houthis are launching bloody attacks on the central Yemeni city of Marib and launching cross-border attacks on Saudi territory. Violence has also erupted between rival factions in the south of Yemen. A UN expert panel found that all parties to the conflict may have committed war crimes. The US may not be able to stop all the violence it helped create, but it can stop enabling Saudi warplanes to bomb Yemeni civilians. Doing so will save lives – not only the Yemenis spared in Saudi bombing runs, but also by utilizing its leverage to pressure Saudi Arabia to lift the blockade on Yemen, which continues to block fuel and other essential imports into the country, pushing millions of Yemenis toward the brink of starvation. Lifting the blockade must happen immediately and be delinked from final peace negotiation talks. We have proposed an amendment to the National Defense Authorization Act to finally end all US support for the Saudi war effort. The House already passed this amendment for the third consecutive year. Given that this amendment simply codifies a prohibition on providing support for the Saudi war that already passed both houses of Congress in 2019 – legislation supported at the time by multiple officials now in the Biden-Harris administration – it is long overdue for this provision to be included in the final defense policy bill that is sent to the president’s desk. It is essential we pass this amendment to restore US credibility as an arbiter of peace in Yemen. But that alone is not enough. The US must support an international observer mission alongside the Saudi-Yemeni border and spearhead generous development efforts to rebuild Yemen. This aid should be focused on bolstering localized humanitarian and development initiatives like Yemen’s Social Fund for Development. We also must dramatically increase our diplomatic engagement to press Saudi Arabia, the Riyadh-based Republic of Yemen government, and the Houthis to accept the UN’s roadmap as the basis for a compromise that ends foreign military intervention and allow Yemenis to come to an agreement. The war has gone on too long, and it’s time we begin to take bold steps on the path to peace. Bernie Sanders is a US senator, and the ranking member of the Senate budget committee. He represents the state of Vermont. Rohit Khanna is a US representative from California’s 17th congressional districtAmerican democracy is at the breaking point, and a supreme court ready to gut or overturn Roe v Wade is the latest warning sign. A radical minority is accumulating ever more power, and they’re threatening to undermine equal rights under the law, basic human freedoms, and democracy itself. On Wednesday, the supreme court heard arguments in a case challenging Mississippi’s ban on abortions after 15 weeks of pregnancy, even for rape and incest survivors. Under the longstanding legal framework of Roe v Wade and Planned Parenthood v Casey, two of the supreme court cases that shape abortion rights in the US, states cannot outlaw abortion before the point of fetal viability, when the fetus can survive outside of the woman’s body (states can put restrictions on abortion before that point, so long as those restrictions don’t pose an “undue burden” on women seeking abortions). The Mississippi law violates that longstanding supreme court precedent. Yet the court agreed to hear it anyway, which was the first bad sign – why hear a case that so clearly flies in the face of what the court has already ruled? Wednesday’s oral arguments only contributed to the sense of doom, as a majority of the justices seemed ready and willing to overturn Roe. This didn’t happen by accident. The rightwing stranglehold on the courts has been a long-term project achieved by devious means. Republicans blocked Barack Obama from appointing dozens of judges to the federal bench, leaving those slots open for Donald Trump to fill. He stacked the courts with conservative reactionaries, many of whom were so unqualified that they failed to get the basic endorsement of the American Bar Association (ABA). Instead of appointing qualified candidates over rightwing stooges, the Trump administration simply cut the ABA out of the judicial vetting process. The most egregious of these Republican blockades came when Obama tried to appoint Merrick Garland to the supreme court seat vacated by Antonin Scalia. The right cried foul: it was wrong to change the balance of the court, they said, and it was an election year and therefore unfair to allow Obama a supreme court appointment; voters should decide the next president to pick a supreme court judge. A majority of voters wanted Hillary Clinton to have that role. But our undemocratic and archaic electoral college rules handed the victory to Donald Trump – the second time in less than two decades that the winner of the majority vote lost the White House. Trump, who ran on a promise of appointing anti-abortion judges who would overturn Roe v Wade, set about doing just that. He appointed Neil Gorsuch to the seat that should have been Garland’s. Then he appointed Brett Kavanaugh, despite the judge facing credible accusations of sexual assault. Finally, and most insultingly, Trump and his Republican Senate allies rammed through the appointment of the explicitly anti-abortion Amy Coney Barrett to the seat vacated by the feminist icon Ruth Bader Ginsburg – in his last year of office, and despite the supposed rule about a president letting the voters decide before an election. Trump voters – a minority of Americans in both 2016 and 2020 – are about to get what they want: an America in which women and girls are forced into pregnancy, childbirth and motherhood; an America in which women are second-class citizens, not entitled to control over the very bodies they live in, forced to risk their lives in the name of “pro-life” misogyny. The rest of us are stuck dealing with these minority religious views imposed on us. Strong majorities of Americans support abortion rights and do not want to overturn Roe. And in any case, the supreme court is supposed to be a bulwark against tyranny, an institution that defends and upholds constitutional rights, not one that punts those rights to the states. This court is not that. And that’s because of the shameful rightwing devastation of American democracy. Three members of the conservative supreme court majority, after all, were appointed by a traitorous president who fomented an attempted coup against the United States, and who has continued to undermine the electoral process by claiming that the last election, which he lost fair and square, was stolen. His party has devolved into a cult of personality, so tied to one narcissistic tyrant that it didn’t even bother releasing a political platform in the last presidential election. And because the Republican party knows it will lose if it has to play on an even playing field, its members have been systemically undermining voting rights for years. The demise of abortion rights in the US is the outcome of years of anti-democratic organizing to make it harder for people to vote, gerrymander districts, pull power from various elected offices when Democrats win them, and stack the bench with rightwing judges who will allow it all to happen. It’s terrifying. And of course forcing women into subservience and traditional roles is part of this process – that’s been the strategy in authoritarian nations throughout history, and it’s a pattern we’re seeing play out now, as the same nations that are scaling back democratic norms and processes are also going after women’s rights. That American women are facing a hostile supreme court and are looking at a future without abortion rights – and potentially without the constitutional right to contraception – isn’t a matter of law or “life”. It’s a sign of a democracy in decline. Jill Filipovic is the author of OK Boomer, Let’s Talk: How My Generation Got Left BehindA new train ticketing platform launching today is promising to plant a tree for every booking, which it hopes will appeal to passengers who care about climate change. Trainhugger says it will use 50p out of each £1.50 booking fee to pay for a young tree, in partnership with the Royal Forestry Society and Royal Scottish Forestry Society. The website will sell the same UK routes and fares as other rail websites, such as Trainline, which charges a web booking fee of 80p-£1.75 per ticket (and advance booking fees of 35p-£1.75, free on day of travel). Passengers who book directly with a rail provider, such as Southern, don’t usually pay a booking fee, but Trainhugger’s founders believe they will be able to win enough business from its rivals to make a considerable contribution towards combating climate change. They hope to plant 10 million trees by 2025. “If rail gets back to where it was pre-pandemic – 1.8 billion journeys in 2019 – and Trainhugger sold 5% of those passenger journeys, that would be 90 million bookings or 90 million trees, and we would match the government’s target of planting 90-120 million trees (30,000 hectares) a year,” said Felix Tanzer, who co-founded the company with Ed Caldecott. Each 50p donation covers the price of a “whip” , a baby tree shoot smaller than a sapling, but the costs of the land, and planting and maintaining the tree are covered by members of the RFS, including its own three forests and other landowners. The type of tree planted will be appropriate to the location. “We don’t plant sitka spruce, because it’ not good for biodiversity,” said Caldecott. Although Trainhugger and its Android and iOS apps officially launch today, passengers have been able to book through the site since late October. It has already taken 25,000 bookings, equating to 25,000 trees, with the first planted in the RFS’s Hockeridge and Pancake Woods in Buckinghamshire. The website uses a booking and payment system from a third party – On Track Retail – and says it will offer the same fares as other sites. At present, rail routes across England, Scotland and Wales are available, with Northern Ireland to be added soon. Passengers who register get a running tally of how many trees they have personally paid for, and can find out about the farmers who plant them. Caldecott and Tanzer initially planned to launch a rewards programme similar to Airmiles for train journeys, to be called Trainmiles, but said it “quickly felt very 1990s, like something Branson would do, and not something our generation would care about. And what do we care about? Climate change.” They believe that passengers will be willing to switch to their platform because there’s so little choice in the market, and because many train companies have a poor brand image because of their association with delays and engineering works. “We can talk to our customers about positive stuff. Your commute may be diabolical, but at least you’ve planted 60 trees. It’s all about feeling good about travelling,” said Tanzer. Although rail travel has recovered to only about 40% of pre-Covid levels, Tanzer said changes in work and travel patterns could benefit the scheme. “People who had a season ticket but are now just travelling once a week are buying individual tickets, which means they’ll be planting a tree with every journey.” Foreign travel restrictions, a growing consciousness of carbon footprints, a new appreciation for UK staycations and the current high cost of petrol would all help boost the popularity of UK rail travel in future, he added. The website joins other recent innovations in sustainable transport in the UK, including Lumo, FirstGroup’s new 100% electric rail service, which runs between London King’s Cross and Edinburgh and launched in October, and Karshare, a community car-sharing service which allows drivers to rent vehicles from private owners in five cities. • This article was amended on 6 December 2021 to remove a reference to Virgin, which no longer operates a rail service, and to make clear that fares for services in Northern Ireland are to be added soon.The Conservative hold in the Old Bexley and Sidcup byelection has both sides claiming victory. Senior Tories point to the fact that their party held the seat with more than 50% of the vote share as proof of success. Labour politicians claim the 10-point swing towards the opposition is evidence that the party is “back in business”. The truth is more complicated than either side’s spin, though. Ahead of the vote – triggered by the death of former cabinet minister James Brokenshire – ministers were confident they would hold the constituency, which has long been seen as a safe seat. However, the fact that the majority was reduced from 19,000 to less than 5,000 and voter turnout is at 34% means this isn’t a win that will lead to a party atmosphere at Conservative campaign headquarters. Instead, there are lessons to draw from it for future votes. The poor turnout – the lowest at a byelection since 2018 – hasn’t surprised those sent to the seat to campaign. While members of government were confident of a win, there was a sense that there was a lack of enthusiasm among the core base. “People will come out for us, but they are doing so begrudgingly,” said one senior Tory ahead of the vote. Weeks of negative stories – from the Owen Paterson sleaze row to Boris Johnson’s rambling speech to the CBI – mean that the Tory grassroots is feeling deflated. What points to potential issues for the Tories in the future is who benefited. For now, the fact that the Labour vote share went up by 7.4 points, while Reform UK won 6.6%, means that the opposition vote was split. That Reform’s leader, Richard Tice, only got 6.6% is a reminder of how lucky the Tories are that Nigel Farage has retired to the comfort of the broadcasting studios. It is not hard to imagine the trouble he would have caused in a seat such as this after the month the government has had. As the Channel crossings gain more coverage, one of the biggest worries in CCHQ about the next election is that a party will emerge that will outflank them on the right. While Labour has recently pulled level with the Tories in the polls, government advisers are sceptical of the idea that Keir Starmer can win much ground over immigration, given that Labour’s own approach isn’t clear-cut. However, were a Farage-style party to hammer the party on this, there could be a world where the Tories lose a chunk of their vote to the right, which would allows Labour to become the largest party without making much progress from where it is now. In the short term, the byelection result will increase Tory nerves over the next one, in North Shropshire later this month. That vote was already viewed as the trickier of the two, even though the Conservatives have a majority of more than 20,000 in the rural seat. Despite this being Owen Paterson’s old seat, sleaze is not dominating. Tories and Liberal Democrats campaigning there both say it doesn’t come up much – instead one Lib Dem says that “Peppa Pig” is a more regular complaint on the doorstep, a reference to Johnson’s CBI speech. But what worries the Tories is that the seat is so safe that they don’t have data about where their voters are, and the distance from London makes it hard to get cabinet ministers there for profile-raising visits. Meanwhile, the Liberal Democrats are on the offensive – pouring resources into the seat and claiming it as neck-and-neck, with one senior Lib Dem betting on a win. A Tory loss in North Shropshire would still be a surprise. But a byelection nine days before Christmas with a demoralised Tory base is not a recipe for festive cheer: if the Tories don’t hold it, it won’t be the season of goodwill for Boris Johnson among Tory MPs. The prime minister can’t afford for the fortnight ahead of the vote to be dominated by more stories about parties in N0 10 or contradictory advice about just how normal this Christmas will be. The government will try to get back on the front foot next week with announcements on crime and the nationality and borders bill. Johnson needs these to go well if he is to ensure that there’s no unpleasant Christmas surprise for him and his party. Katy Balls is the Spectator’s deputy political editorIn the interests of public service, I need to make you aware of a trap. Yesterday, a property became available on Airbnb. It is a large home in the Chicago area, available for one night only and it is suspiciously cheap. Look, it’s the Home Alone house. Apparently, for $18 (£13.50), you and three friends can stay overnight in the iconic McCallister residence. You will be greeted by the actor who played Buzz McCallister. There will be pizza and other 90s junk food. There will be a mirror for you to scream into. There may well be a tarantula. It all seems too good to be true, doesn’t it? This is why I am convinced that whoever ends up staying there will be robbed. Plenty of equally iconic movie locations have been turned into rental properties. Tony Stark’s log cabin from Avengers: Endgame is on Airbnb, for example, as is the Swan house from the Twilight films. You can even stay in the bus from Spice World, if your interests happen to include both claustrophobia and bouts of unwarranted nostalgia. I don’t have a problem with any of these properties. As locations go, they’re all relatively benign. The cabin is where Tony Stark invented the time travel necessary to defeat Thanos. The Twilight house offered young Bella Swan a safe haven from all the horny teenage vampires and werewolves that plagued her every move. The worst thing you could expect from staying a night in the Spice World bus is an unwanted Meat Loaf cameo. But the Home Alone house? Something doesn’t add up. Ostensibly the property is being made available to coincide with the release of the Disney+ movie Home Sweet Home Alone, but that doesn’t make any sense. Why mark the release of one film by showing people around the location of the superior original? Surely that would just underline how unnecessary Home Sweet Home Alone is? It’d be like celebrating the stage musical Cats by inviting you to Rebel Wilson’s house and forcing you to watch her sing. No, something else must be going on. My fear, and I don’t think it is unfounded, is that Buzz McCallister has somehow fallen in with the Wet Bandits. Which I know doesn’t make sense, because the whole point of the Wet Bandits is to rob houses that have been left vacant by their occupiers, and not filled with a bunch of gawping, giddy movie fans. But times change. My theory is that, following the events of Home Alone and Home Alone 2, the Wet Bandits became addicted to the chase. They no longer enjoy simple burglaries. Now the only thing that gets them off is the relentless psychological terrorism of strangers. Therefore, working alongside Buzz, it seems natural to assume that they have arranged for the McCallister property – a house they know inside out, remember – to be occupied by a new set of people. Once they’re settled in, the Wet Bandits will storm in, cause untold bodily damage, take all of their belongings and then leave. One way around this would be for the guests to jerry-rig a number of violent Rube Goldberg-style devices designed to repeatedly bring the Wet Bandits to the point of death. The other, more practical way, would be to not stay in the McCallister house at all. Just stay at home and watch Home Alone instead. The original, not the remake. You’re not a monster.In mid-September, Clarence Thomas told a crowd of more than 800 students and faculty at the University of Notre Dame that the US supreme court should not be viewed in political terms, and that justices don’t base their rulings on “personal preferences”. But if not political or personal preferences, where exactly do they discover the law? Thomas never said. When asked whether the attorneys presenting oral arguments ever compel him to change his mind, Thomas said, “almost never”. In late September, the court’s newest member, Justice Amy Coney Barrett, told a crowd in Kentucky that supreme court justices are not a “bunch of partisan hacks”. If there’s any doubt about the partisan hackery of the supreme court’s six Republican appointees, it will be on full display when they overturn Roe v Wade, the 1973 decision that established a constitutional right to abortion and prohibited states from banning the procedure before fetal viability, about 23 weeks. That ruling is expected next July. The case they’ve teed up to do the dirty deed is Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization, which centers on a Mississippi law that bans almost all abortions after the 15th week. Moving the constitutional prohibition to 15 weeks would disregard decades of precedent. On Wednesday, during almost two hours of intense oral argument and questioning from the justices, the court’s six Republican appointees signaled their comfort with the Mississippi law, even though it would flatly overrule Roe. Several of them appeared ready to dispense with Roe entirely, letting states decide whether and when to ban abortions. Until the last few years, there was no realistic prospect of overruling Roe. But Donald Trump vowed to name justices who would do so. And courtesy of the machinations of then Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell, Trump got an opportunity to appoint three justices – who have now created a six-justice conservative supermajority. During Wednesday’s argument, the three justices appointed by Democratic presidents warned that overruling Roe so soon after a change in the court’s membership would undermine the court’s legitimacy. “Will this institution survive the stench that this creates in the public perception that the constitution and its reading are just political acts?” Justice Sonia Sotomayor asked. “If people actually believe that it’s all political, how will we survive? How will the court survive?” It’s the key question. As the framers of the US constitution well understood, the supreme court is the one branch of government with neither the power to command obedience by force nor to gain it by doling out money. It relies totally on its moral authority. If the public begins to see it as just another political branch, it will lose that authority. Flashback: I was in law school in 1973 when the supreme court decided Roe. Also in my class at the time was Clarence Thomas, along with Hillary Rodham and Bill Clinton. The professors used the Socratic method – asking hard questions about the cases they were discussing and waiting for students to raise their hands in response, and then criticizing the responses. It was a hair-raising but effective way to learn the law. One of the principles guiding those discussions is called stare decisis – Latin for “to stand by things decided”. It’s the doctrine of judicial precedent. If a court has already ruled on an issue (say, on reproductive rights), future courts should decide similar cases the same way. Supreme courts can change their minds and rule differently than they did before, but they need good reasons to do so, and it helps if their opinion is unanimous or nearly so. Otherwise, their rulings appear (and are) arbitrary – even, shall we say? – political. In those classroom discussions almost 50 years ago, Hillary’s hand was always first in the air. When she was called upon, she gave perfect answers – whole paragraphs, precisely phrased. She distinguished one case from another, using precedents and stare decisis to guide her thinking. I was awed. My hand was in the air about half the time, and when called on, my answers were meh. Clarence’s hand was never in the air. I don’t recall him saying anything, ever. Bill was never in class. Only one of us now sits on the supreme court. It appears that he and his Republican-appointed colleagues – three appointed by a president who instigated a coup against the United States – are getting ready to violate stare decisis, judicial precedent. I don’t expect them to give a clear and convincing argument for why. Robert Reich, a former US secretary of labor, is professor of public policy at the University of California at Berkeley and the author of Saving Capitalism: For the Many, Not the Few and The Common Good. His new book, The System: Who Rigged It, How We Fix It, is out now. He is a Guardian US columnist. His newsletter is at robertreich.substack.comIn its 120th anniversary year, Hackney Empire is returning to its roots with a highly traditional pantomime. That’s mostly good news for the kids. All the favourite flourishes are here: sweets are thrown into the crowd; there’s a skit with a water pistol, plenty of patter with the audience, and a downright charming panto cow. There’s significantly less for the adults, though, with very few political references (despite a cancelled Christmas plotline that screams Covid) and a PG-rated script with barely a hint of sexual innuendo. Writer Will Brenton is best known for penning children’s TV show Tweenies and there’s a whiff of CBeebies to Cleo Pettitt’s pastel-coloured cut-out set and the ensemble’s beamingly innocent performances, including a bubblegum bright Jill (Ellie Ruiz Rodriguez) and a suitably strait-laced but plucky Jack (Rochelle Sherona). Even the baddies aren’t in the slightest bit scary. Boo. Hiss. It’s down to Clive Rowe to add a bit of bite to proceedings. Rowe has become a panto institution in Hackney and he stars and directs alongside Tony Whittle. Donning a series of delightfully absurd dresses, Rowe plays Jack and Jill’s mum Dame Trot and soon has the audience purring with pleasure. There’s a running gag in which an audience member has to jump up and declare his love for Dame Trot and, with Rowe on such great form, it doesn’t feel too much of a stretch. Then there’s his singing voice, which is as rich and controlled as ever. Steven Edis’s songs don’t really stretch Rowe but there’s one borrowed number – a thoroughly silly take on The Twelve Days of Christmas – which contains a dizzying deluge of custard-pie splats and whips the audience into a thoroughly festive frenzy. • Jack and the Beanstalk is at Hackney Empire, London, until 2 January.Whether it was Dua Lipa, Róisín Murphy or Sophie Ellis-Bextor’s kitchen, disco would unexpectedly prove to be one of the defining sounds of lockdown – its opulent escapism helping us to put on a brave, perhaps glitter-strewn face before another Saturday night indoors. Jessie Ware’s 2020 album What’s Your Pleasure? leaned heavily into the genre, seeming to renew her creativity – it became her best-performing album to date. Entering the stage to a sample from Deee-Lite’s rave pop anthem What Is Love?, the show’s tone is one of neon and luxury. Ware stalks the stage in a turquoise feathered gown; two giant disco balls reveal themselves. Opener Spotlight has the welcome fizz of a surprise bottle of prosecco, while the terrific Ooh La La toys with Tom Tom Club’s Wordy Rappinghood, complete with choppy Chic-style guitars. “The last time I was here I had one child, now I have three and my mum is more famous than me,” explains Ware to the loudest applause of the night – a reference to her highly successful Table Manners podcast co-hosted with her mother, the no-nonsense social worker Lennie Ware, where guests have included Paul McCartney and a tipsy Ed Miliband. The contrast between Ware’s newer material and what tonight she jokingly refers to as “the good old miserable days” – meaning the elegant, understated R&amp;B she broke through with a decade ago – affords the set a real variety. Biggest hit Say You Love Me – wearing much of co-writer Ed Sheeran’s sugary generalities – is stripped down as a singalong piano moment. At one point, Ware pauses to wish the audience shalom and a happy Hanukkah (in interviews, she is proud and articulate on her Jewish identity). The set genuflects to disco’s queer roots by a well-judged, banger-heavy opening DJ set by UK drag artist Jodie Harsh. In sultrier moments, of which there are a few, Ware is lavishly fanned by her blue and pink lit dancers. For a brilliantly steamy encore of the pulsating electronic Hot N Heavy, Ware unveils a microphone whose lead doubles as a black leather whip – leaning into a sense of fun, even camp, once entirely absent from her colour palette. This is scintillating, grown up pop, done with wit and finesse.“It was a wee bit emotional,” says Donald MacPhee, reflecting on how he reunited a woman with the wedding ring she lost in a potato patch in the Western Isles 50 years ago. Peggy MacSween, now 86, believed she had lost the golden band forever after it slipped off her finger while she gathered potatoes at her home on Benbecula in the Outer Hebrides. But after learning about the lost ring during a neighbourly chat, fellow islander and single-minded metal detectorist MacPhee made it his mission to unearth the treasure. He spent three days searching Liniclate Machair, the sandy coastal meadow where the potato patch once was with a metal detector. The area had become a popular drinking spot over the years, resulting in a significant number of buried can ring pulls that confused the sonic search for the ring. MacPhee, who runs Benbecula’s Nunton House hostel, explained: “For three days I searched and dug 90 holes. The trouble is gold rings make the same sound [on the detector] as ring pulls and I got a lot of those – as well as many other things such as horseshoes and cans. “But on the third day I found the ring. I was absolutely flabbergasted. I had searched an area of 5,000 sq metres. It was a one in a 100,000 chance and certainly my best find. It was a fluke. There was technique involved, but I just got lucky.” After dislodging it from the turf, MacPhee brought the ring straight to its owner. “It was in immaculate condition. She put it on her finger and it still fitted perfectly.” Taking up the story, MacSween said: “He just came to the door and said: ‘I have something to show you.’ It was the ring. I couldn’t believe it, but there it was. I thought I would never see it again.” She said of losing it: “I was shaking the sand out of my gloves and the ring disappeared. I didn’t know until I got home. I went out once or twice to look for it, but there was no way of finding it.” Her husband, John, whom she married in July 1958 and died a few years ago, bought her a replacement while they were on holiday. MacPhee said he had started metal detecting seven years ago after watching YouTube videos. “That got me interested and this is for many reasons my best find,” he said.Nationwide has appointed Debbie Crosbie as the first female chief executive in the building society’s 175-year history. The 51-year-old, who has led the turnaround of the troubled bank TSB as its chief executive since May 2019, will take over from Joe Garner, who has run Nationwide for the last six years. Crosbie will start at the country’s second-largest mortgage lender in the first half of next year. Nationwide did not disclose her pay; however, it is expected to be in line with the £1.2m Garner currently receives annually. “Following a thorough and rigorous selection process, she emerged as the outstanding candidate to lead Nationwide,” said Kevin Parry, Nationwide’s incoming chair. “She brings significant banking experience combined with deep operational and technological knowledge.” Crosbie follows in the footsteps of Alison Rose – whose appointment as chief executive of Royal Bank of Scotland in 2019 made her the first woman to lead one of Britain’s biggest banks – in taking a chief executive role in the male-dominated British financial sector. Analysts welcomed Crosbie’s appointment, with Goodbody praising the “remarkable turnaround in financial performance” at TSB after she led a “relentless restructuring effort”. The stockbroker said: “We think she is an excellent choice for the Nationwide chief executive seat, and we wish her well in the new role.” Born and raised in Glasgow, the daughter of an engineer and a care worker, Crosbie studied business at Strathclyde University before moving to London to join the Prudential graduate trainee scheme. In 1997, she joined Clydesdale Bank, which later became CYBG. While acting chief executive there, she led the preparation for its demerger from National Australia Bank and subsequent flotation. However, after missing out the top job at CYBG, which has since become Virgin Money, she went on to take the helm at TSB. Crosbie’s move to Nationwide comes as the banking sector faces the prospect of an imminent increase in historically low interest rates, against a backdrop of falling unemployment and higher inflation. In October, the Bank of England’s chief economist said he expected to see inflation surpass 5% by early next year. Nationwide is the UK’s biggest mutual, owned by its members, and sees itself as acting as a balance to the high street banks, often offering better deals because it does not have to respond to shareholders. “Nationwide’s mutual status, combined with its trusted brand and market-leading customer service, make it a purposeful and unique force for good,” said Crosbie. “I’m delighted to be asked to lead the society in its next phase of growth.”I’ve long been fascinated with the mega-YouTuber Jimmy ‘Mr. Beast’ Donaldson, who is 23 years old and richer than God. There’s something perennially fascinating about basically all YouTubers who sit at the top of the content tree, because they really are making and remaking their own worlds, shaping entertainment into something it’s never really been before – look at Logan Paul, who first typified the rise-and-grind make-a-prank-video-every-day-and-sell-merch-about-it mindset, then got cancelled for accidentally filming footage of a corpse, then went away for a month, came back with a slightly less fluffy more sincere haircut, mumbled something about how he’d “do better” and now he has one of the biggest podcasts in the world and boxed Floyd Mayweather Jr for an estimated $20m. But Mr. Beast is particularly fascinating, because he does it while having a moustache and not even being especially charismatic about it. I can’t stop watching. Mr. Beast first gained viral notoriety by gaming whatever the YouTube algorithm was at the time – one of his big early successes was a daylong video where he counted to 100,000 – then pivoted into what I can only describe as ‘stunt philanthropy’, i.e. giving a homeless person $10,000 and watching them sob gratefully on camera, or treating a family to a Christmas-saving no-limits trip around Best Buy. Obviously, I cannot criticise the guy giving away money to the needy, no matter how mawkish and calculated I find it, so you see how Mr. Beast has me in an absolute headlock. This week, Mr. Beast – one of the few YouTubers, like Mark Rober, who are such enormous stars in their own right that they can drop videos as and when they please, rather than having to rustle up content to feed the algorithmic beast every one or two days – launched his much-trailed version of Netflix’s Squid Game, where he … well, he just did Squid Game. Nobody died, obviously – instead, the first contestants were handed a sympathetic $2,000 for going out early. The sets were faithfully recreated from the Netflix show and each participant was in a true-to-series costume. The $456,000 prize was provided by an app that I dutifully downloaded after Jimmy did an ad halfway through the video. And the video was good: though there was absolutely no lip-service paid to the fact that Squid Game was a nine-hour long criticism of the grinding gears of capitalism and Mr. Beast’s videos are quite often just handing people between one- and ten-thousand-dollars in exchange for them humiliating themselves trying to win a car (the video ended with Donaldson saying, “shout out to the creator of Squid Game!”), the final game of musical chairs for a half-million dollar cash prize was genuinely thrilling. But … he just did Squid Game. I don’t get it. Netflix did Squid Game. And then Mr. Beast … just did Squid Game. There is no trick. This wouldn’t have been bought into sharp focus if there wasn’t a soon-deleted tweet this week from Jon Youshaei, one of those ‘creator and adviser’, too-into-NFT guys that exist out there, praising Mr. Beast for so brazenly ripping the original idea off. “.@MrBeast Squid Games video: 103M views in 4 days,” Youshaei wrote. “It took 7 weeks to make. @netflix’s Squid Games series: 111M views in 30 days. It took 10 years (!!) to make. More views, less time, fewer gatekeepers. That’s the promise of the creator economy.” I know, I know – I can’t believe copying someone else’s idea wholesale took less time and money than creating the original content in the first place. However, this is part of the problem: yes, we have a new generation of internet-only megastars with the power and the finances to make any content they like. But sadly, after years of creating videos purely to please an algorithm rather than an audience, they don’t really have anything new to say. What happens when Mr. Beast runs out of Netflix shows to re-make? How many more times can he buy someone needy a car? This week’s Squid Game video was, undoubtedly, a huge success. But it hints at a dearth of IP a little further down the line that could change how YouTubers make videos all over again. If you want to read the complete version of this newsletter please subscribe to receive The Guide in your inbox every Friday.Even the most bullish Labour activists expected the Conservatives to hold the staunch Tory seat of Old Bexley and Sidcup – but Keir Starmer will be quietly encouraged by the 10.3% swing to Labour. For all the occasional whispers that an upset could be brewing, given Boris Johnson’s recent woes over sleaze and internal Tory dissatisfaction, a byelection in the outer London constituency was never the ideal battleground for Labour. In a seat that has always been held by the Conservatives since its creation in 1983 – originally by Edward Heath – the party was defending a near-19,000 majority from the 2019 election. And, while the North Shropshire byelection later this month was prompted by the resignation of Owen Paterson, the Tory former minister whose breach of lobbying rules prompted the furore about standards, the one at Old Bexley and Sidcup followed the untimely death of James Brokenshire, a popular and respected local figure. As ever with such results, all wings of a party can pick out the lessons they want, and those within Labour already dissatisfied with Starmer will grumble that even after weeks of poor headlines for Boris Johnson, the Tory candidate still won more than 50% of the vote. Nonetheless, there will be some satisfaction within the Labour leadership about a swing which, if replicated nationally at a general election, would put the party at least close to government. Perhaps more significant is that while the new Conservative MP for the seat, Louie French, won a sizeable percentage of the vote, his majority was just under 4,500. Although the turnout in December byelections could be expected to be low, Labour strategists will be buoyed by the idea that some Tory voters, if not ready to switch sides, are at least staying at home. There was also more evidence of targeted tactical voting. With Labour the accepted challenger, the Lib Dems and Greens – neither of whom devoted significant resources to the byelection – won fewer than 1,500 votes between them. On the Conservative side, feelings might also be mixed. Supporters of Johnson will use the result as evidence the prime minister is untainted by opposition attacks of corruption and incompetence: holding a seat so strongly at a byelection after the governing party has been in power for 11 years is certainly an achievement. But Tory canvassers whose job it was to “get out the vote” on Thursday confessed they heard complaints from disaffected Conservative supporters, many of whom criticised Johnson’s leadership skills and professionalism. A familiar story related by one Tory councillor who went door-knocking in the area went: “The reports our voters have weak motivation, and [are] disaffected with Boris, have been borne out in my conversations with residents.” But now the votes have been tallied, it is clear to see the seat was always very unlikely to change hands. Looking at its demographics, the proportion of people aged over 65 is 19.2% based on the last census data, well above the London average (12.2%). When it comes to housing, 79.8% of voters are property owners – again well above the London average of 48.3%. And the borough of Bexley voted strongly for leave in the EU referendum, by 63%. But while Johnson is well known for his promise in 2019 to “get Brexit done”, voters in Old Bexley and Sidcup do not seem convinced yet that the government is delivering for them in other areas. During the campaign, some brought up issues such as: Johnson’s widely panned speech to business leaders that meandered into Peppa Pig World; the party held in No 10 attended by Johnson during the second lockdown, and broader frustration accompanied by a sense that the PM needed to sharpen up his act. What may not worry some Conservatives – but should bother Labour – is that these voters lamented the lack of an effective opposition. Starmer was said by some observers of the campaign to have been invisible during the byelection, and the Labour leader even spent polling day in Yorkshire. That is perhaps the single clearest message from Thursday’s vote: neither leader can afford to be complacent.Jon Daly has noticed it in the family’s fruit bowl, which isn’t as well-stocked as it used to be. His wife, Jess, has noticed it at the weekends, when the cost of filling the family’s car means thinking twice about long trips out. Inflation has hit the UK, and for households up and down the country rising living costs mean tough choices have to be made about spending. The most recent figures from the Office for National Statistics (ONS) show that in October the cost of living was 4.2% higher than in the same month of 2020. As some countries emerge from lockdown, consumption has increased across the globe, driving up demand for goods and services – and their prices. Beneath the headline rate of inflation – the highest in almost a decade – are some even steeper price rises for many daily essentials, such as energy. This week, Citizens Advice warned that one in 10 families were facing a financial crisis this winter, and for all but the wealthiest households there are shocks at the checkout or when bills land in the inbox or on the doormat. Jon and Jess, both 35, live in Norwich, where he works for the insurance company Aviva and she works for the University of East Anglia. The couple have an eight-month old daughter, Robin, and a cat called Polly. The family is well-positioned to spot rising prices: they keep a spreadsheet of their expenditure and can track their household finances back to 2018. But what they have noticed will be familiar to many – and underlines the stark choices facing households as they battle the biggest squeeze on incomes in years. In a deep dive into the finances of the Daly household, we illustrate how the cost-of-living crisis is eroding household finances for families across the country. “The main price rises we have seen are food and petrol,” Jess says. “The cost of petrol is just shocking at the moment.” The Dalys say they are lucky enough to have choices about what they do with their money. With both in work, they know they are more fortunate than many families who are on the breadline this winter, forced to rely on food banks and unable to afford to heat their homes. The squeeze on finances has led them to cut back on how much they put into savings, and to review subscriptions before they renew them, in case any spending can be reduced or cut entirely. But their income still covers their costs, and they do not having any outstanding debts to pay off. Like many households, they tend to do a main food shop – every couple of weeks, and either in Morrisons or Asda – then top up with some items from a local corner shop and small supermarket, in their case Tesco. With a young child and lockdowns to contend with, they have not been able to go out for restaurant meals this year, so their grocery budget accounts for pretty much all of their food spending. “We don’t eat out any more, so I do like to cook nice things,” Jess says. “I allocate a certain amount to food and we go over it every month at the moment. I look at the budget and where I can cut down costs so we don’t need to scrimp on food.” The couple don’t eat most meat, which is one saving. But they have noticed rising costs in the things that they do buy. “Fish is expensive,” Jess says. “We really can’t afford to eat fish more than once a month at the moment. You buy a couple of pieces of salmon and it’s £7 or £8.” Fruit, too, seems pricey, and Jon says he’s noticed that they don’t buy as much these days. A family shopping list they have shared with us shows how some things cost more this month than they did at the start of the year. A comparison of current prices with those they paid in late December shows peppers, cauliflower, potatoes all cost more now than they did then. These are all things that vary in price throughout the year but the ONS figures show an upwards trend in the cost of fresh fruit and vegetables since October 2020, with inflation in both categories running at 1.9%. Dairy products have also gone up over the past year. Jon says his favourite yoghurt is now much more expensive, and this is part of a wider trend, of 9.7% inflation in this category. The cheese the Dalys had on their shopping list costs much more today than when they threw it in their virtual trolley in December, and have gone up by more than the headline rate of 3% recorded for “milk, cheese and eggs”. Lower shop prices for eggs may be disguising growth elsewhere, though – according to the ONS, last month a dozen large free-range eggs cost an average of £2.15, down from £2.26 the year before. The Dalys are conscious of what they buy – trying to avoid food that has a lot of packaging or has been brought from thousands of miles away, and Jess says this is “quite hard when you are trying to save money”. Although their daughter has started weaning, she still only eats a tiny amount, so has not added to the food bills. There is the cost of nappies to contend with now but the family say they have not been buying them for long enough to have noticed a rise in costs. The fourth member of the family’s meals have been hit by inflation. “The food that our cat eats is never on offer any more,” Jess says. “I just paid £4 for a box of 12 pouches. But I feel like since having Robin I’ve neglected the cat, so the least I can do is get the food she likes.” The ONS says keeping a pet has become more costly: products for pets cost 2.9% more than in October last year, while vets’ bills have risen by 4%. The other big cost increase the family has noted has been petrol. Recently, petrol prices in the UK hit a record high, and the average cost of a litre of unleaded has continued to climb, reaching 146.89p this week, according to government data. This is more than 34p a litre more than a year ago, and has made a real difference to many families’ budgets. Neither Jon nor Jess use the car for work, so they do not have to rely on it every day. But they have started to think twice before using it in their spare time. “Last week, I filled up the car and it cost over £50, which was a bit of a shock,” Jess says. “The cost does come into my mind when we are deciding what to do – we won’t go for a trip out to north Norfolk and use a quarter of a tank of petrol, we’ll do something local instead. It’s definitely a factor when we’re planning what to do at the weekend.” The energy crisis has put pressure on many families’ finances. So far the Dalys have not seen their unit costs rise as they are on a fixed-price tariff with British Gas but their monthly outlay has gone up, as having a young baby and working from home has meant using the heating more. “Before we had a baby, Jon would have probably said I was quite stingy with the heating,” Jess says. “But now it needs to be on more.” Their direct debit increased by £20 a month to £100 in August, and they may have to pay more over the winter. Their fixed rate ends in April, and whatever they do, their costs look set to rise. They are paying about the same as the variable rate tariff, so a switch to that today would not have much impact but moving on to a new fixed-rate tariff with their provider would mean paying almost twice what they are charged now. Come April, they should move on to the variable deal but that’s at the same time the new price cap will come into force. Analysts have suggested the cap could be 30% higher than it is today, pushing average bills from £1,277 to £1,660 a year – a worrying increase for households around the UK. Recently, the Dalys cut their cable TV and broadband bill, which they say had “crept up” to almost £70, by cancelling lots of channels, and they now pay £38 for a basic package. Before becoming parents they used to go to the cinema a couple of times a month but have lost track of the cost of that. When they do return they could get a shock: according to the ONS, cinema, theatre and concert tickets are 9.5% more expensive than they were a year ago. While Christmas may be weighing on some people’s minds, the Dalys are planning a small celebration, and have a strategy to cover the costs: starting each January they both make a monthly contribution of £20 into a savings account. When the festive season arrives they have £480 to spend. “It really takes the sting out of it,” Jon says.The fashion industry is facing a waste and overproduction crisis if it continues on its current trajectory, one of the UK’s leading economic experts has warned. Dame Vivian Hunt, a managing partner at the consulting firm McKinsey and Company, said “fashion has a long way to go to demonstrate its commitment to achieving net zero emissions”. Hunt, who has previously been named the most influential black woman in Britain and one of the 30 most influential people in the City of London, said recent investigations showed 12% of fibres were discarded on the factory floor. She highlighted the acute problems with overproduction, noting that 45% of garments went on to be sold at markdown prices. Hunt was speaking at the Business of Fashion Voices conference in Oxfordshire – a two-day summit seen as the equivalent to the Cop26 climate talks – where she was joined by industry leaders including Tommy Hilfiger and Kris Jenner who, in true fashion style, watched from the front row. Hunt told the audience sustainability could be style and substance, adding that “perfection is an elusive goal but progress is achievable”. Now in its sixth year, Voices has attracted a host of high-profile speakers, including Stella McCartney and Alber Elbaz. The event is also credited with kick-starting some of the most essential conversations in fashion over the past decade. With the climate emergency serving as a headliner, issues surrounding equality in fashion, the mental health crisis, and the need for a better understanding of cultural appropriation were among the other lead topics on the agenda this week. Another speaker, the designer and activist Dame Vivienne Westwood, blamed capitalism for some of the problems plaguing the planet. “The whole world is in competition with itself to outsell itself, creating better and smarter weapons we are defending ourselves from our own aggression,” she said. Westwood, who created a series of playing cards to illustrate her point, added: “War is a major polluter and our major waste. Temperature is rising. As we saw at Cop, without cooperation, nothing can be done,” Westwood said. She referenced Cop26 in Glasgow and its failure to “keep the goal of 1.5C alive”, accelerate the decarbonisation of the global economy and to phase out coal. Dame Ellen MacArthur, the British sailor turned circular fashion economy expert, also used the Voices platform to call for unity and a concerted effort from all corners of the industry. She said: “A hundred innovations in 100 sectors does not add up to a solution.” The Business of Fashion founder, Imran Amed, who leads the event, said Voices aimed to bring fashion’s “big thinkers” together to create change. “No industry lies in a vacuum. Fashion is connected more than ever to the forces changing the world,” he said.He’s the blue-eyed boy whose elevation to the Australian Test captaincy has been met with universal approval among the locals but Pat Cummins still largely steps into the unknown and the challenge of combining leadership with the demands of bowling fast. Not since Ray Lindwall in 1956 has a seamer performed this dual role for Australia and even that was a one-off Test match forced by injury to Ian Johnson. Instead a succession of flinty-eyed batsmen have held sway in modern times until Tim Paine’s unexpected reign from behind the stumps most recently. What then for Cummins as he readies himself for the Gabba on Wednesday? The 28-year-old unquestionably sits among the world’s premier quicks, his 164 Test wickets coming at 21 runs apiece and his modus operandi one of relentlessness. But his own captaincy experience is limited to just four 50-over matches (and four victories) for New South Wales this year. Be it balancing the hostility required during his own spells with a calm disposition overall, setting fields and devising plans while trying to catch breath between overs, juggling the workloads of himself and his fellow bowlers dispassionately or staying injury-free throughout what are now compact series, the challenges are myriad. According to Stuart Clark, the decorated former Test seamer who helped inflict the 5-0 Ashes whitewash on England in 2006-07 and captain of New South Wales towards the end of his playing days, these should not be insurmountable for Cummins; not least given the wealth of experience in the current Australian team. “As captain you’re in the game the whole time,” Clark says. “Normally you can get down to fine leg, have a rest, a drink. But you can’t sleep as captain. You’re the centrepiece, making every decision going, so you get physically and mentally tired. As a batter you can park all that and concentrate when performing your playing role. “Then there is the off-field stuff, fixing little problems, managing people, selection – you’re involved in every meeting, motivating, acting as counsel. In Test cricket there is also the media demands, ferocious in terms of the demands before each Test, at the toss, after play. In short, there is a lot going on. “I did it for a season [2010-11] when Simon Katich was away and the likes of Pat, Steve Smith, Usman Khawaja, David Warner, Mitchell Starc and Josh Hazlewood were just coming through. But I think the cricket part will take care of itself in some respects, because Pat is lucky in that those guys are now senior players. Even a guy like Alex Carey [set to make his debut as wicketkeeper] is 30 and has captained before.” Nevertheless, the nature of the day job brings with it individual contests with batsmen that could potentially cloud judgment of the wider match. “Pat is an aggressive fast bowler,” replies Clark. “Not the screaming or shouting type but he has to be in the contest with the batsman. A thing I found hard here was when to bowl yourself. I recall this vividly, You always wonder whether someone else should be bowling. “You also don’t know when to stop bowling, because as a quick you always feel you can get the guy the next over. He’s got the keys to that now. There’s probably not a right answer, only the end result. And instinctively you don’t want to be the guy that comes on to knock over the last few wickets for a cheap three-fer, even if you’re the right person at the time. So he’ll need the senior guys to tell him either way at times. “But I think, knowing Pat for a long time, he will have clarity of thought here and err on the side of less is better. And I think he has the demeanour and cricket brain to possibly be a pioneer, maybe change the wider view that fast bowlers can’t be captains.” Along with the hurdles outlined above, said view has been driven by the fact that fast bowlers naturally get injured. In the modern era, they also face an uphill battle to get through the entire series without needing to be rotated given the shorter turnaround times. The upcoming Ashes, for example, sees five Tests crammed into just 42 days. Cricket Australia have already stated that Smith, the vice-captain, will step up once more should Cummins be forced to miss a Test. Clark is not a spokesperson for 25 million Australians but he believes the ignominy and tears of the 2018 ball-tampering scandal in Cape Town should not prevent a return. “I get it’s polarising,” says Clark. “There will be people who think he’s done his time and others who are dead against it. I’m on the side of thinking he’s been through enough. I have known Steven a long time, coming through the same club [Sutherland]. He knows what happened was horrible and he just wants to get on with his cricketing life. If that’s as captain, he’s happy to do it, if not, he’s happy to just play.” Whether this public debate comes to pass remains to be seen and, though Smith will be consigliere, the unblemished Cummins will be the one primarily directing traffic in the field next week. In a series that promises a raft of threads and subplots, how he fares will be among the most fascinating.Relations between the world’s great powers are tenser than ever since the cold war. Troops are massing along Russia’s border with Ukraine. Chinese ships and planes are openly threatening Taiwan. Japan is rearming in response. Turkey is renewing its belligerence towards its neighbours. Russia is backing east-west fragmentation in Bosnia. Where Britain stands in all this is dangerously unclear, drifting on a sea of Boris Johnson’s gestures and platitudes. The Royal Navy currently has a £3.2bn aircraft carrier waving the union flag in the South China Sea, completely unprotected. China could sink it in an hour. In the Black Sea, a British destroyer provocatively invades Russian waters off Crimea, showing off to the world’s media. Last week, the British foreign secretary, Liz Truss, advanced her bid for her party’s leadership by sitting astride a tank in Estonia and warning Russia that Britain “stood firm” against its “malign activity” in Ukraine. Meanwhile, Britain’s outgoing defence chief, Sir Nick Carter, estimates that the risk of accidental war with Russia is now “the highest in decades”. There is no evidence of a coherent strategy in these moves. Johnson is travelling a familiar path, seeking foreign glory to distract from domestic woes. He has announced a reversal of Britain’s 1960s withdrawal from “east of Suez”. He seeks something called an “Indo-Pacific tilt”, and a projection of what he calls “British leadership in the world”. His March defence review proposed a 40% increase in Britain’s nuclear stockpile, in flagrant defiance of the 1968 nuclear non-proliferation treaty. To push home the point, he appointed the navy’s expansionist Admiral Tony Radakin as his new chief of defence staff, reportedly against military advice. What this has to do with Britain’s defence is obscure. None of it falls within any treaty obligation. London has no obligation to get involved in China’s argument with Taiwan, nor does Taiwan even want it. Yet when Theresa May last month asked Johnson if his anti-Chinese Aukus treaty with Australia and America committed Britain to military action, Johnson played macho and refused to answer. Nor has Britain any obligation to defend Ukraine, which is not a member of Nato. Yet Truss appears to suggest otherwise. As for Iran, Brexit ended Britain’s need to impose crippling – and useless – economic sanctions. Yet it continues with them, even using them to refuse to ransom the imprisoned Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe. Most extraordinary, Johnson appears personally to have rescinded a pledge that Britain would never be the first to use a nuclear weapon in any future conflict. What conceivable credibility can be attached to such a threat? None of these bellicose emanations from the prime minister has anything to do with British security. They are play-acting. Britain is at liberty to say what it thinks about the authoritarian regimes in Russia and China – indeed it has a moral duty to do so, as it has to accept refugees and extend aid to the needy. Such duties have nothing to do with defence. Yet Johnson’s ambiguous words and actions carry implications. Casual promises to confront and act, not stand idly by, can be misread and lead to no less casual commitments to deploy violence. Just such a morass of bombastic threats and counter-threats were hurled into the fury of instabilities that preceded the first world war. It was a similar bout of sabre-rattling that led the great powers to the nuclear cliff-edge during the Cuban crisis of 1962, and the Andropov miscalculation of 1983. Recent analyses of both have shown how truly close was disaster, saved only by the luck of having sane leaders at the time. There is no such guarantee today. We can all see that the world faces dictatorships in Beijing and Moscow. Both are flexing their muscles internally and doing externally what both Britain and America did in their imperial prime, which is expand their influence. They see the west’s global confidence dwindling. Democracy is sick, with America in turmoil and Europe dis-uniting. Neither Russia not China actually threatens the west, but both want to strengthen their spheres of control over their neighbours as powerful states have always done. China’s “belt and road” strategy is a reprise of Britain’s imperial preference. If any lesson is to be learned from recent decades, it is that the western powers are ill-advised to meddle in the power structures of China, India and the Middle East. They are not good policemen. They should accept that their role is to exemplify their much-vaunted western values at home, not force them on other nations and cultures in the manner of medieval crusaders. This merely condemns them to humiliation and their victims to the devastations of groups such as Islamic State and the Taliban. At this moment the world most needs wise and calm statesmanship. On leaving Afghanistan, Joe Biden at least had the dignity to learn the obvious lesson. It was over. Withdrawal should mark “the end of an era of major military operations to remake other countries”, as Biden put it. Other countries should be left to their own devices. No such lesson has come from Britain. All Johnson can do is boast that he is the ruler of a “global Britain”, and spend a fortune on useless weaponry. Can we imagine a German or French leader indulging in such imperialist bombast? In doing so he risks sucking his country into yet more murderous interventions. They can have nothing to do with his nation’s security. They are political vanity. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnist“We made the film in seven days, shooting non-stop from six in the evening to six in the morning. It was hell. We were always tired. And the cast and crew were always picking on me because my brain would just go completely dead at 2am every day.” Japanese film-maker Junta Yamaguchi is talking about his first feature film, Beyond the Infinite Two Minutes, which was shot almost entirely inside a real cafe in Kyoto. “We couldn’t film anything during their opening hours.” But Beyond the Infinite Two Minutes isn’t your average small-scale indie film. It’s a nicely innovative time-travel yarn that asks: in our world of remote working and Zoom calls, what if the face staring back at us from our computer was a version of ourself two minutes in the future? It’s also the latest example of the nagamawashi (long-shot) film, the micro-genre currently putting no-budget Japanese cinema on the map after the success of One Cut of the Dead – the 2017 zombie horror-comedy that became an international cult sensation, grossing over $30m (£22m) worldwide from a $25,000 budget. Ostensibly filmed in a single continuous shot, Beyond the Infinite Two Minutes was made for JPY 3m, or just under £20,000 and follows Kato, an amateur musician who discovers that a live video stream on his PC is, in fact, being cast by a near-future version of himself from the cafe beneath his apartment. Kato and his friends bring the “time TV” downstairs to the cafe to face the monitor broadcasting the stream and pandemonium ensues, creating a Droste effect that multiplies the time vortex taking place. Yamaguchi is speaking from his home in Kyoto over Zoom (no disturbances to the space-time continuum on this occasion) and says that, like almost everyone involved in Beyond the Infinite Two Minutes, he is a member of Europe Kikaku, a Kyoto theatre group, and the cafe is a place they regularly visit. (Yamaguchi waves the menu: “Organic coffee, vegan hamburgers, and katsu curry and rice.”) Financial strictures meant Yamaguchi was the film’s cinematographer, camera operator and editor, as well as director. Yamaguchi says that Back to the Future was the group’s biggest influence, but it was the “intricate and precise long-take camerawork” from films like Birdman, 1917 and Alfred Hitchock’s 1948 real-time classic Rope that inspired Beyond the Infinite Two Minutes’ form. The limited technological setup was a creative choice as well as a financial one: Yamaguchi shows off a camera no bigger than a Tamagotchi. “You can get close to the cast – like, five centimetres away – and take a really good picture,” he says. The camera was strapped to the back of a smartphone, which was used as a handheld monitor so Yamaguchi could watch the footage back as he followed the actors. Beyond the Infinite Two Minutes premiered at Tollywood, a 46-seat micro-cinema in Tokyo that specialises in sci-fi and animation (“literally the size of my living room,” says Adam Torel, managing director of the film’s UK distributors, Third Window) and arrived in the middle of the pandemic: due to social distancing measures, there were only 12 seats available. But Japan’s state of emergency worked to the film’s advantage: with mainstream film production severely curtailed, it bagged a slot at Toho Cinemas, one of the biggest chains in Japan. Since then, Beyond the Infinite Two Minutes has gone global, picking up awards and nominations at festivals in Sitges, Brussels and Montreal. “Studio Ghibli are now our rivals,” says Yamaguchi. “I thought this was a niche, fun film, but it went worldwide. I never expected this to happen.” • Beyond the Infinite Two Minutes is out now on Blu-Ray.I couldn’t help but wonder – would there really be a ready market for a Sex and the City reboot, nearly 20 years after it left our screens? And then the trailer for the sequel to the culturally iconic series – which ran for six award-laden, press-smothered seasons – arrived, and I realised just how desperately I’d missed it. Not that I missed it in the usual sense, of course. We live in a world of constant reruns, access to all programmes at all times, YouTube videos to scratch any minor itch and Instagram fan accounts devoted to the characters, the clothes, the men and all points in between. But the hunger for new stories about Carrie Bradshaw and the gang was there, and the trailer reminded me of the best parts of SATC. The energy. The glee. The glamour. The chemistry between the co-stars, and the sight of well-scripted actors at the top of their game. And, to quote the title of the new show, And Just Like That … I was eager for more. Perhaps you do not remember (hello, dimpled youths!) or were simply not a fan of the original series, created by Darren Star and based on Candace Bushnell’s bestselling book of the same name about her and her female friends’ dating lives in New York. I wasn’t, at first. Season one was – and on rewatching remains – an odd creature. Cold, hard and hobbled by Carrie’s propensity to break the fourth wall to talk about her latest conquest or the sociosexual phenomena on display, it was easy to boggle at but hard to love. However, as it continued, the writers and performers retooled it into something warmer and more immersive, allowing the characters to inform the action rather than the other way round. It was an unusual series. It was led by women: chaotic columnist Carrie (Sarah Jessica Parker); acerbic Manhattan lawyer Miranda (Cynthia Nixon); Waspy Charlotte (Kristin Davis); and sex bomb Samantha (Kim Cattrall). They spoke frankly about sex (Sam’s comment post-blowjob with a new man – “I’m dating a guy with the funkiest-tasting spunk” – pretty much became the show’s unofficial tagline), and they were friends. Proper friends, who mattered to each other, rode out storms together, fell out and made up. It was this depiction of female closeness as much as anything more overtly eye-catching that made it beloved, and an enduring success. That is what we want more of, and which the reboot seems to promise. Unlike the two unspeakably awful spinoff films, released in 2008 and 2010, which emptied the franchise of everything fans genuinely held dear (most fans consider them non-canonical and mentally excise them from the record). While those projects simply filled the screen with fashion, the script with hot air and the plot (especially in the second outing, set in Abu Dhabi) with racism, And Just Like That … looks to have recaptured the essence of the show. One element, of course, is missing. Cattrall is not returning (due, it seems, to a long-running incompatibility between her and Parker), meaning the new show will be Samantha-less. This is unlikely to be fatal. Not only are few characters (or actors) ever bigger than the show that makes them, Cattrall herself seemed increasingly uncomfortable and verging on parodic in the role (at least until Sam developed her first real relationship, with young Jerrod, and was allowed to bring some emotional, as well as vulval, vigour to proceedings). It has been great to see her make a name for herself with some fine performances since, in British TV drama especially, and you cannot help but feel that the all-round effect has been to allow us all – including Cattrall – to breathe a sigh of relief. But let us turn again to the new offering. What do we know, from the official publicity, the leaked scripts, the papped shots of filming and all the other scraps fans have managed to gather and put on social media for the delectation of all? We know that Big (Chris Noth) is back and that he and Carrie have some scenes in Paris. We know Carrie kisses someone else. We can see that no one is yet to figure out how to style Miranda’s (now silver-grey) hair. We know Brady is 19 and has a girlfriend and that we are all Methuselahs now. David Eigenberg returns as Steve – though there are suggestions that Miranda’s sexuality is going to follow Nixon’s, who has come out as gay since SATC ended – and Evan Handler is back as Charlotte’s husband Harry. The new series is the creation not of Darren Star (or indeed Bushnell) but of SATC showrunner and writer Michael Patrick King. He wrote the two films but also about a third of the original episodes, including the finale and it seems he might have refound his touch. Like its contemporaries – among them Friends and Frasier – SATC was always unreflective of the diversity of city life. This looks to have been addressed by the addition of several new characters, including Sara Ramirez, a non-binary actor who is to play the non-binary, queer host of a podcast to which (former?) columnist Carrie is now a frequent contributor. There is also a carousel of new friends played by actors of colour who are apparently intended to fill the fourth space without any one being a direct substitute for Samantha. “In no way were we into tokenism,” said Parker in a recent interview, pre-empting the potential for criticism. “You can’t bring people on the show and not let the camera be with them! These characters are all gifts to us.” A further prophylactic against talking the talk rather than walking the walk is that half of the writing staff are people of colour, including award-winning writer and comedian Samantha Irby. It’s hard not to risk that most unfashionable – if not downright terrifying – of all post-2016 actions and start letting our expectations rise. After all, this is the resurrection of a show that, flaws aside, came to symbolise a simpler, easier time – before Trump, before Brexit, long before Covid – and thus inescapably reminds us of when we were young and the world we knew felt more coherent and more cohesive. Besides, SATC was a show that brought people together with water-cooler moments aplenty. Berger’s Post-it note! Bloody Aidan! Carrie farting in front of Big! Samantha fishing her friend’s diaphragm out! Trey’s unreliable boners! David Duchovny as the high-school boyfriend in a treatment facility! Mikhail bleedin’ Baryshnikov suddenly turning up and knocking it out of the park as Aleksandr “You are … comic?” Petrovsky. And, above all, the funky spunk – and a chance for women to see the way they spoke, laughed and related to one other in private offered as part of a mainstream story. The sex may have gathered the column inches and faux-outraged commentary, but even more shocking for many was hearing on TV what had long constituted pretty ordinary conversation among female friends. Of course, it was far from grittily realistic. The shoe habit Carrie maintained on a column-a-week income is up there with Monica and Rachel’s apartment in the fairytales-of-New-York annals. But it had emotional truth in abundance, and helped a generation of thirtysomethings identify and articulate their experiences in a way few shows had done before or managed since. Now Carrie, Miranda and Charlotte are in their 50s – an even more rarely represented group. The stranglehold youth has had over television (and even more so cinema) over the last few decades has until very recently been unyielding. The days of Dallas and Dynasty, whose female stars were well beyond ingenue age when the global hits began (Dynasty’s Linda Evans was 38; Joan Collins, 47), had been obliterated. The prevailing attitude towards (women’s) age is best summed up by the scene in 30 Rock in which Jenna Maroney is cast as the ailing mother of a Gossip Girl-type character. She tells her daughter not to worry. “I’ve had my life! But I’m 42. Time to die.” And actors’ sell-by dates are grounded in the truth enshrined in Amy Schumer’s famous sketch, performed by Julia Louis-Dreyfus, Tina Fey and Patricia Arquette entitled “Last Fuckable Day.” But the stranglehold is starting to loosen – if not because of great leaps in progressive thinking then because of the power vacuums left by male titans of the industry who were finally toppled by #MeToo revelations and whose projects were ruined in the falls. Safe pairs of female hands were drafted in, and it has helped bring about a change that will hopefully continue to gain momentum. The grand hope for And Just Like That … is surely that the cast and writers can reproduce for another generation – though it remains their generation – everything meaningful that lay beneath the extravagant fashion, glamorous cocktailing and proliferating brunches that made it all such fun to watch. That they can capture the issues, the problems, the jokes, the conversations, the relationships for middle-aged women as gloriously, as unashamedly, as they did for their younger incarnations. What a milestone and a triumph it would be if they could bring this culturally and socially invisible age of womanhood unapologetically to the fore and make us laugh as much with them – not at them – as we ever did. And if their next round of adventures looped back to tie up a few loose ends, too, let the record show that there is still space in my heart for that. I wouldn’t be averse to Carrie having a second fling with an après-facility David Duchovny or coming across a down-and-out Berger and still kerb-stomping his head on behalf of us all. As long as there’s no bloody Aidan. I, for one, am too old to go through his nonsense again. And Just Like That … starts 9 December, 9pm, Sky ComedyEach day we have so many choices to make and we are constantly improvising them, just like playing jazz,” says the drummer-composer Makaya McCraven. “Even when we try to organise and sanitise the world so that we can function – that’s us improvising in different frameworks. It’s all an expression of life.” Wearing a black T-shirt emblazoned with the slogan “Listen more” – as if signposting to his interviewer – the 38-year-old McCraven is fizzing with energy while speaking from his basement home studio in Chicago. As he philosophically explores his unique style of composition – improvising while playing live and then chopping up the subsequent recordings to create a patchwork of samples – his wife calls out from upstairs that she’s got his lunch. “One second,” he turns away from the webcam. “I’m doing an interview with an international newspaper!” he shouts back, smiling mischievously. “See – always improvising.” McCraven moved to Chicago from western Massachusetts in 2007. “I was following love, since my wife got a position at Northwestern University here,” he says. It was an inspired move: his wife, Nitasha Tamar Sharma, is now a professor of African American studies and Asian American studies, while McCraven has spent the past decade cementing his status as one of the most individual voices in jazz, pioneering his technique with a group of local collaborators to create a sound that straddles instrumental improvisation and the hip-hop mentality of splicing samples. The result has been a spate of critically acclaimed records, such as 2015’s In the Moment, the 2018 mixtape collaboration Universal Beings, and We’re New Again, his 2020 reimagining of Gil Scott-Heron’s final album I’m New Here. This cut-and-paste approach reaches its apex on his latest album, Deciphering the Message, which is also his debut on the Blue Note label – home to such legendary jazz innovators as Miles Davis, John Coltrane and Herbie Hancock. On it, McCraven was given free rein to recontextualise tracks from the the Blue Note archive using his production process. Speaking in ever-branching tangents, as if following the improvisatory lines of a solo, McCraven explains how he sees his methodology as a continuation of tradition rather than a break from the norm. “Sampling is a play between future and past,” he says. “I want to honour the music we came from, and there’s so much sampling in the history of jazz already. You’ll hear similar intros on different tracks, or people who are trading licks and playing the same ideas. They have been engaging with the music in the way that sampling engages with it, but now we’re just using technology.” As such, Deciphering the Message traces the legacies of these licks and musical similarities through the prism of drummer Art Blakey, leader of the Jazz Messengers – an incubator of talent who saw the likes of saxophonist Hank Mobley, trumpeter Kenny Dorham and guitarist Kenny Burrell pass through his orbit. McCraven flips Mobley’s A Slice of the Top into a boom-bap introduction, slips a rhythmic shuffle beneath the languorous changes of Burrell’s Autumn in New York, while Dorham’s Whistle Stop is transmuted into a sludgy funk. “I wanted to highlight the familial side of this music; I’ve always loved that a band of musicians can become a community and affect a whole scene or moment in time,” he says. “So many musicians are deeply connected to each other, they’ve cut their teeth together, and when the younger guys come in, they help them up, too.” Born to musical parents in Paris – his mother is a Hungarian folk musician and his father a drummer who played for John Coltrane collaborator Archie Shepp – McCraven is accustomed to the ancestral communality of the jazz scene. “There was an extended musical family, where a lot of different cats would be popping in and out at home for jam sessions and stuff that probably shouldn’t be going on around a kid,” he laughs. “These musicians were pushing the boundaries, and guys like Archie Shepp taught me about the oral tradition of this music: how it’s about the culture, more than texts.” McCraven cut his teeth gigging around Massachusetts’ college towns of Amherst and Northampton, where he would play with rock bands, reggae groups, jazzers and wedding outfits. “I was just keeping busy, playing as much as I could, self-recording and experimenting,” he says. “Creating that sense of community, since I’ve always believed that if you do right for the music, the music will do right for you.” It is an open-eared ethos that has led him to a wide group of collaborators, from younger British musicians such as the Mercury prize-nominated saxophonist Nubya Garcia to his fellow Chicagoans Junius Paul and Ben LaMar Gay. “I only really want to make music with people I feel I can be vulnerable around and trust,” McCraven says. “Especially when we’re playing live, you create this magic of bringing people together and it’s something that produces real emotion. We crave it.” The vitality of the live scene is what has drawn McCraven to London in recent years. “Young musicians define this music; it’s kids like Lee Morgan or Herbie Hancock who were 19 or 20 years old and shaping its sound,” he says. It was seeing young musicians such as Garcia and saxophonist Shabaka Hutchings on stage, playing to their peers, that caught his attention. “There wasn’t a discussion of gatekeeping or honouring tradition. It felt like people realising that evolution is part of the tradition. And culture only evolves when people travel and trade ideas.” Progress as being intrinsic to the form is McCraven’s mantra and a reason why jazz is so hard to define as an entity – it is always changing. Is that the underlying “message” he is trying to decipher on this album? “If I knew what it was, I wouldn’t be asking you to work it out by listening,” he laughs. “I just want to honour this music: improvised music, Black American music, whatever you want to call it. I’m not reinventing the wheel, I’m just learning how it’s constructed and using that knowledge to make a statement that will stand the test of time.” • This article was amended on 25 January 2022. The leader of the Jazz Messengers was Art Blakey, not Horace Silver as stated in an earlier version. Deciphering the Message is out nowAcross 8 harp seal HARP (lager) + ALES (anag) 9 hornet (finge)R ON THE (anag) 10 nuke (u)N(l)U(c)K(i)E(r) 11 limoncello LIM  O 12 Saxony SA  Y 14 gas pipes GASP 
<i>S 15 Rebecca EC in CABER (anag) 17 ravioli R(ecipe) + A  IOLI 20 polluter POLL + TRUE (anag) 22 dugong DU  NG 23 instrument IN/STRUM/EN(French)/T(heatre) [all across solutions contain an instrument] 24 loud (c)LOUD 25 creeds CREE  S 26 organise O (round) + R  ISE Down 1 saturate SAT/U(you)/RATE 2 épée shEEP Enclosure (hidden rev) 3 really RE-ALLY 4 plumage PLUM/A/G(auz)E 5 China Sea CH  ASE/A(rea) 6 free-living VIRGIN FEEL (anag) 7 wellie L (£) in WE LIE 13 open letter OPEN  ER 16 cutpurse CU  RSE 18 languish L(intel) + ANGUISH 19 treetop cryptic def 21 owners (d)OWNERS 22 dotage DO  E 24 lent double/cryptic def [‘lent’ = ‘slow’ in French]        </i>My favourite cookbooks look like DayGlo hedgehogs – bristling with Post-it notes next to all the recipes I want to try. One of the most neon-edged books in the house is Ruby Tandoh’s new Cook As You Are (Serpent’s Tail). It is thoughtfully written, keeping in mind readers who are less confident in the kitchen, and Tandoh has also produced a large-print easy-read version, including step-by-step photographs for those who aren’t able to use a traditionally formatted cookbook. The recipes themselves are brilliant, with plenty to excite more experienced cooks: I particularly like the chips with chaat masala, pickled onions and pomegranate, the cheesy kimchi cornbread muffins and the pea, mint and chilli toast with crispy paneer. I love the idea of heading into December with the kitchen full of home-baked cakes and biscuits, so for a spot of calming seasonal baking inspiration, my top tip is Anja Dunk’s Advent (Quadrille), packed with wonderful German Christmas baking recipes. I loved reading about how festive guests in Germany are offered bunter teller, a plate of beautiful assorted biscuits and confectionery, which you can easily recreate with the recipes in the book. Look out for the recipe for lebkuchen, which look exactly like the walls of the gingerbread house in Hansel and Gretel. The book is a beautiful object, too, with elegant lino cuts and photography by the author. For a spot of food writing, as nourishing to dip into as a bowl of soup, I tremendously enjoyed the collection of essays, fiction and poetry that make up What She’s Having: Stories of Women and Food, compiled and edited by the women’s publishing platform Dear Damsels. The essays by Ansa Khan on MFK Fisher, and Syeda Salmah on the pleasure of eating with your hands, are particularly evocative, detailing the experience of growing up within two cultures. Grace Safford’s piece on food, grief and her relationship with her mother in What She’s Having reminded me of possibly the best book I’ve read all year: Michelle Zauner’s Crying in H Mart (Picador). It’s the story of a young Korean-American woman coming to terms with the early death of her mother, and the role that food played in their often turbulent relationship. It’s written with a lightness of touch, tackling grief, loss and love in a way that I’ve rarely read before. It’s also a fascinating immersion in Korean food and culture: I will be buying copies for friends and family this Christmas. My favourite books legitimise my belief that it’s acceptable to spend most of the day thinking about what to eat for your next meal, and Stanley Tucci’s Taste: My Life Through Food (Fig Tree) does exactly that. His descriptions of the Italian food he grew up with, woven through with family stories and the recipes he’s encountered on his travels, will leave you hungry – and in no doubt that this is a man who knows both how to eat and how to live. The chapter describing the Alpine pasta-cheese-potato-cabbage bake was a particular favourite – now, to work out where I can find the Italian cheeses to make it. Get the ingredients for a Negroni ready so you can sip along as you read. And finally, a cookbook that you need to read on a full stomach: Ottolenghi Test Kichen: Shelf Love (Ebury). My review could just be a list of the recipes that I have made from it, or have earmarked – the jarred butter beans with preserved lemon, chilli and herb oil (what Navarrico jarred beans were made for), the smooshed carrots with coriander-pistachio pesto and pickled onions (which I have had before at Ottolenghi’s restaurant Nopi), the sticky sweet-and-sour plums and sausages, the one-pan crispy spaghetti and chicken … In the absence of being adopted by the Ottolenghi team (a life goal), this book will keep you well fed. • Rukmini Iyer is the author of the Roasting Tin series of cookbooks. Her latest book is The Sweet Roasting Tin. • Browse all the featured books and save up to 15% at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.There are few things nicer than a clomp around Glasgow’s cathedral grounds on one of the year’s first crisp, bright autumnal mornings. On my way to eat at Celentano’s, the air was cold enough to flush the cheeks, while the skyline over the Necropolis, the nearby Victorian burial ground, was dreamily blue. The Necropolis, perched on a low hill, is the archly gothic backdrop that Whitby wishes it had. Yes, goths love Whitby, but let’s face it, it’s a seaside town and, just like daleks and triffids, goths fare badly on sand. These were the kind of thoughts with which I entertained myself as I sat alone in a graveyard, waiting for the nearby Italian-inspired Celentano’s to open for lunch. Chef Dean Parker and his wife Anna have recently pitched up in Glasgow, from London, where their names were linked with several spots I’ve loved and often returned. Parker was head chef at Darby’s, an NYC-style, Irish-influenced oyster bar and restaurant in the vicinity of the new American embassy in Vauxhall. It’s a spot to which I have pointed many people and their parents, for the fun as much as the pie and crisp beef fat potatoes; it’s a reliably good-quality establishment with astute cooking. Before that, Parker cooked at Sorella in Clapham, where I once stayed so long over lunch, drinking the house vermouth and eating gnocchi, that they closed and opened again for dinner. In fact, I hold Parker responsible for beginning my midlife addiction to affogato, or vanilla gelato drowned in hot espresso with a large shot of something boozysuch as Frangelico. An affogato isn’t big enough to be a proper course, I argue, so doesn’t strictly count as pudding, which means you can order a tiramisu, too. And now the Parkers have headed north, opening Celentano’s within Glasgow’s Cathedral House hotel, a rather sumptuous boutique residence built in old baronial style in 1896 and now rather tastefully restored, with eight rooms overlooking the cathedral and the Necropolis. Celentano’s is a split-level dining room with sage-green wooden panelling, original wooden floors and pretty black-and-white tiling around a sit-up bar area. It is serene, ever-so-slightly olde worldy and instantly likable. The menu is Italianish, in so much as it features pastas, cheeses, salumi and so on divided into antipasti, primi and secondi, but this is no red table-clothed, garlic-bread sort of establishment, and more a delightful hodge-podge of all of Dean Parker’s talents and eccentricities. On the “snacks” section of the menu, for example, there are slices of his gloriously pungent homemade pork and fennel salami, alongside chunks of lasagne fritti made with porcini and Cora Linn sheep’s cheese. Yes, fried lasagne. I am a convert. See also tiny doughnuts filled with a truly curious “jam” of salt cod and kimchi. In fact, it would be easy to stay in the snacks section alone, smearing Parker’s homemade chicken liver parfait on to fresh sourdough, or dipping it in the fine-quality Le Ferre olive oil, but I was dining alone, so needed to be judicious in my menu choices. If I went for a large bowl of charmingly slithery fresh pappardelle in a rich, cream-abundant Dexter beef sauce, would I possibly have room left for the hefty chunk of toasted honey cake with miso, pear and tonka bean gelato? And, if so, dare I fit in an antipasto of jerusalem artichokes with stracciatella and chanterelles? It was a risk, but she who dares wins. The pasta here is exquisite, as you might have guessed. There was a Mossgiel ricotta agnolotti with cavolo nero and squash that I’ll certainly return to try. The jerusalem artichokes were a little soggy and plated on a thick and almost-set earthy, taupe-coloured mushroom sauce that was titivated with the occasional green leaf. This was experimental, rather than safe, sating cooking, but it was very edible nevertheless. That toasted honey cake, by the way, was gorgeously chewy – think of a pleasing wodge of souped-up Soreen malt loaf with an oozing cream centre sat on a plinth of sweet pear and ice-cream, with a flickering note of umami from the miso. It is a great dessert. It’s very early days for Celentano’s, meaning now is a great time to book a table. In fact, it might be the perfect Saturday outing: there are 3,500 monuments to the deceased in the nearby Necropolis that you can spend an entire morning perusing, before wandering over to Celentano’s for lunch to honour the living. Life is short, cruel and bumpy, so make time for long lunches with friends that slide on into dinner time featuring honey cake, laughter and bowls of fresh, slippery pappardelle. You might as well. I’m not sure where we go after this life, and I know even less about the catering there. • Celentano’s 28–32 Cathedral Square, Glasgow G4, 0141-552 3519. Open lunch Weds-Sat, noon-3pm, dinner Weds-Sat 6-10pm; Sun noon-6pm. About £40 a head, plus drinks and service • • Episode seven of the second series of Grace’s Comfort Eating podcast is released on 7 December. Listen here or wherever you get your podcasts.If you’re after an impressive dessert, choux pastry is the way to go. Bring this to the table and you’ll be met with a flood of “oohs” and “aahs”. Traditionally, this French classic would be filled with a praline crème mousseline, which can take a while to prepare, so I’ve given this a simpler festive spin with a layer of hazelnut ganache and a very generous whipped cream filling. Orange and hazelnut Paris-Brest Prep 1 hr Cook 35 min Serves 8-10 For the choux pastry 60ml water 60ml milk 40g unsalted butter 1 tsp sugar 75g strong white flour 1 pinch salt 2-3 eggs, beaten 40g chopped roasted hazelnuts For the orange hazelnut ganache 70g blanched hazelnuts, roughly chopped 130ml double cream Zest of 1 orange, plus extra for assembling 160 dark chocolate, finely chopped 20g unsalted butter For the cream 500ml double cream 2 tbsp icing sugar 1 tsp vanilla bean paste 3 tbsp orange liqueur (optional) Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Line a baking tray with greaseproof paper and draw a 20cm circle on it. Put the water, milk, butter and sugar in a pan, bring to a boil, then take off the heat. Tip in the flour and salt, stir quickly until it all comes together, then put the pan back on a medium heat and stir constantly for about a minute or so, until the dough comes away cleanly from the sides of the pan. Transfer the dough to a clean bowl or the bowl of a stand mixer and leave to cool a little. With the mixer running, or beating by hand, add the beaten eggs a little at a time until the dough is glossy and of a consistency that slowly falls off the spoon (you may not need all three eggs) – it will look lumpy at first, but keep mixing until it comes together. Fill a large piping bag with the dough and snip off the end. Pipe a ring around the inside of your drawn circle, pipe another ring inside that, making sure they’re touching, then pipe a third ring on top of the first two. Brush the surface lightly with egg wash (use any remaining egg here) and top liberally with the chopped hazelnuts. Bake for 25-35 minutes, until well risen and deeply golden. Poke holes in the bottom of the choux with a toothpick/skewer to let out some steam, leave to cool in the oven for 10 minutes, then remove and leave to cool completely. For the ganache, toast the hazelnuts in a pan for a few minutes until fragrant and lightly browned, then leave to cool. Meanwhile, heat the cream and orange zest in a pan until steaming, pour this over the chopped chocolate, leave for a minute, then stir until smooth. Stir in the butter until melted and the ganache is glossy. Mix in the chopped hazelnuts and set aside. Whip the cream, sugar, vanilla and orange liqueur, if using, to stiff peaks. Spoon it into a piping bag with a large open star nozzle. Once the choux is cool, use a serrated knife to cut it in half horizontally. Spoon the hazelnut ganache on to the bottom layer, pipe swirls of cream on top and finish with some orange zest. Top with the choux lid, dust the whole thing with icing sugar and serve. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoJM Barrie was obsessed with the loss of youth. It was a theme he returned to throughout his career. Had he been able to hear Sarah Punshon’s adaptation of Peter Pan, he would surely have recoiled at its most stinging line. It is delivered early on by Amy Drake, as the Darling family mother. “Oh, grow up, Wendy!” she snaps. In Barrie’s world, to grow up is the ultimate threat. In this 21st-century update, Mrs Darling is vexed by the prospect of seeing her ex’s new partner at Christmas and angry that Purvi Parmar’s Wendy hates the idea, too. The girl is on the cusp of adolescence, torn between the childhood innocence romanticised by Barrie and the bitter truths of adulthood. Meeting Matthew Heywood’s Peter Pan, she needs no persuasion to choose youth over wisdom. In Lotte Wakeham’s punchy production – the first Christmas show in the smartly refurbished Octagon – Wendy opts for imaginative escape. “You want a story, don’t you?” goes the cry at the start, to which the schools audience gives a resounding yes. Employing just five actors, the show has make-believe built-in. No sooner has Jason Patel made a splash as a gender-fluid Tinkerbell who “doesn’t like being put in a box” than he has ditched the woolly pink jacket and is morphing into a Lost Boy. Likewise, Heywood and Parmar take turns as pirates, Drake plays Captain Hook, and Robert Jackson mops up the remaining parts. Economy of means becomes an asset in a show with playfulness at its heart. To turn a wooden spoon into a razor-sharp weapon, you only have to believe – just as belief keeps Tinkerbell alive. Designer Rose Revitt allows similar creative freedom with her bare-bones set, although she also surprises us with a concealed ball-pool that bubbles like the sea. With our imaginations engaged, we don’t doubt the reality of the aerial flying or the ferocity of the crocodile. But however emboldened by Peter Pan’s victories, we remain as children when we hear the most affecting of the songs by Ziad Jabero and Claire Tustin: “Never be too tall or tough / For a cuddle at the end of the day.” • At the Octagon, Bolton, until 9 January.There are still plenty of lean, grizzled oldies in well-worn gear zipping effortlessly up Lakeland hills like it’s a walk to the corner shop. But there are also younger and more diverse communities exploring the area as hiking, climbing and enjoying nature become “fashionable and trendy” again. “It is absolutely fantastic,” said Richard Leafe, the chief executive of the Lake District national park. “This is what it is all about.” Before the pandemic, the average age of visitors to the lakes was over 60 but that was changing, Leafe said. “To see a real swing and change in that, a lot more young people talking about nature, grabbing their selfie moment at the top of the Old Man of Coniston, or England’s highest peak, Scafell Pike … it’s fantastic to see.” Leafe said the health benefits of being outside were becoming more widely known and talked about. “I think that hiking, walking and being outside … for younger people it has become quite fashionable and trendy again. We’ve seen a lot of that led by influencers on social media, whether that is on Instagram of TikTok.” The change was important, he said. “We need people to love these places. If they don’t love them, they won’t support the ongoing efforts to conserve them. “I think the very future of our national parks is in young people’s hands so to see them back energetically and enthusiastically enjoying these spaces is a joy for me personally because a movement was needed to help support national parks in the future.” Leafe was speaking as the Guardian joined him for a walk up Helvellyn, England’s third-highest peak, to launch the annual fell top assessor scheme. The unique scheme, in its 34th year, involves a rota of three people climbing the mountain every day between December and April. They report the weather and wind speed and write an account of conditions that is put on the park’s website and matched with Met Office weather forecasts to give, it is hoped, a complete picture of what people will find if they go up the high fells. Zac Poulton, in his fifth season, is one of the three, along with Jon Bennett and Wes Hunter. “It is a ridiculous job really isn’t it?” Poulton said. “But in a very good way. It’s my escape to the hills. “You never get bored. Every day is different. We’ve got an absolutely stunning day today, a real good hard freeze, a little bit of snow on the tops, not a cloud in the sky … what’s not to enjoy?” Other days, when it’s lashing down with rain, are what they call “type two fun” – better in the pub afterwards. Poulton said the lakes in the winter could be as perilous as anywhere in the world, with a wind chill sometimes of -20C or gusts of 85mph that will blow people over. The key questions people should ask are: do I have the right gear? Do I know what the weather will be like? Do I have the correct knowledge or skills? Most people came prepared for winter conditions, Poulton said, but not all. Every assessor has a story of a winter walker in trainers and jeans or shorts. “Usually it is just that lack of awareness of what the risks are. We do get avalanches in the Lake District, temperatures are usually around freezing … most of us who have been out in the hills in winter have suffered from minor hypothermia. It is about being able to recognise it and do something about it. You do see people who have gone beyond that, just pushed on and pushed on.” One of the best pieces of advice, he said, was to always be prepared to turn back. The scheme is part of a wider winter safety campaign on the national park runs. Leafe said: “We encourage people to be adventure-wise and to be equipped for their day out in the mountains. To know what the weather is going to be, to have the right gear, and to have the skills and knowledge to know how to use that gear.”Eddie Howe is pinning his hopes on an apparently reborn Joelinton helping to spearhead a revival as Newcastle seek their first win. Not that the £40m Brazilian striker will necessarily be leading from the front. Joelinton, who has looked a player transformed since Howe took over as manager last month, shone in a No 8 midfield role after Newcastle were reduced to 10 men by Ciaran Clark’s early dismissal during Tuesday’s 1-1 draw at home to Norwich. Indeed Joelinton appeared a far better enforcer than a striker as he persistently frustrated Norwich. “He’s covered every blade of grass for us,” said Howe, who knows that with Newcastle increasingly adrift at the bottom, victory on Saturday at home to his former club Burnley is imperative. “Joelinton’s given everything for the team. He’s got a real selfless mindset and I think he can continue to improve; he’s going to be a huge player for us. “We really, really like him; I think he’s got a good mix of physicality, technical ability and tactical intelligence. You saw some superb footwork from him in tight areas on Tuesday when he started as a No 10 and then moved to midfield where, after very little instruction, he showed high tactical awareness. He was brilliant.” Howe has been particularly impressed by the versatility of a player his predecessor, Steve Bruce, once claimed was uninterested in scoring. “For me he’s already played three or four positions and played them all very well,” Howe said. “I think we’ll probably play him in different positions against different opponents. “Joelinton can be whatever he wants to be … I think you have an outstanding individual who is only going to get better.” There was a time when Newcastle seemed desperate to offload their low-scoring record signing but Howe has very different ideas. “I wouldn’t swap Joelinton,” he said. “I really like him as a person and I think we can take his game to new heights. “After watching Joelinton on television before coming here I always liked him but, now having worked with him and seen the personality, the human being, behind the player, I like him even more.”An Italian man is facing charges of fraud after turning up for his Covid-19 vaccine wearing a fake arm. So determined was he to dodge the jab but still obtain a health pass, the anti-vaxxer may have paid hundreds of euros for the silicone prosthetic. The bizarre episode at a vaccine hub in Biella, a town close to Turin in the northern Piedmont region, came a week after Italy announced measures barring unvaccinated people from a host of social, cultural and sporting activities. After completing the bureaucratic formalities, including signing a consent form in front of a doctor, the man, aged 50, sat down and lifted up the sleeve of his shirt as he prepared for a health worker to administer the jab. Initially, the health worker did not notice anything odd, as the silicone looked similar to skin. But after taking a closer look and touching the arm, the medic asked the man to take off his shirt. His plan foiled, the man, who has not been named, then tried to persuade the health worker to turn a blind eye. “I felt offended as a professional,” Filippa Bua told La Repubblica. “The colour of the arm made me suspicious and so I asked the man to uncover the rest of his left arm. It was well made but it wasn’t the same colour.” The man said to her: “Would you have imagined that I’d have such a physique?” She told La Stampa she could not see the man’s veins: “At first I thought I made a mistake, that it was a patient with an artificial arm.” It is not clear whether he was wearing a whole fake arm or some kind of silicone layer over his skin. “The promptness and skill of the health worker ruined the plans of this person, who will now have to respond to the judiciary,” Alberto Cirio, the president of Piedmont, said in a joint statement with Luigi Icardi, the regional health councillor. La Repubblica suggested that the incident might not have been a one-off, citing a recent message on social media that might have been written by the man in Biella. The Twitter post featured a silicone male chest half-body suit, complete with fake arms and neck, that was on sale on Amazon for €488 (£416). Alongside the image was the message: “If I go with this, will they notice? Maybe beneath the silicone I’ll even put on some extra clothes to avoid the needle reaching my real arm.” Cirio and Icardi said the case would “border on the ridiculous” were it not “for the fact that we are talking about a gesture of enormous gravity”. “It is unacceptable in the face of the sacrifice that the pandemic is making the whole community pay for,” they added. Italy has reported a significant rise in the number of bookings for first-time jabs since announcing plans for the “super green pass”, which takes effect nationally from 6 December and requires people to prove they are vaccinated or have recovered from Covid-19 to access cinemas, theatres, gyms, nightclubs, ski-lifts and stadiums, as well as to be served indoors at bars and restaurants.The past two months have been much kinder to Southampton than to Brighton – 11 points out of 24 as opposed to the Seagulls’ six – helping Ralph Hasenhüttl’s side move clear of the relegation zone for now. Brighton, however, are sliding slowly down the table after their impressive start. No wins in nine matches tells its own story, although Neal Maupay’s excellent goal on Wednesday to earn a point at West Ham may put a bounce in their step, especially as it ended Brighton’s collective goalscoring drought of 335 minutes. With Tottenham, Wolves and Manchester United coming up for Graham Potter’s side, they may see this as their best chance for a few weeks of ending that win drought. Conrad Leach Saturday 3pm Venue St Mary’s Stadium Last season Southampton 1 Brighton 2 Referee Anthony Taylor This season G11 Y45 R2 4.27 cards/game Odds H 11-8 A 23-10 D 12-5 SOUTHAMPTON Subs from Lewis, Forster, Obafemi, Simeu, Valery, McQueen, Long, Tella, Walcott, Diallo, Perraud, Djenepo, Stephens Doubtful Stephens (knee) Injured Bednarek (calf, unknown), S Armstrong (calf, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y24 R1 Form DWWLLD Leading scorer Adams 3 BRIGHTON Subs from Steele, Scherpen, Connolly, Mac Allister, Richards, Burn, Locadia, Mwepu Doubtful None Injured Welbeck (hamstring, 26 Dec), Alzate (ankle, Jan), Sarmiento (hamstring, unknown), Webster (calf, unknown), Lallana (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y34 R1 Form LDDLDD Leading scorer Maupay 5A bill to fund the US government through mid-February gained the support of enough members of the Senate late on Thursday to win passage and prevent a partial shutdown of federal agencies at the end of this week after leaders defused a partisan standoff over federal vaccine mandates. The vote late evening came after some Republican senators threatened to block the process in order to voice their opposition to the Biden administration’s vaccine requirements. Senators voted on an amendment to defund the federal vaccine mandate, which ultimately failed, clearing the way for the passage of the short-term funding bill. The measure, which was approved by lawmakers in the House earlier in the day, will keep the federal government funded for the next two and a half months. The measure now goes to Joe Biden to be signed into law. The need for vaccine mandates, which have been introduced by Joe Biden, has taken on additional importance as the US braces for the impact of the Omicron coronavirus variant. The plot by Republican senators to undermine the vaccine mandate came after some Republican states have already sought to diminish mandates, by expanding unemployment benefits for employees who have been fired or quit over the requirement to get the vaccine. On Wednesday, the House Freedom Caucus, a group of rightwing Republicans in the House of Representatives, urged their Senate colleagues to block the funding bill, also known as a continuing resolution, “unless it prohibits funding – in all respects – for the vaccine mandates and enforcement thereof”. In a letter to Mitch McConnell, the Senate minority leader, the House Freedom Caucus said that the Friday deadline gave their Senate colleagues “important leverage” to prevent funding for mandates. Biden introduced vaccine mandates, which require employees to be vaccinated or submit to weekly testing, for federal workers and contractors in July. In September, Biden ordered healthcare workers to be vaccinated and companies with 100 workers or more to require Covid-19 vaccines or testing, which the government said would cover more than 100 million employees. Those measures have been put on hold by court rulings, after Republican state attorneys general, conservative groups and trade organizations sued to stop the regulations. Earlier Thursday, congressional leaders announced they had finally reached an agreement to keep the government running for 11 more weeks, generally at current spending levels, while adding $7bn to aid Afghanistan evacuees. Once the House voted to approve the measure, senators soon announced an agreement that would allow them to vote on it quickly. “I am glad that in the end, cooler heads prevailed. The government will stay open and I thank the members of this chamber for walking us back from the brink of an avoidable, needless and costly shutdown,” said Chuck Schumer, the Senate majority leader. The Senate approved the measure by a vote of 69-28. The Democratic-led House passed the measure by a 221-212 vote. The Republican leadership urged members to vote no. The lone GOP vote for the bill came from Illinois congressman Adam Kinzinger, one of the two Republicans on the special House committee investigating the insurrection at the US Capitol by extremist supporters of Donald Trump. Lawmakers bemoaned the short-term fix and blamed the opposing party for the lack of progress on this year’s spending bills. Representative Rosa DeLauro, chair of the House appropriations committee, said the measure would, however, allow for negotiations on a package covering the full budget year through September. “Make no mistake, a vote against this continuing resolution is a vote to shut government down,” DeLauro said during the House debate. Before the votes, Biden said he had spoken with Senate leaders and he played down fears of a shutdown. “There is a plan in place unless somebody decides to be totally erratic, and I don’t think that will happen,” Biden said.Name: Whamageddon. Age: Eleven years old. Appearance: As late as possible. Is it an event? It’s a game. A festive game. Like charades? No, it’s more of a play-along-remotely game. Like charades on Zoom? Because I am never doing that again. It’s a game you play with Wham’s 1984 hit Last Christmas. Do I sing along to it? You could, but that would be wildly counterproductive. Do I just listen to it? You do the opposite – you try not to listen to it. That will be difficult at this time of year! That’s the idea: from 1 December until 24 December, players attempt to avoid hearing this most unavoidable of Christmas songs to see who can manage the longest. If you hear it and recognise it, you’re out. Then what? You announce your retirement from the game by posting on social media with the hashtag #Whamaggeddon. Better luck next year. That’s it? Barring a few technicalities, yes: cover versions of Last Christmas don’t count, and trying to force other players out by sending them links to the song is considered bad form. The full rules can be found at whamageddon.com. What on earth is the point of this? There is no real point, although some people have used the game to fundraise for charity in the past. It sounds as if your only chance of winning is by not leaving the house all month. Good idea – maybe the government could use Whamageddon as part of its Covid strategy. Seriously, though, no one will be able to shop, or go to the pub. This will destroy the economy! Some pubs have thought of that. In 2018, the Fullers pub chain banned the song from all its premises to give players some sanctuary. 2018? How long has this game been going on without me? It started on the online forum GTPlanet in 2010, but it wasn’t known as Whamageddon until a dedicated Facebook page appeared in 2016. With my luck, I’ll lose straight away and have nothing to avoid all Christmas season except my relatives. There are still alternative versions you can get in on. Some gamers avoid the Pogues’ Fairytale of New York, for others, it’s Mariah Carey’s All I Want for Christmas is You. Do say: “Last Christmas, I gave it my all, but the very next day I got into a minicab with Heart FM playing.” Don’t say: “SORRY I CAN’T HEAR YOU, I’M LISTENING TO A MACROECONOMICS PODCAST.”Sir Antony Sher, one of British theatre’s most acclaimed and respected stage actors, has died of cancer at the age of 72. His terminal illness was revealed in September, when the Royal Shakespeare company announced that its artistic director, Sher’s husband Gregory Doran, would be taking compassionate leave to care for him. Sher’s death was announced on Friday. Catherine Mallyon, RSC executive director and Erica Whyman, acting artistic director, said: “We are deeply saddened by this news and our thoughts and sincere condolences are with Greg, and with Antony’s family and their friends at this devastating time. Antony had a long association with the RSC and a hugely celebrated career on stage and screen.” It is his vivid performances in productions over four decades with the RSC, many of them directed by Doran, which gained Sher his reputation as one of the great modern Shakespearean actors. In 1985 he won the Olivier award for a portrayal of Richard III on crutches, his image a striking realisation of the character’s description in the play as a “bottled spider”. For the same director, Bill Alexander, he played Shylock in The Merchant of Venice. Doran directed him as Macbeth and King Lear, and as Falstaff in Henry IV Parts I and II, and Iago in Othello. As Lear, performed between 2016 and 2018, he was praised as “unbearably moving” by the Guardian’s Michael Billington. Sher played another great Shakespearean, Edmund Kean, in Sartre’s bio-drama Kean directed by Adrian Noble. But his range went well beyond the Bard. The 1985 Olivier award was given to him in honour of both his Richard III and his performance as a drag queen in Harvey Fierstein’s Torch Song Trilogy, enabling him to say in his acceptance speech: “I’m very happy to be the first actor to win an award for playing both a king and a queen.” He was praised for his Cyrano de Bergerac and his Willy Loman in Death of a Salesman, both with Doran and the RSC. He excelled as both Tartuffe and that play’s author, Molière (in a play by Bulgakov) in RSC shows. Lead roles as Brecht’s Arturo Ui and Kafka’s Joseph K came at the National Theatre. The real-life figures he portrayed included Freud in Terry Johnson’s play Hysteria at the Theatre Royal Bath and Primo Levi, both at the National Theatre (in a play Sher wrote himself) and on screen too. Sher was born in 1949 in Cape Town, where his grandparents had moved after fleeing the Lithuanian pogroms. He revisited their journey in his novel Middlepost and returned to South Africa during his career with major theatre productions including The Tempest (playing Prospero), Titus Andronicus (in the title role) and Arthur Miller’s Broken Glass, whose hero, said Sher, was as “uncomfortable in his own skin” as the actor himself. He grew up fascinated by the performances of great Shakespearean actors – obsessively listening to an LP of Laurence Olivier’s Othello – and his understanding of drama was transformed by the plays of Harold Pinter. He arrived in London in 1968, at the age of 19. “I looked around me and I didn’t see any Jewish leading men in the classical theatre, so I thought it best to conceal my Jewishness,” he once said. “Also, I quickly became conscious of apartheid when I arrived here, and I didn’t want to be known as a white South African.” He concealed his sexuality in public, too, which meant “my entire identity was in the closet”. Sher prepared one of Mick’s speeches from Pinter’s The Caretaker for his drama school tryouts but at his Rada audition “they urged me to seek a different career”. He studied instead with the Webber Douglas Academy of Dramatic Art and gained early stage experience with the group Gay Sweatshop and at the Liverpool Everyman, playing Ringo in Willy Russell’s John, Paul, George, Ringo … and Bert. While Sher’s principal commitment was to the stage, he could be seen regularly on TV (including in the series The History Man) and in films. He wrote plays and novels, the memoir Beside Myself and autobiographical accounts of some of his best known performances, including as Richard III and Falstaff, which opened up the craft of acting. Year of the Mad King: The King Lear Diaries won the Theatre Book prize in 2019. It featured a number of his own illustrations and Sher remained a passionate painter. He was knighted in 2000 for his services to the arts. Sher and Doran entered into civil partnership on the first possible day of the new law, 21 December 2005, which he called “a great day for human rights”. The couple married in 2015. His final roles on stage included that of a chilling torturer in Pinter’s One for the Road in the Pinter West End season, and in John Kani’s play Kunene and the King, which premiered in the Swan theatre, Stratford-upon-Avon, in 2019, directed by Janice Honeyman. Its London run was curtailed by the first lockdown. Sher’s love for language was always palpable in his performances. “To an actor, dialogue is like food,” he wrote in Year of the Fat Knight, his book about Falstaff. “You hold it in your mouth, you taste it. If it’s good dialogue the taste will be distinctive. If it’s Shakespeare dialogue, the taste will be Michelin-starred. Falstaff’s dialogue is immediately delicious: you’re munching on a very rich pudding indeed, savoury rather than sweet, probably not good for your health, but irresistible.” • This article was amended on 3 December 2021 to clarify that Doran directed Sher as Iago in Othello.Pearls ruled the 20th century. Jackie Kennedy described them as “always appropriate”. Diana Vreeland once fired off a memo to staff demanding to see more of them on the pages of Vogue: “Nothing gives the luxury of pearls,” she insisted. Oscar Wilde said they made one “look so plain, so good and so intellectual”. Anna Wintour, returning from a White House lunch where she, the then first lady Hillary Clinton and a visiting Princess Diana had all been wearing them, remarked that “you just can’t go wrong”. For the same universal style plaudits to apply now, you just need to swap pearls for gold hoops. They are the understated finishing touch that works for anyone, anywhere, any time of day or night. They are discreet enough for the office, but have party attitude when required. With gold hoops you are never overdressed nor underdressed. Flick through Vogue now and gold hoops are as ubiquitous as strings of pearls once were. In the November UK issue, Adele teams gold hoops with a spectacular Hollywood blowdry and a white feather coat; supermodel-of-the-moment Paloma Elsesser wears hers with slicked-back hair and a Dolce &amp; Gabbana bustier. Hailey Bieber, née Baldwin, is rarely seen without a pair the size of saucers. But who do gold hoops belong to? Before becoming mainstream, gold hoops were classified as “urban” or “downtown” glamour, with all the uncomfortable racial undertones that those labels imply. So how close does a landgrab of the gold hoop by a demographic already rich with pearl necklaces and diamond studs come to cultural appropriation? When Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez was sworn into Congress in 2019 wearing a white trousersuit, red lipstick and gold hoops, she tweeted that her look was inspired by the progressive and Bronx-born US supreme court justice Sonia Sotomayor – who, when she was sworn in as the first Latina justice in American history, was advised to wear neutral-coloured nail polish to avoid scrutiny: “Next time someone tells Bronx girls to take off their hoops, they can just say they’re dressing like a congresswoman.” Frances Solá-Santiago, a fashion writer from Puerto Rico based in New York, wrote that the look was “a radical act”, celebrating hoops as “a cultural touchstone” of Latina womanhood. When Marc Jacobs accessorised a collection inspired by early New York hip-hop with hoops the diameter of a cola can in 2017, he described them as “an acknowledgement of, and gesture of my respect for, the polish and consideration applied to fashion from a generation that will forever be the foundation of youth culture street style.” But while we have moved on from the era when Carrie Bradshaw wore “ghetto gold for fun”, high-street jewellery stands don’t tend to feature footnotes honouring their influences. Many believe the rich history of an adornment that threads back from Angela Davis to Nina Simone, to Frida Kahlo to Nefertiti, risks being flattened through overexposure. When Coco Chanel popularised strings of costume pearls, she prised apart the decorative merit of jewellery from its monetary value – and paved the way for gold hoops as a fashion accessory. But jewellery can never be divorced from wealth or from status – as every pearl-clutching debutante knew. A gold hoop may well be the perfect modern finishing touch. But it is also much more.Eddie Howe once managed Burnley and retains considerable affection for his old club but will be desperate to defeat them. Indeed if Newcastle fail to secure their first win of the season then relegation will start to look increasingly inevitable. Unfortunately Howe’s record against Sean Dyche’s team does not inspire great confidence. Newcastle’s manager can only hope for another stellar performance from Joelinton. Apparently reborn under his management, the £40m Brazilian striker excelled in an often defensive midfield role after Ciaran Clark’s early sending-off during Tuesday’s draw with Norwich and he may well end up being reinvented as a No 8. Louise Taylor Saturday 3pm Venue St James’ Park Last season Newcastle 3 Burnley 1 Referee Paul Tierney This season G10 Y42 R0 4.2 cards/game Odds H 11-8 A 12-5 D 23-10 NEWCASTLE Subs from Darlow, Ritchie, Schär, Krafth, Murphy, Longstaff, Hayden, Almirón, Gayle, Anderson Doubtful Gayle (hamstring) Injured Dummett (calf, unknown) Suspended Clark (one match) Discipline Y36 R2 Form DLDDLD Leading scorer Wilson 5 BURNLEY Subs from Hennessey, Norris, Pieters, Bardsley, Thomas, Lennon, Long, Rodriguez, Cork, Gudmundsson, Collins Doubtful None Injured Bardsley (knock, 12 Dec), Barnes (hamstring, unknown), Stephens (illness, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y31 R0 Form LDWDDD Leading scorer Cornet 5A growing number of countries are exploring making Covid jabs compulsory for the general population, but is it the right approach? Which countries are opting for mandatory Covid vaccinations? Austria has announced plans to make Covid jabs mandatory from February, with Germany indicating it may follow suit. Greece, meanwhile, has already announced mandatory jabs for the over-60s, while Indonesia and Turkmenistan are among those that have already made Covid jabs mandatory. Why are they taking this approach? Many of the countries exploring mandatory vaccination of the general population are doing so in the face of rising levels of Covid that have led to the reintroduction of severe measures including lockdowns. In Germany, for example, many hospitals are under severe strain while the number of new Covid cases has hit unprecedented highs in recent weeks striking a record of 79,051 new cases on 24 November, according to data collated by Johns Hopkins University. According to Hans Kluge, the WHO’s Europe director, the situation faced by Europe and central Asia is down to a number of factors, including insufficient vaccination coverage and the relaxation of public health and social measures. “Most people hospitalised and dying from Covid-19 today are not fully vaccinated,” he said last month. The emergence of the variant Omicron has added to concerns given early signs it may be more transmissible than Delta and have some ability to dodge the body’s immune responses, leading many countries – including the UK – to ramp up efforts to ensure the population is as well protected as possible through vaccination, including booster jabs. Some countries believe the best way to do this is through mandatory Covid jabs. Does mandatory vaccination work? Vaccines against Covid have been shown to be safe and effective, particularly at preventing severe disease and death, and may reduce the need for severe social measures such as lockdowns. Mandatory vaccination programmes offer the potential to not only increase the level of uptake but the speed at which people head for the jabs. But how well such programmes work depends on a number of factors, including the level of opposition. “Vaccine mandates work – as Italy, the US and Australia have shown for other vaccines. Will they work for Covid? There is more uncertainty in the public about the long-term safety profile so more resistance,” said Prof Julian Savulescu, director of the Oxford Uehiro Centre for Practical Ethics at the University of Oxford, adding in the UK there was the added factor of high levels of natural immunity. Italy already had 10 mandatory vaccines for children, with some evidence suggesting the laws have had a positive impact on vaccine uptake. However, the EU-funded Asset project, which looks at the impact of mandatory vaccination in a number of countries, found no clear link between the approach and vaccine uptake. In April, the World Health Organization (WHO) said it “does not presently support the direction of mandates for Covid-19 vaccination, having argued that it is better to work on information campaigns and making vaccines accessible”. But speaking last month, Robb Butler, executive director for WHO Europe, said conversations on the compulsory jabs needed to be had. “Mandatory vaccination can but doesn’t always increase uptake,” he said. Are there downsides to mandatory vaccination? There are a number of concerns, including that it may risk undermining public confidence in public health measures. “I think the main problem is public backlash, increase in polarisation and the possibility of political parties gaining ground on the anti-vaxx ticket,” said Dr Samantha Vanderslott of the Oxford Vaccine Group. “Also it might ignore improvement of vaccine services and access to vaccines,” she said. Savulescu also pointed out concerns. “The risks are public confidence in government but more importantly, liberty should only be restricted to the least extent necessary. Unless the public health system is on the verge of collapse, it is hard to justify treating the decision to treat the unvaccinated differently to the decision to smoke, drink alcohol, eat unhealthily, not exercise etc,” he said, adding if mandatory policies were brought in, they should be as selective as possible. “The Greek approach of making [Covid] vaccination mandatory for over-60s is more ethically defensible than the Austrian or German proposals to make it mandatory for all adults,” he said. Will the UK introduce mandatory jabs? The health secretary, Sajid Javid, has said the UK “won’t ever look at” mandatory vaccinations for the general public. While the UK decided to make Covid jabs a condition of work for frontline health and social care workers, mandatory vaccination of the general population would be a very different matter. Besides the ethical concerns, the situation faced by the UK is different to many countries in Europe. “The UK has a high level of immunity now – natural or from vaccination. Importantly, it has good protection of the elderly, who are the main group putting pressure on hospitals,” said Savulescu, noting data from the Office for National Statistics suggests in early November 92.8% of adults in England would have had antibodies to Covid either from vaccination or natural infection. “There is not a lot of point to a mandatory policy in the UK – Austria, for example, has much lower coverage.”Antony Sher, who has died at the age of 72, was a man of staggering versatility. As well as being a brilliant actor, he was an accomplished artist and writer. But, far from being separate, his three careers all fed into each other: you only to have to look at his sketches of Richard III in his book Year of the King to see how his draughtsman’s eye enriched his performance. Gifted in numerous ways, Sher also saw his acting career as one that evolved from impersonation to embodiment of a character. Sher once told me that, when growing up as a boy in South Africa, his idols were Alec Guinness and Peter Sellers: what he envied, and initially sought to emulate, was their capacity for physical transformation. He also said that, when he left Cape Town at the age of 19 to make a career in the UK as an actor, he was aware, as a gay, Jewish South African, of being a triple outsider. He was even unsure whether he was cut out to be an actor; in his autobiography, Beside Myself, he describes himself arriving in London as a “short, slight, shy creature in black specs” understandably rejected by Rada, who strongly urged him to seek a different career. Happily, he persevered, but in much of his early work you feel Sher was relying as much on his imitative skills as his inner self. That didn’t stop him being totally persuasive as the Beatles’ legendary drummer in John, Paul, George, Ringo … &amp; Bert, which transferred from the Liverpool Everyman to the West End: he was equally good as the lecherous redbrick sleazeball Howard Kirk in the TV version of Malcolm Bradbury’s The History Man. But it was his stage performance as an exploited Arab visitor in Mike Leigh’s Goose-Pimples that marked his development as an actor: the performance, based on meticulous research, was mimetically brilliant but also called on Sher’s own experience as an outsider struggling to fit into an alien culture. Sher’s career really took off, however, when he joined the RSC in 1982. He was an eccentric Fool to Michael Gambon’s Lear and was magnetically malevolent as the eponymous hero of Molière’s Tartuffe. It was his performance as Richard III in 1984 that showed his talents working in perfect harmony. With a writer’s zeal, he explored with orthopaedic surgeons the exact nature of Richard’s disability. As an artist, he was able to find a precise visual image for Richard. And, as an actor, he broke away totally from the Olivier template: fleet and demonic, Sher was the fastest mover in the kingdom, making wickedly inventive use of twin crutches that variously became phallic symbols or a cross to betoken Richard’s seeming saintliness. It was a career-changing performance, which, over the years, gave Sher the chance to play all the great Shakespearean roles, almost invariably in Stratford-upon-Avon. He was a dazzling Shylock, driven to revenge by Christian physical abuse, in Bill Alexander’s The Merchant of Venice. Directed by Gregory Doran, his partner and eventual husband, he also gave a series of performances that combined abundant physicality with psychological penetration. His Macbeth in 1999 was a supreme fighting machine fatally undone by Lady Macbeth’s taunts about his virility. His Falstaff in the two parts of Henry IV was a rivetingly unsentimental portrait of a pub charmer and ruthless operator with a casual disregard for human life: when Sher dismissed his ragged recruits as “food for powder, they’ll fill a pit as well as better”, Alex Hassell’s Prince Hal reacted with a look of appalled horror. By the time he came to play King Lear in 2016, Sher was a consummate Shakespearean able to bring a lifetime’s experience to the part. He was first seen enthroned like a secular god in an elevated glass cage. Once brought to earth, Sher captured perfectly the emotional volatility that is the key to Lear: having shown a beatific gentleness towards Cordelia, he rounded on her captors with a downright violence as if to remind us that this is a play of irreconcilable contradictions. Intensely self-analytical, Sher wrote in his autobiography that at the start of his career he was obsessed by his characters’ “casual dress of flesh whereas I’m now more interested in their visible souls”. You could see that in his approach to modern drama. His Ringo Starr in the Beatles’ musical gave us the outward flourish of the man. But by the time he played a New York drag-queen in Harvey Fierstein’s Torch Song Trilogy in 1985, he was totally within the character: above all, he caught the shape-shifting quality of Fierstein’s Arnold, who could switch in a second from gossipy camp to anxious mother-hen depending on who he was with. Sher was also able, as much in modern drama as in Shakespeare, to convey the contradictions in a character. His Willy Loman, in the RSC’s 2015 revival of Arthur Miller’s Death of a Salesman was, on one level, a dapper spring-heeled joker who used the old vaudevillian trick of extending his hands as if seeking applause. Yet, the more Willy became trapped in his dreams, the more Sher relapsed into sudden, brick-red rages. And Sher’s last great performance came in John Kani’s Kunene and the King, which called on his emotional memories of South Africa. Sher played a cantankerous old actor physically dependent on a black carer and hoping to overcome illness to play King Lear. Shuffling around the stage in rubberised slippers and swigging forbidden liquor, Sher was not only memorably testy but showed his character experiencing a Lear-like moral awakening. Sher was a man of many parts and of diverse talents. But, for me, there was a unity about his skills as actor, artist and writer, in that he approached each part with an intense creative fervour, as if it had to be understood equally on the performative, visual and psychological level. And, having started out as a gifted chameleon, Sher became a supreme actor unafraid, whether in Shakespeare or modern drama, to exhibit his own soul.A cybersecurity company filed a $110m lawsuit in New York this week, accusing the Spanish global energy company Iberdrola and its US subsidiary Avangrid of bid rigging and racketeering. The 72-page federal court complaint outlines an elaborate scheme by Iberdrola executives to generate millions of dollars in wasteful equipment expenditures in order to turn a profit from its utility customers in New York, Connecticut and Maine. The lawsuit further alleges that much of this equipment was never put to use and is instead collecting dust in warehouses across the region. Iberdrola came to prominence about 20 years ago with investments in large wind farms, natural gas and hydroelectric power. In addition to Avangrid, it holds subsidiaries throughout Europe, Brazil and Mexico. But in recent years, the company has come under scrutiny. Two of the Iberdrola defendants named in the lawsuit, Antonio Asenjo and Enrique Victorero, are under investigation in Spain for alleged corporate espionage and fraud. Legislators and environmentalists in the U S have attacked it for price-gouging tactics, citing Maine’s soaring electricity bills and frequent, long-lasting outages ever since Avangrid assumed control of the state’s utility company. This latest lawsuit, brought by Security Limits Inc, comes amid a series of high-profile utility malfeasance cases in the US, involving bribery and dark money groups used to influence elections and public officials. The largest of these criminal cases, a $60m alleged bribery scheme in Ohio this summer led to the expulsion of the state’s speaker of the House and a $230m fine levied against the utility, FirstEnergy. The complaint also comes as Avangrid is looking to expand its operations to the American west by merging with New Mexico’s largest utility, PNM. Mariel Nanasi, executive director of the Santa Fe- based environmental group New Energy Economy, has long been an ardent opponent of the merger, often voicing concerns about Iberdrola’s criminal investigations in Spain and the possible implications for New Mexico. “Fraud, bid rigging, jacking up customer rates by making phantom capital expenditures – there is a pattern of misconduct that has emerged,” she said. “Avangrid and Iberdrola act outside the law and the public be damned.” The complaint was filed in the southern district court of New York by lawyers representing Paulo Silva, a cybersecurity expert and CEO of Security Limits Inc. In it, lawyers describe events in the nearly two years that Silva spent working as a subcontractor for Avangrid, designing and building secure data centers for its utilities. Silva alleges that in 2018 he complained about overspending on equipment. Shortly after, Avangrid executives began manipulating the bidding process and steering lucrative contracts toward five companies with ties to Iberdrola, he added. According to the complaint, these companies were charged with buying large amounts of equipment for new data centers, for which they charged Avangrid markups of 40% or more. According to the complaint, much of this equipment was never put to use, but instead was stored in a warehouse, which had to be expanded three times over the course of several years, according to the lawsuit. Iberdrola and Avangrid “actually paid to have structures erected to house the dust-gathering hardware that lacked any discernible purpose apart from serving as a vehicle for the [companies’] accounting misfeasance”, the complaint states. In response to the complaint, Joanie Griffin, an Avangrid spokeswoman, described Silva as a disgruntled former subcontractor, bitter that he did not win bids from the company. “The allegations and claims have no merit, and the company will vigorously defend itself,” she said. The alleged benefit to Avangrid and Iberdrola derives from a half-century-old utility regulation strategy designed to encourage the development of critical infrastructure. These regulations allow utilities to charge customers for the cost of capital expenditures – long-term investments in things like equipment – plus an additional 7 to 15 percent, which the utility keeps as profit. Under these regulations, Avangrid was allegedly able to charge its customers on their electrical bills for every piece of over-priced and unused equipment – while greatly enriching its shareholders. While the civil complaint does not include an exhaustive review of Avangrid’s alleged unnecessary purchases, the company’s SEC filings show that when the alleged scheme took place, Avangrid increased its capital expenditures by nearly $1 billion. As technology has changed and improved, utility watchdogs have lambasted such regulations, saying they create a perverse incentive for companies to invest in unneeded equipment, while ignoring important maintenance and operational expenses. In Iberdrola’s case, the complaint says that the company over-purchased certain equipment, while also leaving major lapses in the utility’s cybersecurity. These lapses left critical utility infrastructure unprotected from things like cyberattacks, the complaint asserts. “The [scheme], and its inherent waste, deprived SLI of valuable contracts it would have otherwise been awarded in an unrigged bidding process, wasted millions of rate-payers’ dollars, and wrongly enriched the [scheme’s] participants,” lawyers concluded in the complaint.A republic has been proposed and postponed by Barbadian prime ministers for decades. Battling a pandemic that has devastated the country’s tourism economy, Mia Mottley, the country’s first female leader, had ample excuses to again kick the constitutional can down the road. Instead, at the stroke of midnight on Monday, she oversaw the transition of the Caribbean island out of the realm of the British monarchy – the country’s first local head of state, also a woman, Sandra Mason – and in case that were not enough, bestowed the title of national hero on the Barbadian megastar Rihanna in one of the new republic’s first acts. To close observers of Mottley, 56, little of what transpired this week was surprising. “She is a person in a hurry,” says Cynthia Barrow-Giles, a professor of political science at the University of the West Indies, who has tracked Mottley’s political career since she entered parliament as a lawyer in her late 20s. “Her hurry is to achieve what she thinks is in the realm of possibility in the Caribbean. She believes this region represents a civilisation that is still untapped, and she wants to untap it.” Mottley hails from a wealthy family and a Barbadian political dynasty – her grandfather was a mayor of the capital, Bridgetown, and her father an MP – but in her own career has forged a populist profile, comfortable among the masses and close to working-class constituencies. “She’s a very ‘rootsy’ person,” says Peter Wickham, a principal director at Caribbean Development Research Services, a political consultancy. “She’s forged an alliance with the pan-African movement and other progressives, the Rastafarians and other low socioeconomic organisations.” Winning office in a landslide in 2018 – her Barbados Labour party (BLP) holds every position in the country’s 30-seat parliament, the first clean sweep in the country’s history – one of Mottley’s early acts was to reinstate free tertiary education at the country’s premier University of the West Indies campus. Barbados is a socially conservative, deeply religious society, making it especially difficult for a woman – especially one who is single – to climb to the top of its politics. “She’s taken a lot more abuse than any other politician I know, both within her political organisation and outside it,” Wickham says. But Mottley, “a political creature from start to finish”, has made light of the challenges, he adds. Many of her former adversaries and rivals are now members of her cabinet. “She practises a politics of convenience,” he says. What she wants to do with power, on the other hand, is less open to compromise. Removing financial barriers to university points to the kind of mental transformation Mottley is eager to accelerate across the Caribbean. Alongside cutting ties to the monarchy, she has strengthened them with the Gold Coast states from which Britain enslaved and transported an estimated 600,000 Africans to work on the island’s sugar plantations. (Just 83,000 were surviving at emancipation, according to Barbadian historian Sir Hilary Beckles). On a visit to Ghana, Mottley took soil from Barbados’s Newton Slave Burial Ground, one of the largest such sites in the western hemisphere, and spoke to the country’s parliament in stark terms about their shared history and future. “Our people humanised the violent, inhumane slave plantation society that the British colonialists had established,” she said. “[But] we are still faced with the insidious nature of a culture that is intended to dehumanise black people wherever black or blackness is found, and our parliaments therefore, while we shall be in the vanguard of removing all laws of discrimination, it is the mental emancipation that shall forever always matter.” She has renewed calls for the UK and other European states to make reparations for the slave trade, a message she took into British homes last year, arguing the case on Good Morning Britain. Boosting Monday night’s somewhat staid event of a formal constitutional transition (guest of honour, Prince Charles) with the star power of Rihanna ensured it became an international story that was shared widely on social media and reached younger audiences. It showcased another emerging Mottley trademark: the ability to get noticed on the international stage. At last month’s Cop26 summit in Glasgow, Mottley surveyed a hall of many of the world’s most powerful people, delivering a withering warning in her contralto voice that captured the moment, and left some speculating about a possible future running a United Nations agency, if not one day becoming its first female and first Caribbean secretary general. A month before, her remarks to the UN general assembly had gone viral for invoking Bob Marley. “Who will get up and stand up for the rights of our people?” she asked delegates. Establishing a proud, independent Barbadian identity that is unflinching about the country’s bloody past and its implications for the future has been one of Mottley’s long-term goals, analysts say. Last year, when the murder of George Floyd ignited Black Lives Matter activism around the world, including in Barbados, she seized the opening, agreeing to take down a statue of Admiral Horatio Nelson that had stood in the capital for more than 200 years. The same day it was removed, she announced Barbados was going to become a republic in a year’s time. “She would not have forgiven herself if she hadn’t addressed [the republic], and she wanted to address it quickly,” says Barrow-Giles. But she must walk a careful line. The pandemic dented tourist arrivals in Barbados by 86% last year and has left the economy reeling. Barrow-Giles is one of many to express doubts over whether Mottley has done enough to persuade Barbadians of why changes such as the republic, or an accompanying review of the constitution, matter to their lives. “I’m not sure she has been able to reach the average person in relation to how those grand ideas are going to lead to a transformation of their socioeconomic conditions,” she says. “When you speak to some people on the ground, there’s cynicism and disappointment that they have not been consulted [on the republic].” Early results of a poll shared with the Guardian showed most Barbadians were broadly in support of the new system, though fewer than one in three were enthusiastic – and about the same proportion were either indifferent, unaware of the change or actively opposed it. Her political rivals accuse Mottley of squandering what could have been an opportunity to spend time engaging Barbadians in the transition – waiting until Covid-19 had ebbed, so that in-person town halls could be held, or putting the decision to a popular referendum – in order to make it a truly transformative event in the national psyche. “Democratic republics are not merely formed upon the consent of the people, they are absolutely dependent on the active and informed involvement of the people for their continued good health,” said Guy Hewitt, a former diplomat and figure in the opposition Democratic Labour party, before this week’s handover. “I believe Barbados has gotten off on the wrong foot.” Caribbean leaders often outlive their welcome with the public, Wickham says. Notably, Mottley has made clear that she supports term limits for Barbadian prime ministers, and that she will serve only two herself, meaning if she wins elections in two years’ time, she will be out of the job by 2028. “Our previous prime ministers don’t have a good record of resignations … because nothing excites them like being a PM,” Wickham says. With a surging international profile, however, Mottley may find she does not encounter the same problem.For those who want to be part of a zero carbon future but find the prospect of giving up flying, ditching the car and turning vegan daunting, help may be at hand. A Finnish-made online tool that promises to give users the key to their own “sustainable good life” by taking control of their carbon footprint is set to be launched in the UK. London Councils, the body that represents all London boroughs, is looking at developing a version of the tool, which aims to be helpful rather than hectoring, letting people create their own tailor-made path to reducing their CO2 output rather than giving out blanket prescriptions such as stopping flying or eating meat. Its developers say users in Finland who answer the tool’s 20-odd questions and commit to change commonly reduce their carbon footprint by 30% in 12 months, through simple steps such as buying secondhand clothes, cycling more and eating locally produced food. Philip Glanville, the mayor of Hackney and chair of London Councils’ transport and environment committee, said the tool could help show citizens that “even small tweaks to their daily lives” could contribute to tackling the climate crisis. “The vast majority of our residents are motivated to help prevent climate change – our recent polling suggests 87% feel this way,” he said. “But Londoners can only make the choices they are given, and how important government and businesses are in enabling real sustainable choices that fit into their lives.” Finland has agreed to reduce its CO2 emissions by 15 megatonnes by 2030 compared with 1990 levels. According to calculations by Sitra,the Finnish innovation fund that developed the tool, if every household has two people reducing their carbon footprint by 20%, that reduction alone would result in 73% of the national reduction required. “There’s a misconception that it doesn’t really matter what you do as an individual, how you eat, how you live, how you move or what type of products and services that you buy,” said Markus Terho, from Sitra. “Studies show that individual action has a significant potential to lower CO2 impact on a global level.” The average annual carbon footprint of a Londoner is 8,345kg of CO2 emissions, according to the Global Carbon Atlas, so if two people in every one of its 3.6m households reduced their carbon footprint by 20%, this would mean an emission reduction of 12 megatonnes. Terhosaid achieving a carbon footprint reduction of as much as 20% “is easy to do, anyone can do it and it’s very fast”. The tool, which launched in Finland in 2018, has gone viral in the Nordic nation of 5.5 million people, with 1.2m tests taken. While only about 24% of its population are motivated enough by climate fears to change the way they live, the majority think other things such as wellbeing, health, saving money and time, and fun are more important, says Terho. “The beauty of this is that everyone can find their own way to live a good life that is sustainable,” said Terho. “You can find your own unique combination of actions that create meaningful reduction.” Sitra is an independent body that has a mission to future-proof the Nordic nation, funded by an €84m endowment gifted by the Finnish government to mark 50 years of independence in 1967. Terho said another 17 countries were looking to adapt the approach, and the organisation estimated this had the potential to take as much as a gigatonne of carbon out of the atmosphere by 2030. Terho stressed that engaging citizens was only a small part of the solution. “Activating citizens on a large scale will bring CO2 reductions and push governments, cities, municipalities and companies to move quicker,” he said. “Mitigating climate change is such a huge global societal challenge that everyone’s contribution is needed.”“Anyone who thinks there is romanticism to reading by candlelight needs their head examined,” said 69-year-old Fran Marshall as she braced herself for a sixth night without power. “There is no romance. None whatsoever. It has been freezing cold and it has been miserable.” Marshall lives in a picture-postcard patch of north Northumberland, her 19th-century stone cottage nestled in a valley below a spectacular hill called Yeavering Bell, or the Hill of the Goats. On top of the hill are stunning views, the largest iron age hillfort in northern England, and on occasion you might even see friendly groups of wild Cheviot goats. Opposite is a field where once stood the royal summer palace of Anglo-Saxon kings and queens of Northumbria. It must be a such a wonderful place to live. But this week it has been awful. “My water comes from a spring which is run by an electricity pump, so I’ve got no water and no heating and no power.” Marshall was one of tens of thousands of people in a similar situation after Storm Arwen wreaked the worst havoc to power lines for nearly 20 years. Day by day, more households were switched on but on Friday a relatively small proportion – fewer than 10,000 – were still without power. The army was deployed in Aberdeenshire and Durham to help people affected. Local radio stations have this week been full of callers telling their stories, from parents feeling guilty for not being able to keep their children warm to others who were just desperate for a hot shower. Marshall, whose job is helping horse trainers and owners, counts herself as one of the luckier ones. “Because I am a fairly able person I’ve been getting out. I’m driving around charging my phone, I’m going to the pub for food, but an awful lot of people aren’t. It is so difficult for people living in the valleys without any power ... it is frightening. There are a lot of elderly people in this part of the world. “I’ve got candles, but I’m getting through them. You try to read a book, but actually you can’t really read a book by candlelight, it’s extremely difficult. At least I’ve got an open fire. It’s not brilliant, it heats the chimney rather than the room but it is there.” Her week has involved going to bed early and not being able to wash properly. Don’t even ask about the toilet. “My deep freeze is a disaster, everyone’s will be. Everything is wasted.” Her 10-year-old Bedlington terrier, Daisy, is out of sorts too. “She’s just wondering why it’s dark all of the time.” Marshall has had no landline and because masts were brought down too, no mobile signal until she gets in the car and drives to where she can get one. More than anything, it has been really boring. “We have become so used to putting a switch on, turning the heating up, going online, getting what you want when you want it and none of it is there now. “I’m fairly resilient in my life, I’ve had to be ... but this is miserable.” Marshall is one of many people to think that if such power cuts had happened in the south-east it would have been a bigger story, declared a national emergency. “People don’t understand remoteness in this country,” she said. “People might say: ‘Well you chose to live in the countryside’ … Well, farmers do as well, the reason being they have farms and without farms you are not going to eat.” Marshall said the community spirit, everybody helping each other, had been amazing and humbling. In the Cheviot Centre in nearby Wooler volunteers work long hours coordinating visits to the most vulnerable, a huge team effort involving fire, police, paramedics, mountain rescue and council staff – a picture replicated across affected areas. Hugh Penney is a potter who lives with his cat, Pippikin, in a small early 19th-century former miner’s cottage in the village of Waterhouses, County Durham. There are 70 houses in the terrace, all without power for six nights. He tries to see the funny side, joking that he sells his work at a lot of Christmas fairs, which he finds exhausting and “I sometimes say: ‘All I want to do is lie down in a darkened room’… I didn’t know it would be taken literally. “The first night, it’s a novelty, you get the candles out and it’s all fine. But you don’t realise it’s going to go on for so long and it just got less amusing day by day. It just makes life more difficult, that’s all, everything is more difficult. People have been managing but it is very tiring.” It can be miserable. “In the evening you can sort of make yourself comfortable but it is so boring.” Penney said there was a real problem with communication. “The worst thing was getting messages that things would be fixed by a certain time and then it didn’t happen. That’s worse than no information. The communication has been bad.” Both Penney and Marshall’s power came back on Thursday. “How long I’ve got it I don’t know,” said Marshall. “I’m relieved it’s back but disturbed it has gone on for so long. “I don’t think people realise what it is like being in the sticks without power for so long, how it affects everybody. It just takes away everything you have.”The US economy added 210,000 jobs in November, less than half the jobs growth that economists had expected, in a report that was compiled before the discovery of the Omicron coronavirus variant that now threatens to derail the economic recovery from the pandemic. The unemployment rate dropped to 4.2% as employers added jobs in business services, transportation, warehousing and construction. The overall gain was less than half the 500,000 plus jobs that economists had expected to be added over the month. November’s jobs report from the labor department comes after the US added 531,000 in October, a sharp increase after a slowdown in hiring triggered by the spread of the Delta coronavirus variant over the summer. Over the month the retail sector lost 20,000 jobs and hiring in leisure and hospitality was lower than expected. In a note to investors, Capital Economics’ senior US economist, Andrew Hunter, said the figures suggest “the labor market recovery was faltering even before the potential impact of the new Omicron variant, possibly as a result of the rising infection rates in the north-east and midwest”. Even though the unemployment rate fell again, Hunter said he was “skeptical that a further significant recovery in the labour force lies ahead – particularly given the worsening virus situation and the potential federal vaccine mandate”. It remains to be seen whether the Omicron variant will, like Delta, have a damping effect on the jobs market. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) thinktank warned this week that Omicron and rising inflation could prove significant threats to the global economy. The strong jobs report comes after ADP, the US’s largest payroll supplier, said private sector employees had added 534,000 jobs in October. Nela Richardson, chief economist at ADP, said: “Service providers, which are more vulnerable to the pandemic, have dominated job gains this year. It’s too early to tell if the Omicron variant could potentially slow the jobs recovery in coming months.”The advent of the Omicron variant has given us a glimpse of an alternative future in which, had the Sars-CoV-2 virus been initially identified in Africa in early 2020, the world would have maybe locked Africa away. There would have been no emergency funding for vaccine development, limited global attention, and Africa would have become known as the continent of Covid. We may never know the origins of Omicron, but there is now evidence that this variant was circulating in the Netherlands before it was officially identified in South Africa. African scientists’ superior level of pandemic preparedness is what has enabled the world to quickly respond to this new threat. However, the response has entailed the imposition of travel bans – shutting out southern African countries, as well as Nigeria and Egypt, who have now had to pay a heavy price in trade and tourism for identifying this variant in such an expeditious manner. Travel bans are an important way to contain the transmission of Covid-19, but in this instance the measure is merely performative, given that the variant is already on several continents. What we’re left with is the assumption that the ban is as discriminatory and racist as Africa’s inequitable access to vaccines, diagnostics and therapeutics. It is a myth to say that vaccine hesitancy in Africa is the cause of low vaccination rates. The US, one of the most vaccine-hesitant countries in the world, and with billions of surplus doses, has just under 60% full vaccination coverage, while some countries in Africa have less than 2%, owing to a lack of supply. The emergence of another variant was an inevitable result of the failure of the international system, and a response driven by domestic politics rather than global solidarity on the part of high-income countries. We knew this was where the hoarding, the delays with intellectual property (IP) waivers and the lack of cooperation on sharing technology would leave us. It was always going to end in more dangerous variants. Why do we now feign surprise? It does not have to be like this. African countries, which have decades of experience of fighting Ebola, HIV/Aids and polio successfully, are using their technology and knowhow to monitor the virus. But instead of being called on to contribute to tracking its spread, our continent has been rewarded with exclusion and red-listing – an insult added to our injury. There is no time to lose. This virus is moving quickly, and we in turn need to move fast. Global leadership is needed, but so also is African leadership. It is time for African political leadership to step up and to push back – African lives are at stake. We must be the masters and mistresses of our own destiny and take a stand for equity at this once-in-a-hundred-years moment. Africa cannot stand on the sidelines of history when it has so much at stake and so much to offer. The world cannot impede African states and other low-income countries that want to produce their own vaccines, to develop their testing and sequencing capacity and to contribute to the fight against this virus. If the pandemic has taught us anything, it is that we cannot fight this virus alone. We must work together, sharing technology and information with full transparency, as the South Africans have ably demonstrated, to ensure that we do not end up with another variant that could have the potential to be far more deadly than Omicron. The solutions are simple: we work together, we do not exclude, and we cooperate openly and transparently. This is not an African problem: this is a global problem that requires international cooperation and a greater commitment towards multilateralism. A global pandemic treaty could be a part of the solution, but we must first of all do away with the nationalism that plagues us: we must urgently vaccinate the world. Next week, when G7 finance and development leaders meet in Liverpool, they will have the opportunity to demonstrate global leadership and solidarity as this next wave of the virus takes hold. Let us follow the science, not the politics. Dr Ayoade Olatunbosun-Alakija is the co-chair of the African Union’s Africa Vaccine Delivery Alliance and former chief humanitarian coordinator of NigeriaHow many of you have taken a dodgy bottle to a party, possibly even one that someone brought to yours? Let’s face it, we’ve all done it, though hopefully the desire to drink something decent may encourage you to up your game. If you’re hosting the party and providing the booze, your primary consideration, drinkability aside, is no doubt cost. I’m guessing most of you want to keep that under £10 a bottle, though that’s a bit of a struggle with fizz these days. I really like Aldi’s Specially Selected Cap Classique (13%), from South Africa, though £12.99 is pushing it a bit if you’re catering for larger numbers. The same store’s Specially Selected Pignoletto (11.5%, see today’s pick below) would be a more affordable choice, especially if you’re a prosecco fan. For those with drier palates, cava is a better bet. Lidl’s Arestel Rosé (11.5%, also in today’s pick) is an extraordinary £5.29; I don’t know how they do it – and it’s better, to my mind, than the standard Arestel at the same price. If you want to serve champagne, Lidl’s Comte de Senneval Champagne Brut (£13.99, 12.5%) is decent, too, even though it recently went up by a quid. Even so, it’s better than the cheaper Champagne Veuve Delattre Brut (12%) at £11.99. The wine you choose also depends on the food you’re serving, of course. Fizz is fine for party nibbles, but less so for buffet-style eating, and even that can vary in terms of its compatibility with wine. With cold food such as quiches and salads, you might want an easy-drinking white such as a sauvignon blanc or a rosé, while hot food such as lasagne or a casserole calls for a hearty red, and the 14.5% Domaine Bousquet Gaia Malbec in Waitrose’s current “Fine Wines at £10” offer is a cracker. If you’re up for spending as much as a tenner, I also like Mirabeau Pure Rosé 2020 (12.5%) and Broglia Gavi di Gavi 2020 (13.5%) from the same promotion, too. (If any of those take your fancy, however, it’s probably worth visiting a branch in person, rather than ordering online, because they’ll sell out fast.) Rosé also has the virtue of generally being lower in alcohol, which is no bad thing at a party. I wish I could report that I’ve found a good alcohol-free option, too, but I struggle. If you’ve a sweet tooth, Aldi’s Zerozecco, which is not dissimilar to a moscato, might work, and at only £2.49, you can hardly complain about the price, but I wouldn’t drink it myself, even at someone else’s expense. Sorry. Five crowdpleasing party wines Specially Selected Pignoletto Spumante £6.99 Aldi, 11.5%. One for prosecco fans. It has the same touch of sweetness, but a bit more character than most basic prosecco. Arestel Cava Rosé £5.29 Lidl, 11.5%. Drier than you’d expect from the girly pink colour.. Just a really nice bottle of sparkling rosé, especially at this price. Porta 6 White 2020 £7.50 (or £6.50 on Clubcard this weekend) Tesco 13%. Fresh, aromatic, Portuguese white that’s a blend of local grape varieties with chardonnay and viognier. (There’s a red in the same line, too, but it’s a bit jammy.) Co-op Irresistible Carmenère 2020 £7, 14%. The label of this ripe, Chilean red certainly suggests a party vibe, but the contents are decent, too. Could handle a bit of spice. Sainsbury’s Taste the Difference Gaillac Rouge 2019 £6.75 (on offer), 13.5%. Fresh, quaffable, rustic French red for those who don’t like their reds too sweet. For more by Fiona Beckett, go to matchingfoodandwine.comFrench sports stars and politicians have expressed anger at the acquittal of a coach accused of domestic violence against the Olympic judo champion Margaux Pinot, as the state prosecutor launched an appeal. Pinot, 27, a gold medallist at the Tokyo Olympics, had serious facial injuries including a fractured nose when she filed a police complaint in the early hours of Sunday. She said her partner and trainer, Alain Schmitt, had attacked her at her flat outside Paris, wrestled her to the ground, verbally abused her, punched her many times, repeatedly smashed her head on to the ground and tried to strangle her. Pinot said she managed to escape the apartment with the aid of neighbours and called police. Officers arrested and questioned Schmitt that night. The case was fast-tracked to a court hearing on Tuesday where Schmitt, 38, denied the allegations. The state prosecutor requested a one-year suspended sentence for what they deemed “very serious violence”. But the judge decided there was not “enough proof of guilt” for the prosecution to proceed. “A court is never there to tell who is telling the truth and who is lying,” the judge said. Schmitt told the court that he denied the allegations “100%” and that it had been a fight between lovers, started by Pinot. Pinot posted a picture of her swollen, injured face on social media. She talked of the “blood across the floor of my apartment” and said: “What was missing? My death at the end, perhaps? It’s probably judo that saved me and my thoughts go out to other women who cannot say the same.” Schmitt, with bruising around his eye, gave a press conference where he said he felt he had been put on trial by social media. He said Pinot was lying and he denied all of the allegations. He said they had had an argument, that Pinot had punched him and pushed him into a door and that as he had tried to get away they had bumped into a wall and a radiator. He said she had made him fall on her. His lawyer said Pinot had “behavioural problems”. He said: “In my life, I’ve never punched anyone … It’s not possible for me to have punched someone and they ran away and I caught up with them – it’s not possible. And all of that after I supposedly pushed her head into the ground? It’s a joke … She’s lying of course.” He added: “She jumped on me and grabbed me by the collar. I moved back, she pushed me against a doorframe. I banged my head. I got up a bit dazed. She punched me and it escalated. We banged into walls, a radiator, a door.” Pinot and her lawyer then gave their own press conference where, with bruising across her face, she recounted her version of the night’s events and described how she had thought she was going to die. “He grabbed me by the hair, pulled me to the ground, got astride me and started to pull out my hair and bang my head on the ground. He wanted to strangle me,” Pinot said. She said she thought to herself she had to find a way to get out of the apartment “otherwise I’ll die”. She said of his press conference that he was lying and trying to make out she was a “hysterical woman”. Pinot has described a relationship of controlling behaviour and verbal abuse. Schmitt did not want their relationship to be known about, she said, and he often verbally abused her, saying her career would go nowhere and criticising her personality. Pinot said the weekend’s attack began with Schmitt making belittling comments. She said she lay on her bed with fingers in her ears not to hear it, and then the blows started. She said he had on previous occasions smashed things in her apartment. Her lawyer said neighbours heard Pinot’s screams for help and took her into their flat. The sports minister, Roxana Mărăcineanu, said she supported Pinot, “who for me is clearly the victim in what has happened”. The French judo stars Teddy Riner and Clarisse Agbégnénou also publicly backed Pinot. Riner said there should be more support for victims. Pinot also had the support of the French judo federation, which said it was shocked by her injuries. The mayor of Paris and Socialist presidential candidate, Anne Hidalgo, backed Pinot, as did another presidential candidate on the left, Jean-Luc Mélenchon.A truly vintage week for hypocrisy in an industry I simply cannot take seriously: the newspaper industry. My industry. As longtime observers of so-called Fleet Street will be aware, living down to expectations is a constant burden. But it is a tribute to the business that said burden is shouldered daily by any number of lavishly shameless individuals, across all titles, without exception. This past week’s standout has been the full-spectrum warfare unleashed by the tabloids on the BBC’s Amol Rajan for having the temerity to make a documentary about Princes William and Harry – who you will, of course, barely ever read about in the tabloids. On the very, very rare occasions that sacred D-notice is broken, you will only hear about the royal family in the most deferential, scrupulously fair and quintuply sourced terms. You know the sort of thing – “EXCLUSIVE: Diana thinks Kate is perfect but doesn’t believe Meghan’s ‘the one’: confidante reveals the princess still speaks to her from beyond the grave (and even told her to vote for Brexit).” Huge thanks to the tireless standards-upholders at MailOnline. And we’ll come back to the Mail very shortly. To recap: the BBC’s media editor, Rajan, has now been the subject of days of unfavourable press – and reported outrage from the royal family – for saying that William and Harry’s households briefed against each other. Before we go on, I should say I have never so much as met Rajan, in case anyone imagines we’re friends from some cursed London media party circuit (I do not attend cursed parties). I did very much enjoy his book on spin bowlers, though – a much better way of spending an evening than having champagne misted halitotically over you by a parade of dickheads who imagine that their work is hugely significant. What is it about Rajan that has so enraged some sections of the press? The Mail in particular has run a number of articles and columns by the likes of Janet Street-Porter, in which he is energetically trashed. “Next year he’s presenting two documentaries on social mobility,” remarks Janet tartly, “a subject he seems to know very well.” Righto. And that’s bad now, is it? Forgive me – I’m just trying to understand the specific level it would be acceptable for a person such as Amol Rajan to reach. And why. In the meantime, the Sun and Mail have called loudly for the smelling salts over this look at the princes’ relations with the media, citing such outrages as the documentary having annoyed members of the royal family, and Rajan’s previously expressed republican views. On both counts: so what? Everyone has views, and it’s pathetic of so-called free speech nuts to pretend that they haven’t; he certainly didn’t push them in the programme. Even accounting for their long-term interest in attacking the BBC, we have to wonder why the enemies of cancel culture are trying to cancel him for it. Given that the only human right they care about is free speech, this seems an awkward spot to be occupying. Their other bugbear, apparently, is the BBC’s “incendiary” timing, after the recent exposé of the lies behind Martin Bashir’s Panorama interview with Diana. OK, but these are distant past events. If you want a more contemporary instance of “timing”, the Mail on Sunday only this week lost its appeal against a privacy action brought by Meghan – yet no one is suggesting they suspend all coverage of her. The spectacle of tabloid journalists – ANY journalists – demanding the royal family get shown an entire documentary before it airs, so they can approve it, is hardcore through-the-looking-glass stuff. Do the papers show the royal households the entire proof copy front page before they run with this or that anonymous briefing? Of course they don’t. “Hello – we’ve got some chiselling medium who says Meghan’s a cow and Di would have voted Brexit – can we just run the headline past William and Harry to make sure they’re absolutely thrilled with it?” I guess the chance to rubbish the BBC for not doing something they’d never dream of doing themselves is simply too tempting to resist – but really it’s just the most extreme hypocrisy, when they have profited handsomely for decades from the very system of covert gossip it touched on. Anonymous briefing is the royal beat’s lifeblood, helped by the fact royal households are famously Earth’s most bitchy workplaces (not even newspaper offices or the BBC come close). The idea that the royal family could claim with any certainty that one or several of their ludicrous retinues HADN’T briefed a journalist is absurd. They never STOP briefing. The whole point of working for these people for half the money you could get elsewhere is so that you can convince yourself you’re Deep Throat because you’ve divulged a spat about a tiara. That, and the constant possibility of a knee-trembler in the silver cupboard with some likeminded house elf (listen, I’m not knocking it). The self-delusion frequently spreads to those who cover the royals. One of the most hilarious genres is the first-person article by either the “legendary” royal correspondent or the “legendary” royal photographer, along the lines of: “What’s happened to my former cheeky-chappie friend Prince Harry?” To which the answer is: he’s not your friend, he never liked you and there was never any “mutual respect” for each other’s work. You were barely tolerated: the end. The relationship between press and royals is like the relationship between stalker and stalkee, or Britain and the US. Which is to say, only one side thinks there is one. Think of the Swiss photocall at which a boom mic picked up Prince Charles observing the dutiful ranks of royal press. “Bloody people,” he remarked to William and Harry, before catching sight of the BBC’s Nicholas Witchell. “I can’t bear that man anyway. He’s so awful, he really is.” Decades of absolute obsequiousness from Witchell, and this is what he gets for it. But my absolute favourite part of this story is that the BBC was widely reported to have been punished by Charles for it – having its reporters not called at press conferences, a documentary about Camilla given to ITV, and so on. Clarence House denied it, unconvincingly. But to summarise: if THEY are overheard calling you awful, YOU get punished. I can’t help feeling something rather similar is happening with the continuing saga of the Rajan documentary, in which the behaviour of the royal households and some newspapers will ultimately be found to be the fault of the BBC. Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnistExhibition of the week Derek Jarman The visionary film-maker was also a powerful artist. This is a full survey of a great British radical. • Manchester Art Gallery until 10 April Also showing Louis Wain Psychedelic cats mingle with the feline cartoons of this delightful animal artist in a show that explores his later life as a psychiatric patient, at one of Britain’s most fascinating small museums. • Bethlem Museum of the Mind, Beckenham from 4 December until 14 April Sutapa Biswas Films and paintings that mix autobiography, history and politics in a vision of colonialism’s legacy. • Arnolfini, Bristol until 13 February Louise Bourgeois Excellent sampling of the revered dream artist’s uncanny works from the Artist Rooms collecfion. • Tate Liverpool until 16 January Life in a Cup A celebration of the cultures of coffee in the Islamic world, where the coffee house was invented more than 400 years ago. • British Museum, London until September 2022 Image of the week Njideka Akunyili Crosby’s painting is currently showing at Tate Britain’s Life Between Islands: Caribbean-British Art 1950s-Now. It is an exhibition of protests and pleasures, celebrations and insurrections. Several years in the making, and as important as it is timely – as well as long overdue – it is also an exhibition of arrivals, departures and returns. What we learned The young Beatles larking around backstage was Mike McCartney’s best photograph Our critic visited the pub that won the Turner prize – and couldn’t get a pint Janette Beckman has learned plenty from her four decades photographing subcultures Creatives from Miles Davis to Sidney Poitier were part of a subversive fashion wave Fabian Muir’s photos from North Korea give an insight into the shuttered nation Howardena Pindell was newly inspired by a near-death experience It’s time for UK museums to face up to the country’s past The Rijksmuseum’s new Vermeer show may be the last of its kind Masterpiece of the week Pieter Saenredam: The Interior of the Grote Kerk at Haarlem (1636-7) This ethereal painter of architectural space delights in the pure geometry of circular columns and the still emptiness of a near-deserted church. It is tempting to see Saenredam as a modern artist. His feel for stripped down white space is almost minimalist. Flat diamond panels on columns interrupt the whiteness, like canvases by Malevich or Mondrian. But Saenredam lived in the 1600s and reflects his own age. The Protestant Reformation stripped northern churches bare, often unleashing waves of violent iconoclasm against the art and relics that filled medieval churches. Instead of mourning that, Saenredam sees beauty and mystery in the new look, and finds a new holiness in the matter of fact. This painting ponders where the sacred can be found in a material world. National Gallery, London Don’t forget To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign. Sign up to the Art Weekly newsletter If you don’t already receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here. Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comWith the US supreme court seemingly poised to exploit its conservative supermajority to undermine or overturn the landmark Roe v Wade decision, Democrats are vowing to make abortion a defining issue of next year’s midterm elections, embracing what they view as a political silver lining in an otherwise nightmare scenario. As the justices weigh whether to uphold a Mississippi law banning most abortions after 15 weeks, far earlier than Roe allows, and a request by the state that they explicitly overturn the historic 1973 ruling, Democrats and their allies have promised a fight. Across the electoral battlefield, they are kindling what they hope will be a political reckoning over abortion. “It’s earth-shattering,” said Jenny Lawson, vice-president of organizing and engagement campaigns for Planned Parenthood Action Fund. “The court’s actions are going to change the way people think about reproductive freedom and how essential it is. It will be a driving force of the election, undoubtedly.” During oral arguments on Wednesday, the six conservative justices on the nine-member bench signaled they were comfortable with Mississippi’s abortion law, despite the precedent established by Roe in 1973, affirmed in 1992, that women have a right to end their pregnancy until the point of fetal viability, at about 24 weeks. That law has been blocked by lower courts and the state appealed. The case, Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization, pits Mississippi against the last abortion clinic in the state. Several justices appeared willing to overturn Roe entirely, in what would be a momentous decision allowing states to govern the procedure, though the signals were less clear on that pivotal point. A decision is expected in June or July, arriving in the heat of the 2022 political campaign season. While the issue of abortion has traditionally been a more powerful motivator for Republican and evangelical voters, Democrats say there are signs the political debate is shifting in their favor as the latest and fundamental threat to abortion rights comes into clearer focus. Already facing daunting odds next year, given Joe Biden’s sinking poll numbers, Republican gerrymandering, and a poor showing in last month’s off-year elections, Democrats were searching for a new approach to reset the political dynamics. They are hopeful that an intense focus on abortion will not only rally their base but win back suburban swing voters who have shifted toward the Republican party since Donald Trump’s exit from the White House. “Elected officials should be unapologetic about championing and protecting abortion access,” Lawson said. “There’s nothing to spin. The threat is so real and there’s no state in the nation where banning abortion is popular.” After the oral arguments, Democrats and party officials signaled they were prepared to use abortion as a cudgel against Republicans in battleground states like Nevada, Florida, Arizona and Wisconsin. In a statement, the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, the campaign arm of Senate Democrats, said abortion access would be a “defining issue” of next year’s elections. “Abortion rights are hanging in the balance at the supreme court, and the threat to Roe is very real,” Senator Patty Murray of Washington, the No 3 Senate Democrat, said in a floor speech on Wednesday. “Why? Because for decades, extreme Republicans have attacked abortion rights from every angle and they are continuing their non-stop efforts to build a country where patients are forced to remain pregnant and carry their pregnancies to term against their will.” Republicans see political advantages as well, after a decades-long conservative campaign to push the federal judiciary to the right, with the ultimate goal of overruling Roe. “Today is our day,” congressman Steve Scalise of Louisiana, the No 2 House Republican, told supporters outside the supreme court on Wednesday. “This is what we’ve been working for.” If the court overrules Roe, 21 states have currently unenforceable laws on the books that would ban or severely restricts abortion access almost immediately. Already, Republican-controlled legislatures are pushing new restrictions and copycat legislation of a Texas law that effectively prohibits abortions after six weeks and makes no exceptions for rape or incest. The supreme court allowed the ban to go into effect while the justices consider challenges to the law. Molly Murphy, a pollster with the Democratic consulting firm ALG Research who recently surveyed battleground state voters on abortion, said it could be a potent issue for Democrats. But to be successful, she said Democrats must “connect the dots” for voters who support Roe but don’t yet perceive the threat to abortion access as likely or imminent. She encouraged them to highlight “punitive measures,” like the Texas abortion law, as a way to brand Republicans as extreme on the issue. “Awareness of the Texas law is very, very high,” she said. “But for a lot of these voters, they don’t necessarily believe that it’s going to happen where they live. They don’t necessarily know the Republicans are trying to do this across the country.” Emphasizing Republicans’ efforts to curtail abortions would also serve to undermine their economic message, Murphy said. “They’re not going to fix the economy or bring down costs. They’re going to ban abortion,” she said, boiling down the argument for Democrats. “That’s what they want to do and that’s what their priorities are.” Democratic strategists believe Republicans face a “dog who caught the car” conundrum over abortion. For decades, Republicans have energized their conservatives with promises to ban abortion. But now the political landscape has shifted and Democrats say Republicans will have to defend their anti-abortion views in a way they didn’t when the threat was theoretical. “Republicans are between a rock and a hard place here,” said Chris Hayden, a spokesperson for the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. John Fetterman, the Pennsylvania lieutenant governor and a Democratic candidate for the state’s open Senate seat, called on Senate Democrats to abolish the filibuster and pass federal legislation codifying abortion rights. “If you won’t do what it takes to pass this bill now, when abortion rights are on the line, then you’re not pro-choice,” he said in a statement. “It’s that simple.”Monday There aren’t many public figures whose deaths, when announced, can trigger audible anguish, but Stephen Sondheim was one of them. At the end of last week, the alert popped up on my phone. Alone in my living room, I said loudly: “Oh no.” It wasn’t just the music. Without growing dated, Sondheim himself seemed like a figure from a long ago and possibly mythical era, in which people neither tap-danced for favour nor fawned. In 2008, the late Elaine Stritch, one of his great leading ladies, recalled doing a Sondheim benefit and bringing the house down with Broadway Baby and The Ladies Who Lunch. “I really nailed it – standing ovation – and I came off stage and Steve Sondheim squeezed my hand.” This was, she said, an unprecedented level of praise from someone not given to hyperbole. He encouraged and mentored the best of Broadway, with an economy that kept the focus on them. I interviewed Sondheim in 2010. Six years later – six years! – I saw him again and he was still angry about a word I’d used to describe the behaviour of his poodles; they had, I had written, “fussed”. The image summoned, he said, was of small, silly dogs, when his two were large and handsome. I must have looked nonplussed. The word “fussed” – he paused, ominously – struck him as particularly unfriendly to him as a gay man, an interpretation I was so taken aback by, and more generally by the experience of being told off by Sondheim, that I practically had a heart attack on his sofa, remaining so stricken and destabilised that for the rest of the encounter, he was excessively, extravagantly kind. Every word mattered. Tuesday The debate around Omicron and how worried we should be – “cause for concern, not a cause for panic”, said President Biden this week, a distinction not fully recognised by the markets – comes in second to the question of how to pronounce it. As a friend points out, who among us knows the Greek letters much beyond epsilon? And why aren’t the variants going in strict alphabetical order? (The answer, clarified by the World Health Organization, is that they jumped to the 15th letter of the Greek alphabet because some of the skipped letters sound like common surnames – a needless-sounding precaution until one recalls that vandals attacked the home of a paediatrician in Wales, daubing it with the word “paedo”, thinking her job title meant paedophile). The New York Times, meanwhile, offers a handy guide to pronouncing omicron, that for speakers of British English only serves to confuse. Is “AH-muh-kraan”, as the paper has it, intended as phonetic spelling for all of us, or only for those who already turn “hot” into “haht” and “from” into “frahm”? Wednesday Elizabeth Holmes, the disgraced founder of Theranos who is on trial for fraud, made a schedule on hotel notepaper more than 10 years ago that has come up once again in court papers this week. If Holmes and her company had succeeded, this note would now be enshrined in every MBA syllabus as the roadmap to becoming a guru. As it is, her commitment to rising at 4am and reminding herself to thank God, before deciding 12 hours in advance what kind of dressing she’ll be wanting with dinner (“garlic/balsamic”), only serves to make her downfall seem inevitable. The first half of the memo is a timetable, which while odd – she describes one 50-minute period with the words, “change, shower, shave, perfect” – is less odd than the second half, in which Holmes jots down guidelines on how to behave. Her defence attorney claims the advice came from her former business partner Sunny Balwani, who Holmes is accusing of abuse and coercion. He denies the allegations. The tone is reminiscent of a mirthless teen diary in which one exhorts oneself to be an entirely new person. “I do not react,” she writes. “I do not hesitate.” “I give immediate feedback, non-emotionally.” “I speak rarely. When I do, crisp and concise.” “My hands are always in my pockets or gesturing.” If this is Holmes as she wanted to be, it raises a curious shadow image of how she possibly once was: voluble, nervy, erratic, unsure, chewing her fingernails or picking at scabs. Thursday Defenders of Holmes make the case she is the victim of sexism, so that when male CEOs deploy fake-it-til-you-make-it strategies and fail, they aren’t vilified as she was. This may be true. I was aware this week, while watching the supreme court inch closer to gutting abortion law, that I was harder on one judge than the rest. Mid-week, oral arguments were heard in Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization, an abortion case from Mississippi that if upheld, would effectively overturn Roe v Wade. Here was Justice Samuel Alito, saying with all the wisdom of a large stone that “the foetus has an interest in having a life” – an interest apparently not shared by adult women. Here was Chief Justice John G Roberts Jr, who suggested that by imposing a limit of 15 weeks on abortion, the state of Mississippi gave women plenty of time to make up their minds. It was, however, Amy Coney Barrett, the supreme court justice and devout mother of seven, who moved me to another level of rage. The burden of parental rights, a key tenet of Roe v Wade, might, she argued, be made obsolete by the possibility of adoption. No abortion? No biggie. Carry the baby to term, give it up, move on. Coney Barrett’s logic was no worse than that of the other conservative judges, but oh, how much more appalling she seemed. Friday If I could’ve put it off for another week, I would have, but people in my house were harassing me. And so out of the closet comes the fake Christmas tree and for an hour everyone decorates. The home-made angel, fashioned from toilet roll and covered in scribbles, always drags at my heart, but beyond that, the experience is agony. In the background, Sondheim plays on the sound system, as it has done all week. Order, design, tension, balance, harmony; the composer, I would hazard, never had to watch two six-year-olds decorate a tree and put all the tinsel and baubles on one side. • This article was amended on 8 December 2021 to more accurately reflect the events concerning the paediatrician in Wales.On an industrial estate outside Swindon, it’s the busiest time of year at Amazon’s newest warehouse in Britain. Black boxes rattle along miles of conveyor belt, carrying everything from toys to painkillers amid a cacophony of alarms and the faint hum of Christmas songs. “I’m looking around here at anything that might not be right, but it’s actually running very smoothly,” says David Tindal, the general manager of the Swindon fulfilment centre. “The team has been fantastic. We spend the whole year preparing for this peak time, like a good football club preparing for the cup final.” Known internally as BRS2 – using a naming system based on the nearest big airport (in this case, Bristol) – the warehouse is a vision in gleaming concrete, steel and glass landed on the Wiltshire countryside. The vast site is a stark reminder of Amazon’s might. As well as upending consumer habits and standing accused of gaining an unfair advantage by paying too little in tax and hollowing out high streets, the company is creating huge distortions in the jobs market. The new depot has created its own gravitational force sucking staff away from other businesses such as care homes. The latest outpost of Jeff Bezos’s empire also illustrates the shifting economic sands in the western world. In July, the nearby Honda car factory closed – a decision blamed partly on Brexit – with the loss of about 3,000 direct jobs plus thousands more in the supply chain, many of which were high-paying, skilled roles. Amazon has hired 2,000 staff in a matter of months in Swindon, opening the site earlier than planned at the start of November to exploit the online shopping boom in Britain, and advertising roles as “a job for life, not just for Christmas”. With hiring bonuses of up to £3,000 at some of its 150 UK warehouses, and starting pay of £11.10 an hour – more than £2 higher than the legal minimum, and above the £9.90 real living wage – the firm is aiming to shake a reputation as one of Britain’s worst employers, notorious for low-paid jobs and bleak working conditions. For Sue Houldey, the operations director at Coate Water Care, which runs three care homes in the town and six others across the west country, Amazon’s arrival in the area coincides with the toughest hiring challenges of her career. “We’re competing with Amazon and the big warehouses, as well as hospitality, for the same people. It can be very frustrating,” she says, sitting in the cafe of the Church View nursing home in a quiet residential area of the town. Coate Water hasn’t lost staff directly to Amazon, but competition for a slim pool of candidates is fierce. Insufficient funding for social care and soaring fixed costs make it difficult to raise pay much higher than the £8.91-per-hour legal minimum, making a job at the nearby Amazon depot 25% more lucrative. With more than 100,000 vacancies in the care sector nationwide, many staff are leaving to work for Amazon and other higher-paying jobs across the country. “Nobody wants to discuss it because it’s unpalatable. But the funding that we get doesn’t allow us to pay probably what we want to pay for our staff,” says Houldey. As with retail, winter is peak time for the care sector, except the stakes are far higher than the rush for Christmas presents. Houldey must meet Care Quality Commission requirements for sufficient staff numbers. “If [you are Amazon and] one of your workers doesn’t turn up, it’s like: hey ho, everyone else can just work a bit harder, or we might not get stuff done. Those rules don’t apply in care. It’s not an equal playing field.” Official figures show a record 1.2m job vacancies across Britain, with shortages of lorry drivers in particular attracting national attention amid panic-buying of petrol and gaps on supermarket shelves this autumn. Approaching Christmas, there are many reasons for the employee drought. Britain’s workforce has shrunk since the onset of Covid-19, with more than half a million more people out of work and not looking for a job. as Some have taken early retirement and young people have pushed back the start of their working lives. More than 200,000 EU citizens have left the workforce, and Covid restrictions and Brexit migration rules are limiting arrivals. With more than a million furloughed workers leaving the scheme after it closed at the end of September, and others looking for a new job in the so-called “great resignation”, job switching has hit record levels. Amazon has played a substantial role in Britain’s labour market flux, hiring 10,000 people in the past six months alone to take its overall UK workforce to 55,000. The arrival of a new warehouse might be hailed by local politicians for “creating jobs”, but switching from an old employer is more likely, in a form of labour market creative destruction with winners and losers. In Swindon, a town with a total workforce of about 110,000 where unemployment is below the UK average at 3.9%, the arrival of a big new employer hiring thousands of staff has a noticeable impact. “When you drop a stone like Amazon into the local labour pool, it makes quite big waves,” says Tony Wilson, the director of the Institute for Employment Studies. He says the company is following a similar path to McDonald’s two decades ago, when negative media coverage pushed the fast-food chain to clean up its act. “They have to have good employment practices because there’s so much attention on them. As a consequence, a misconception can form relatively quickly that this is all crap work, and the reality is it isn’t.” In the ripple effect of Amazon coming to town, Domingos Dias has seen more than 100 of his colleagues leave the Marks &amp; Spencer warehouse (run on an outsourced basis by DHL) where he works. The departures have left resources stretched. “Where you would have 10 people, 20 people, they now try to do it with five,” he says. “Since Amazon came, they had these opportunities and people went for the better prospects for higher salary.” The GMB trade union shop steward is pushing for higher pay for employees and agency staff, who are paid less than at Amazon on £9.45 an hour. “Suddenly there was a thing that this new warehouse is coming. The guys who were working for 20 long years on agency contracts, they didn’t have any loyalty for Marks &amp; Spencer and DHL, so they saw this and grabbed the opportunity.” Pay is rising fast in warehousing work, according to figures from the jobs website Indeed, with the median hourly wage up 11% this year from £9.25 to £10.27. Pay in other sectors is rising more slowly, and failing to keep pace with soaring living costs. The prospect of higher pay is enticing workers to the warehouse, contrary to the reputation of Amazon as a poverty employer. Still, critics argue that Bezos – among the world’s richest people, with a fortune of more than $200bn (£150bn) – could easily afford to pay more, rather than launching a space tourism business. Hours are still long and the company does not recognise trade unions. The timing of Amazon’s arrival could prove helpful, however, after Honda gave up on its factory after more than three decades in Swindon. Tindal bumps into former Honda employees on a regular basis at BRS2, including an engineer with 30 years’ experience maintaining robotic arms – used for spraying cars with paint – who now looks after the army of blue robots that scuttle goods around a vast cage of consumer goods in the Amazon warehouse. Jay Colsell, who worked on the final shift at Swindon after five years with Honda, is another. He says pay was higher and hours shorter in his old job, but there are more opportunities for career progression at Amazon. “Honda was busy. It was hard work; good money but you worked for it. Amazon is also good but you don’t have to run around lots, you just have to be proactive.” A modern-day equivalent of a Victorian factory, only on a dual carriageway rather than the railway that put Swindon on the map two centuries ago, the new warehouse covers an area the size of nearly seven football pitches. Tindal recruited about 600 staff ahead of time and trained them at Amazon’s older Bristol fulfilment centre in order to launch as smoothly as possible at the start of November. The general manager, who has opened three other sites for the firm from scratch – at Daventry, Rugby and Milton Keynes – says even more expansion is expected after the Christmas rush. “We’re probably still advertising, I haven’t checked. We’re going to pause for now until the new year, but then we’ll be hiring some more.”As breakthrough performances go, Antony Sher’s as Richard III at Stratford-upon-Avon in June 1984 was beyond astounding. He gatecrashed this play’s performance history and threw down an audacious gauntlet to the hallowed shades of Edmund Kean, Henry Irving, Laurence Olivier and, on that same Stratford stage, Ian Holm. Just as Irving’s bells stopped ringing on “the lascivious pleasing of a lute” in the opening soliloquy, so did Sher’s background music, and he instantly produced, with an obscene flourish, a pair of black medical crutches, resuming the speech with two swinging, ape-like hops to the front of the stage, an unforgettable creepy arachnoid. That, in a lesser actor, might have been that. But Sher, who has died aged 72, developed this spitefully animated cartoon into a complicated study of pathology, unctuousness and glistening malevolence way beyond anything revealed in the role, arguably, before or since. In Year of the King, the first of his many books, Sher told the story of Bill Alexander’s RSC production, accompanied by a plethora of remarkable drawings – he was a fine artist, an accomplished writer and an indisputably great actor. And, as with all great actors, there were areas of critical dispute, of “going too far” or of “hogging the stage”. You could equally argue that there is far too little of that sort of thing in the theatre these days, and more’s the pity. Sher was a great admirer of Steven Berkoff, in whose expressionist, balletic adaptation of Kafka’s The Trial he appeared as a bespectacled Joseph K at the National Theatre in 1991; in the same season, he referenced his RSC crutches by surging manically down stage on a pair of upended tommy guns as Brecht’s Arturo Ui, for which Shakespeare’s hunchbacked toad was a prototype. Most of his career was at the RSC after he joined in 1982 to play a capering, clownish Fool to Michael Gambon’s mighty King Lear. He stole a few notices there, too, and allegedly had to be reminded by Gambon that Shakespeare’s play was called King Lear, not “King Lear plus a cunt in a red nose”. He was the first Fool ever killed on stage by his master; not without feeling, one imagined, this act of smother-love. Richard was followed by a flurry of extraordinary performances rooted in Sher’s innate sense of not-quite-belonging as a gay, Jewish South African. In some ways you could see that his long struggle with his own identity paid off more than handsomely in a savagely embittered Shylock, a Greek Orthodox-style Malvolio, a murderous, full-throttle Vindice in The Revenger’s Tragedy and a grubby, unpleasantly perverse Iago to the refined South African Othello of Sello Maake ka-Ncube in 2004. Recrimination and vengeance were his forte. He was less successful as Falstaff, and perhaps saw with hindsight the wisdom of Olivier in never having played the role. But he strode magnificently through The Winter’s Tale as Leontes; as Macbeth (opposite Harriet Walter, the best RSC pairing since Ian McKellen and Judi Dench in 1976), both of these in 1998-99; as a wizened old Prospero (2009) in another pertinent South African reimagining; and finally as King Lear (2016), appearing first enthroned in a glass cage, swathed in furs, prone to violent mood swings and, said Michael Billington, “unbearably moving” with David Troughton’s blinded Gloucester on the Dover cliff. He was a marvellous Willy Loman, too (Walter, again, as his stoically forbearing wife), in Arthur Miller’s tragedy Death of a Salesman (2015). Sher’s grandparents were Jews who experienced persecution in Lithuania in the 1890s and fled to Cape Town, where he grew up insulated against the injustices of apartheid. His father, Emmanuel Sher, was an exporter dealing in animal skins and hides, and he remained particularly close to his mother, Margery, who encouraged and enjoyed his success. Along with his two brothers and sister, he was well educated – at Sea Point boys’ junior and high schools in Cape Town – and the household had black servants. From the beach at Sea Point he could see Robben Island, where Nelson Mandela was incarcerated. After his compulsory year in the South African army, he came to the UK – it was reading the monthly magazine Plays and Players that ignited his theatrical ambitions – and he took a BA acting course at Manchester Polytechnic (now Manchester Metropolitan University), where he was briefly married to an American fellow student. He trained at Webber Douglas – other London drama schools rejected him – from 1969 to 1971, and plunged into repertory theatres in Liverpool, Nottingham and Edinburgh. At the Liverpool Everyman, where I first saw him, he played Ringo Starr in Willy Russell’s John, Paul, George, Ringo … and Bert (1974). Then he donned a leopardskin as Enoch Powell in Tarzan’s Last Stand, a withering and unnerving impersonation. This now legendary Everyman company – the theatre had been co-founded in 1964 by the director Terry Hands, who would become Sher’s key mentor at the RSC – included Julie Walters, Alison Steadman, Bill Nighy and Jonathan Pryce. He blossomed further in the London new plays explosion of the 1970s, notably with the pioneering company Gay Sweatshop alongside his friend and rival Simon Callow, and in significant early pieces by David Hare (Teeth ’n’ Smiles, 1975, with Helen Mirren and a rock band) and Caryl Churchill (Cloud Nine, 1979, with Julie Covington, Miriam Margolyes and Jim Hooper) at the Royal Court. He was in a partnership of 17 years with Hooper, who featured in Characters, his 1989 sketchbook of favourite performers and performances. Sher achieved an early prominence on television as the leering, lecherous academic Howard Kirk in Malcolm Bradbury’s The History Man in 1981 (in line with the 70s setting, Sher sported kipper ties, flares and an afro haircut) and followed through on stage in Mike Leigh’s hilarious Goose-Pimples (1981) at the Hampstead theatre and the Garrick; his character was a small-time entrepreneur who mistakenly thinks he’s arrived in a brothel in Dollis Hill, north London, when he fetches up with a nightclub croupier (Marion Bailey) whose landlord is a house-proud car salesman (Jim Broadbent). When he collected several theatre awards in 1985, Sher said he was proud to be nominated as both king and queen in the same year: Richard III and Arnold Beckoff, the drag queen hero of Harvey Fierstein’s Torch Song Trilogy at the Albery (now the Noël Coward), to whom he lent a restrained, almost melancholic, suburban glamour. He was now increasingly interjecting his classical triumphs – a barbaric and overweening Titus Andronicus co-presented by the Market theatre in Johannesburg and the National (1995), a tremendous, moving Cyrano de Bergerac at the RSC (1997), using the Anthony Burgess translation – with some telling adventures in the contemporary repertoire. For the RSC, he played leads in David Edgar’s Maydays (charting the classic journey of leftwing agitators moving rightwards), Peter Barnes’s farcical medieval pandemic epic Red Noses and, the first contemporary play in the new Swan at Stratford in 1989, Peter Flannery’s Singer, a furious caricature of the 60s London landlord Peter Rachman. Later, in 1997, he delivered one of his sweetest, most obsessional performances as the painter Stanley Spencer, the priapic mystic of Cookham, in a play by Pam Gems at the National. By then he had kicked a self-confessedly serious cocaine habit. He went into a rehab clinic in 1996, supported by his partner, the RSC director Gregory Doran, whom he had met when they first worked together in Stratford in 1987. The first, and most acclaimed, of Sher’s several novels, Middlepost (1988), was a fictional saga of his grandfather’s journey from the Russian shtetl to South Africa. Part critical love affair, part exorcism, his relationship with his home country seeped further into his work with every passing year. His first play, I.D., at the Almeida in London in 2003, was about the assassination of Dr Hendrik Verwoerd, the South African prime minister and architect of apartheid, by a Greek Mozambican immigrant in 1966. Two other plays reflected his passion and commitment to politics and aesthetics: Primo (2004), a one-man show for himself set in Auschwitz and based on the writings of Primo Levi; and The Giant (2008), which fascinatingly fictionalised a struggle between Michelangelo (John Light) and Leonardo da Vinci (Roger Allam) over the commission for the David statue in Florence, with their mutual apprentice a catalytic agent in Renaissance gay culture. His film career was virtually nonexistent, though he was an excellent Benjamin Disraeli in Dench’s belated breakthrough movie, John Madden’s Mrs Brown (1997), and popped up as Dr Moth in Shakespeare in Love (1998) and as Adolf Hitler in Peter Richardson’s ribald spoof Churchill: The Hollywood Years (2004). Sher worked with Doran as his director at every opportunity, before and after the latter succeeded Michael Boyd as the RSC’s artistic director in 2012. They formed a civil partnership in 2005 and were married in 2015, sharing homes in Islington, north London, and outside Stratford-upon-Avon. Sher’s last stage appearance in Stratford-upon-Avon, in April 2019, was as a bibulous old thespian with terminal liver cancer cared for by a black South African nurse – played by John Kani, the play’s author. Kunene and the King, a co-production by the RSC and the Fugard theatre in Cape Town, was directed by Janice Honeyman. Its transfer to the West End in January 2020 was closed by the pandemic two months later. Sher was knighted in 2000, and held honorary doctorates from the universities of Liverpool, Warwick and Cape Town. He is survived by Doran. • Antony Sher, actor, writer and artist, born 14 June 1949; died 2 December 2021 • This article was amended on 7 December 2021, to make it clear that Sher’s grandparents’ reason for leaving Lithuania, then part of Russia, was to escape persecution. On 8 December 2021 it was further amended: Sher took his BA course at Manchester Polytechnic (now Manchester Metropolitan University) rather than Manchester University.Whether it’s immunity from freedom of information requests or paying estate or corporation tax, the royal family enjoys a panoply of financial privileges denied to the general public. But nothing sets them more apart from the common citizen than their special position over sealed wills and their inherited wealth. This was first brought home last April with Prince Philip’s death and the palace’s high court application to seal his will. With the publication last Wednesday of a full list of more than 30 sealed royal wills, following a judgment in September – not to mention a legal challenge to the high court by the Guardian – we know more details of what was decided (Philip’s will and those of future deceased royals will be opened only after at least 90 years), and why it was decided (the tradition of sealed royal wills has lasted almost a century and in the court’s view there is no reason to end this practice that legitimately preserves their privacy). The president of the family division of the high court, Sir Andrew McFarlane, ruled that senior members of the royal family had to be exempted from the law requiring the publication of wills. That was “necessary to enhance the protection afforded to the private lives of this unique group of individuals, in order to protect the dignity and standing of the public role of the sovereign and other close members of her family”. But dig a little deeper and this release of the names of sealed royal wills raises more questions than answers. For a start, it is not such a generous act of transparency as it claims to be, since the information has already been accessible for more than a decade. While I was researching a book on royal wills in 2010, the central probate office gave me an exact typed written copy of the list. What’s more, the list contains a number of anomalies that suggests that the whole policy of sealing “royal” wills is not clearly thought through. For some reason, the list originally included the name of Leopold de Rothschild, which was later removed after the high court acknowledged this was “an error” since he was not a member of the royal family; but it does not inspire confidence. In addition, the list inexplicably contains the name of a distant relative of Prince Philip, Prince George of Denmark, which suggests that even if you are a member of a small European royal house, if you make a big legal fuss you can keep your will under wraps. The judgment also fails to consider the public interest effectively. The role of the attorney general was to represent the public interest by balancing points favouring public inspection with those against. But a careful reading shows that on almost all matters, the attorney general sided with the palace, and there was no appropriate application in support of full disclosure. This lack of representation of the public’s interest in full disclosure, in the shape of the press, is an important plank in the Guardian’s current legal action against the high court. This leaves the mystery of why the royal family insists on having its wills closed while the principle of full openness to prevent fraud applies to everyone else in the country. Norman Baker, the former government minister, has argued that they do so to hide just how much money they receive from taxpayers. He said: “The main embarrassing fact is just how much money they have accumulated from public funds. If the public knew just how hugely rich they are, they might take a view it was high time public funding was cut.” But this may be just half the story. In order to connect with the mass of the population, the royals have to appear less rich than they actually are. If the electorate knew that they were inheriting vast sums, they would be less willing to give them such a generous sovereign grant from their taxes. David McClure is the author of The Queen’s True Worth‘You guys are a horrible audience!” Like Patti Harrison at this address a few weeks ago, or US compatriot Kate Berlant, Megan Stalter doesn’t think it’s her job to entertain us – but our job to appreciate her. It’s a winning mode of comic performance, born of social media and its culture of preening self-presentation, and Hacks star Stalter (making her UK debut) has it down to a T. She barely has material, but she has a ravening ego and a tireless fascination with everything she herself says and does on stage. The persona, like Stalter’s myriad online alter egos, is delusional: this wannabe queen of stage and screen has nothing to back up the brittle self-image. The first half is all about Stalter trying to get her intro right. Her guitarist is ordered to loiter stage-right, his awkwardness puncturing Stalter’s dream of professionalism. An audience member is co-opted to announce her entrance on stage – and another, for whatever reason, to lunge at her murderously from the front row. Then there’s a pause for Stalter to have incredible sex (she tells us, desperate to impress) with her husband, hidden in the wings. It’s all super-silly, light on its feet and unpredictable – and Stalter offsets the faux-solipsism with an endearing bubbliness. She giggles, she banters with the crowd – then side-eyes sarcastically and pivots her attention elsewhere. The “show”, when it belatedly begins, consists of a freewheeling story about a head injury, which tries and fails to illustrate her showbiz commitment, and an eccentric grocery-store anecdote leading to a malfunctioning song. Stalter plays the failures straight, never less than convincing as a look-at-me narcissist too dim to apprehend her own mediocrity. Until the end, when the mask slips a little, in a staged reading (with another audience member) of a supposed scene from Stalter’s new play. It’s fun enough, but the audience participation sections can feel like filler, less thrilling that Stalter uncut. Arguably, she doesn’t solve the conundrum of how to structure a satisfying show around a character who could never feasibly structure a satisfying show. But the character herself, and her creator? You can’t take your eyes off them. Megan Stalter is at Soho theatre, London, until 11 December.Chacun Pour Soi carried untold millions of pounds to defeat on his only previous start in Britain at Cheltenham in March, and the painful memory of that disappointment may still be a little fresh for some punters as Willie Mullins’s chaser is as big as 11-10 for the Tingle Creek Chase at Sandown Park on Saturday. Set the Champion Chase to one side, however, and in every other respect, Chacun Pour Soi (2.25) looks and feels like an odds-on shot. He seemed to falter on the hill at Cheltenham but was hugely impressive in three Grade One wins last season, at Leopardstown in December and February and then Punchestown – like Sandown, a right-handed track - in April. The form of all three victories was backed up by the clock and while Nube Negra was just in front of him at Cheltenham, Dan Skelton’s runner has 11lb to find with the favourite on Timeform’s ratings, at a course that will play to Chacun Pour Soi’s strengths. Greaneteen and Bryony Frost, in fact, could be a bigger danger on the form of their Grade One win over course and distance in April. Chacun Pour Soi won first time up last season, however, and if he is anywhere close to his best, he should account for Saturday’s rivals with something to spare. Aintree 1.30 White Pepper improved from her hurdling debut to win readily in a strong time at Galway in October and can add to Gavin Cromwell’s impressive 20% strike-rate in the UK over the last two years. Sandown Park 1.50 Edwardstone was giving 8lb to the runner-up at Warwick last time but ran out a comfortable winner and looks a top-class recruit to fences. Aintree 2.05 Unlike a couple of his main rivals, Imperial Aura looks ideally suited to this sharp three-mile test. Aintree 2.40 Snow Leopardess does not have the benefit of a previous run over the National fences but she has scarcely put a foot wrong over fences so far and is interesting at around 6-1 to rise to the challenge. Sandown Park 3.00 The form of last season’s Midlands National at Uttoxeter is solid and Highland Hunter, fifth there and unraced since, is interesting at around 8-1 if the steep climb on Paul Nicholls’s gallops has worked its magic. Aintree 3.15 Tamar Bridge has been won with something to spare on his last two starts and starts his career in handicaps on a workable mark. Sandown Park 3.35 Hudson De Grugy has won his last three starts over this course and distance and put up another career-best performance on his return to action here last month. He is up just 4lb for his latest success and looks a good bet at around 9-2 to make the necessary progress.Belarus has threatened to retaliate after the US, UK and other western countries introduced a new round of sanctions over its government’s human rights abuses and the orchestration of a migration crisis on the border with Europe. “The goal of this entire policy is to economically strangle Belarus,” the Belarusian foreign ministry said on Friday, while the country’s authoritarian leader, Alexander Lukashenko, called the pressure “unprecedented”. The foreign ministry said there would be “tough, asymmetric but appropriate measures” in response. Officials did not say what those measures would be. Belarus has already shown it is ready to go to extremes in its growing diplomatic standoff with western countries. Lukashenko is accused of encouraging thousands of people from the Middle East to enter Europe via Belarus in retaliation for earlier sanctions tied to his efforts to arrest and punish his domestic opposition. The migration crisis has subsided somewhat as Belarus has begun pulling asylum seekers back from the border, sending hundreds on flights to Iraq and housing more than 1,000 people in a logistics warehouse where conditions are extremely basic. Still, Poland reported 46 attempts to cross the border on Friday, including what it called “violent” attempts near two border guard posts. Belarusian forces have been accused of guiding people to the border and cutting through border defences. Polish troops have been accused of beating and mistreating people who have crossed the border. Rights groups have criticised the European Commission after it proposed that three countries sharing a border with Belarus should be allowed to hold people in special asylum processing centres for up to 16 weeks, up from the current maximum of four. Western governments had vowed to sanction Minsk but the hardline reactions of states bordering Belarus toward migrants and refugees exacerbated tensions in the economic bloc. EU sanctions targeted the state airline Belavia, the Syrian airline Cham Wings, Minsk hotels and tour agencies in a targeted punishment of organisations that enabled the movement of thousands of people from Iraq, Syria, and other countries to Europe on a path that became known as the “Belarus route”. “We again demand that the Lukashenko regime immediately and completely halt its orchestrating of irregular migration across its borders with the EU,” the EU, UK, US and Canada said in a joint statement. “Those in Belarus or in third countries who facilitate illegal crossing of the EU’s external borders should know this comes at a substantial cost.” In its fifth round of sanctions, the UK sanctioned eight Belarusian officials and imposed an asset freeze on Belaruskali, a state-run potash fertiliser, in an effort to “target a major source of revenue and foreign currency for the Lukashenko regime”. The US targeted 20 individuals, 12 entities, blocked three aircraft and imposed restrictions on holding Belarusian sovereign debt with a maturity greater than 90 days. The economic sanctions also targeted the state-owned tourism company Tsentrkurort, a cargo carrier accused of shipping thousands of tons of ammunition and weapons to conflict zones such as Libya, and Belarusian defence and potash companies. The US also sanctioned Lukashenko’s middle son, Dmitry.The opening of Ali El Arabi’s documentary is achingly evocative in its quotidian simplicity. Under the last light of the day, a football is kicked into the air. As the camera follows the spinning ball, the comforting ordinariness is ruptured by the sight of barbed wires and housing barracks. Here is a slice of life in Zaatari refugee camp in Jordan, the world’s largest for Syrian refugees, and a story that follows the friendship of football-mad Fawzi and Mahmoud from their teenage years to early adulthood. With tender compassion, the film offers gently nuanced insight into the lives of Syrian refugees. It is peppered with endearing conversations between the teenaged boys, who talk of not only romantic crushes but also their dreams of becoming professional athletes. Captains of Zaatari is also attentive to private heartbreak, when Fawzi’s hopes of being chosen to travel with Mahmoud and other Syrian youths to Qatar for a football tournament are in the balance. Typical adolescent worries and the larger concerns of refugees – such as lack of proper healthcare and political disenfranchisement – are treated with equal poignancy and care. In contrast to a media landscape that tends to flatten the refugee experience into faceless statistics and sensationalised photographs, Captains of Zaatari uses plenty of closeups to lend the young men a palpable sense of agency; and while the colour palette is at times too saturated, and the score can get overly sentimental, this remains an wonderfully empathetic film that moves with its subjects rather than gawking at their plight from a distance. As Mahmoud eloquently puts it during a press conference at the tournament: “All a refugee needs is an opportunity, not your pity.” Captains of Zaatari is released on 6 December on Dogwoof On Demand.Wolves’ small squad is stretched to the limit by injuries but Bruno Lage’s team still have the potential to make life difficult for Liverpool. To claim any points Wolves will have to be far more clinical than they have been in a season when they have created – and wasted – plenty of chances. It will be up to Wolves’ valiant defence to ensure that Liverpool, the Premier League’s top scorers, do not put on another lesson in expert finishing. Chances are that Diogo Jota will thrive on his return to Molineux. Paul Doyle Saturday 3pm Venue Molineux Last season Wolves 0 Liverpool 1 Referee Chris Kavanagh This season G6 Y24 R2 4.33 cards/game Odds H 7-1 A 1-2 D 4-1 WOLVES Subs from Moulden, Ruddy, Hoever, Dendoncker, Bueno, Cundle, Campbell, Podence, Silva, Traoré, Bueno Doubtful Podence (Covid-19) Injured Jonny (knee, unknown), Mosquera (hamstring, unknown), Neto (knee, unknown), Marçal (Covid-19, unknown), Boly (match fitness, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y26 R01 Form DWLWDD Leading scorer Hwang 4 LIVERPOOL Subs from Kelleher, Pitaluga, N Williams, Phillips, Matip, Tsimikas, Oxlade-Chamberlain, Milner, Morton, Origi, Minamino, Gomez, Keïta Doubtful Gomez (calf), Keïta (hamstring) Injured Firmino (hamstring, 16 Dec), Jones (eye, unknown), Elliott (ankle, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y17 R0 Form WDLWWW Leading scorer Salah 13Labour has called on the Conservatives to repay donations linked to Grenfell Tower’s cladding, as bereaved families accused Lewis Hamilton’s Formula One team of taking “blood money” sponsorship from a firm that made combustible insulation used on the building. The backlash against the sponsorship of Hamilton’s racing car by Kingspan grew on Friday as more bereaved families joined calls for it to be scrapped. Michael Gove, the secretary of state for levelling up, housing and communities, urged Mercedes to reverse the deal, saying he was “deeply disappointed” that it had happened while the public inquiry is continuing. But Lisa Nandy, Gove’s Labour shadow, urged him on Friday to “take the same principled stance” by returning a 2017 donation of nearly £25,000 from a shareholder in Arconic, which made the cladding panels. She welcomed Gove’s comment that “the Grenfell community deserves better” than the sponsorship deal, but said his party should return donations from property developers that had used similar cladding. Gove, whose party has previously said donations are received in good faith and comply fully with the law, has been contacted for comment. The Grenfell Next of Kin group urged the Mercedes team boss, Toto Wolff, and Hamilton not to “sportswash sins” and accused them of being “on the wrong side of history”. Kingspan made some of the foam boards used on the tower, which the public inquiry into the disaster found “contributed to the rate and extent of vertical flame spread”. Its logo will appear on the nose cone of the Mercedes cars at this weekend’s Saudi Arabian grand prix. Hamid Ali Jafari, a member of Grenfell Next of Kin whose father was killed in the blaze, said the deal was “shocking and upsetting” and called on Mercedes and Hamilton to apologise. “If Lewis Hamilton wants to support us, he could put the logo of Grenfell on the car and show that 72 people died and four and a half years later nothing has happened,” he said. Shahrokh Aghlani, who lost his mother and his aunt in the blaze, said: “These people [Kingspan] flouted regulations and didn’t care less. Sport should stand for something in morality. I hope they do the right thing.” The Mercedes AMG Petronas Formula One team has stressed that Hamilton is not involved in the sponsorship deals. The deal was announced with pictures of Gene Murtagh, Kingspan’s chief executive, sitting on one of the Mercedes F1 cars with Wolff. The inquiry has seen emails showing that the day before the first anniversary of the disaster Murtagh instructed his PR team to push ahead with trying to shape press coverage in favour of his firm’s commercial interest, in spite of the sensitivity of the date. After a senior executive urged the firm’s PR consultant to push a story to journalists arguing against banning all combustible materials in external walls, the consultant cautioned against it, saying: “Anything that veers towards the topic of money could be taken badly.” But Murtagh insisted: “We need to push ahead from every angle and without delay.” Ed Daffarn, who escaped from the 16th floor of Grenfell, said the sponsorship deal showed “a callous indifference to the suffering and pain of the bereaved and survivors”. “To see Gene Murtagh sitting on a Mercedes Formula One car is like pouring salt into an already festering wound,” he said. In response to criticism of the sponsorship deal, a spokesperson for Kingspan said it played no role in the cladding system design, and its K15 product constituted approximately 5% of the insulation “and was used as a substitute product without Kingspan’s knowledge in a system that was not compliant with the building regulations”. Mercedes said: “Our partner Kingspan has supported, and continues to support, the vitally important work of the inquiry to determine what went wrong and why in the Grenfell Tower tragedy.”The partner of a multimillionaire who was left paralysed when her son stabbed her repeatedly has described the moment she turned from the kitchen sink to find him brandishing a knife in front of her as if they were in a crime film. Giving evidence from a spinal unit, Anne Schreiber said her son, Thomas Schreiber, looked like a wild-eyed stranger as he assaulted her at the mansion she shared with Sir Richard Sutton, who was killed in the attack. Anne Schreiber told the jury at Winchester crown court that her son had always had a temper and once strangled her. She said she suffered nightmares about Thomas since the attack in April. Schreiber has admitted killing landowner and hotelier Sutton, 83, but denies murdering him and attempting to murder his 66-year-old mother. The court has been told that the attack took place on the anniversary of his father’s death at a time when family tensions had been exacerbated by Covid lockdowns. Anne Schreiber’s evidence mainly took the form of a video recorded from the spinal unit of a hospital in Salisbury. She said her only memory of the day – 7 April – was the attack. She was listening to music and possibly singing along. She heard a “kerfuffle” and turned to find Schreiber standing there. “He looked unusual,” she said. “His eyes are … almost frightening. They looked terribly determined. I see a knife. He didn’t look as if he was going to help me peel potatoes. “He was definitely not himself; the man who came into my kitchen could have been a total stranger. The eyes were wild, his face was screwed up. He looked … very out of control.” Anne Schreiber, who now uses a wheelchair, said her son held the knife in a “threatening manner … like in crime films”, continuing: “I believe he stabbed me. I remember looking at the knife in me and being surprised that it doesn’t hurt more. I remember me saying: ‘What are you doing?’” She said she felt like a bystander looking through the window “as if it wasn’t really me there”. She believed the weapon was a “nice and sharp” knife from a block in the kitchen used to cut meat or vegetables. She added she had “awful nightmares”. “Thomas is very much part of them,” she added. “I have some awful nightmares relating to this time. I was trapped and he was my captor but they are not real.” She said she wondered where she had gone wrong and felt she had failed Schreiber, but added: “I always think I have given Tom an enormous amount of love.” She said he was a very attractive boy with blond hair but had a “furious” temper and could be very aggressive, especially to her. “I did seem to take the brunt.” She said he adored his late father, David, but found it difficult to channel his anger. “When it comes to Tom, it always ends in fisticuffs. He had a tendency to lash out.” She said: “David didn’t fail him, he spoiled him a terrible amount, and so did I, but with the love oozing on to him.” Schreiber said her son tried to strangle her in 2019 as they returned from a party in a car. She just waited until it ended. “It jolly well hurts when he puts his hand round your throat,” she said. Cross-examined by her son’s barrister, Joe Stone QC, via video link from hospital, Anne Schreiber said she recalled her son saying to her “You’re a gold-digging bitch” in the lead-up to the attack and conceded she might have told him he was drunk and acting like his father, who was an alcoholic. When asked about the 2019 incident in which she claimed her son strangled her, she said she could not now recall if he had actually strangled her. The trial continues.It’s called “health bread,” “fitness bread”, or sometimes, “muesli bread”, but in our house, we call it “misery bread,” on account of its sour taste and unwelcoming texture – it has roughly the shape and density of an insole. It costs, incredibly, $3.99 (£3) for five slices and a single slice contains 11g of fibre, or 40% of your recommended daily intake. I have been on this stuff since January and, after the results of a blood test last week, intend to talk about it for the rest of my life. Nascent studies into nutrition and lifestyle trends since March 2020 confirm what many of us already knew: that as well as stress and lethargy, part of the experience of lockdown was less exercise, more snacks and more frequent meals. Food was the only obvious pleasure and release. My grocery bill doubled. I put away family-size packs of Cheetos. We ordered a McDonald’s delivery, then ordered it again. It felt like a challenge; if I can’t go anywhere or see anyone, I will work my way through the world’s unhealthiest foods with the grim determination of someone clearing a bucket list. At the beginning of this year, my doctor told me I’d blown the roof off my cholesterol, and had 12 months to turn the ship around or she was putting me on statins. This was bad news – not only for my health, but because my record for changing habits doesn’t inspire much confidence. Years ago, I started running but found it boring and stopped. Every six months, I rampage through my apartment throwing stuff out, only to find three months later that the tide of junk has somehow returned. For three months last year, I became an entirely new person, one who stretched and did weights every morning; then every other morning; then once a week. You see where this ends. On the other hand, the prospect of orphaning my children seemed about as focusing as these things can be. In the first instance, I did what everyone does when trying to effect a radical life change: I bought stuff. The courgette spiraliser would save me, I thought, as would the olive oil spray. This entire thing could probably be fixed with a $60 set of Tupperware from Costco. Bulk roasting vegetables on a Sunday night was the answer, as was wholewheat pasta and milk so thin you could see through it. I would never eat bacon again. There were several problems with all this. Watery milk and no cheese was one thing, but have you tried courgette “pasta”? It’s not pasta, is it? It doesn’t do what pasta does. No matter how much starchy water you tip into the pan – or whatever grim fate your doctor presents you with – tomato sauce won’t stick to a plate of sloppy veg. Also: it turns out that the effort-reward ratio that makes homemade burgers worth the hassle isn’t shared by anything in the healthy fishcake family (oatmeal instead of breadcrumbs; no egg, flour, flavour or fun). My doctor had pointed for inspiration to President Obama, whose diet was said to include seven almonds a day. This, said my doctor, was the kind of discipline you needed to be president and achieve low cholesterol. As the weeks wore on, I got to know my limitations. I can’t eat single-digit almonds – if I’m going in, I’m in for fistfuls – and I can’t work with lentils, either. Too sad, too grey, and infinitely more dismal when warehoused in Tupperware. There were successes, however. Wholewheat pasta is horrible, but brown rice tastes better. My rule of thumb was to be sensible during the week, eat whatever I liked at weekends, and on the rare occasions I ate out, have the steak if I wanted. I’m not ordering the salmon at restaurants: you might as well stay in. And while I fell off this wagon a lot, some of it stuck. I did my best. Oddly, one of the biggest changes was conversational. I started to talk about nutrition in a way I used to mock. Halfway through the pandemic, I went on a date. She was a fitness instructor and spent almost 45 minutes talking exclusively about cashew nuts, which I parried with a lot of chat about grains. All right, this would never have worked long-term, but for a couple of hours it was almost entertaining. Last week the results of the follow-up blood test came back. The only thing I have been religious about is the misery bread: the colour of boot polish, like something from the war, I get a flex from its medicinal aspect. For almost a year, I have eaten it every morning, with an avocado, or if I’m feeling jaunty, an egg. My cholesterol has more than halved. It’s now comfortably below danger level. Obviously, I celebrated by ordering in McDonalds, but I’m convinced, this time, the new habits will stick. My palate has changed. Bagels might taste better, but misery bread brings something much more delicious: the ping of self-denial that comes with every bite. Emma Brockes is a Guardian columnistMy earliest reading memory In March 1941, aged six, I was lying in bed in an isolation hospital, recovering from measles, whooping cough and meningitis, and looking at the Knockout comic. My favourite character was Stonehenge Kit the Ancient Brit. I could read the speech bubbles because my mother had taught me capital letters, but the extended captions under the pictures in upper and lower case were beyond me. I must have been decoding them unconsciously for some time, but the moment of realising that I understood the words, that I could read All By Myself, seemed to be instantaneous. I fell back in the bed and stared through the window at a silver barrage balloon hanging in the sky above Manchester and couldn’t stop trembling. From then on I binged on words: The Dandy, The Beano, Shakespeare, Leslie Charteris’s The Saint books, ghost stories and science fiction, comics and pulp magazines cadged from US soldiers; whatever came my way. I was omnivorous. My favourite book growing up While recuperating, I discovered a tattered copy of Tarzan of the Apes by Edgar Rice Burroughs. The final pages were missing, and I read the book 11 times, hoping to find them. But all I learned was how to say “Kagoda” – “I surrender”, in Mangani Gorilla language. After that, I immersed myself in my grandmother’s eight volumes of Arthur Mee’s Children’s Encyclopaedia of 1910, which were the main source of education for me in my primary school years while I continued to be frequently and spectacularly ill. The book that changed me as a teenager I was a sixth-form classicist at Manchester Grammar School, where we were given the opportunity to study in depth the erotic subtleties of the poems of Catullus, which did wonders for adolescent male angst. The writer who changed my mind Aeschylus. Reading his Oresteia aged 17 made me aware more than any other text of the power of language, and its examination of matricide came at an opportune moment. The book that made me want to be a writer I never had any ambition to write. I was set to be an academic. After a period of unfocused growing unease, I had a Damascene moment where I “saw” that I had to follow my family of creative manual craftsmen in Cheshire. But I was useless with my hands. However, I did have a facility for languages. Therefore, I would write. That was the most stupid and illogical thought I ever had; but it helped to quell the panic of realisation. And once I started, there was no turning back. The author I came back to TS Eliot’s The Waste Land irritated me when I first met it in 1950, and still does; but it led to the Four Quartets, which I read frequently for its spiritual charge. The book I reread The King James Bible, intermittently, for its language, wisdom and mythology. The book I could never read again I never enjoyed CS Lewis’s The Chronicles of Narnia. I read the books with horrid fascination. They were, in my opinion, and remain, nasty, manipulative, morbid, misanthropic, hectoring, totalitarian and atrociously written. The book I discovered later in life One day in 1955 I picked up William Golding’s Lord of the Flies, thinking it was a textbook on demonology. The book I am currently reading CG Jung’s autobiography, Memories, Dreams, Reflections. My comfort read Sir Gawain and the Green Knight. It takes me back to the warm comfort of my grandfather’s speech as we sat in the dark of his forge and I listened to the stories of his youth, our family and rural neighbours, and the Legend of Alderley. • Treacle Walker by Alan Garner is published by 4th Estate (£10). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.The supply chain crisis has already forced supermarkets to use cardboard cutouts to hide gaps on shelves. Now even more Britons are turning to growing their own food. Indeed, according to one small survey, three-quarters of city-based under-25s are growing herbs, fruit and vegetables in gardens, balconies and on windowsills. But could we ever be self-sufficient? And should we want to be? I asked Rosalind Sharpe, food policy academic and sustainable food advocate. When was the last time Britain fed itself? Probably the early 19th century. Though it raises the question: where’s the boundary? The British Isles? Europe? Scotland wouldn’t do well alone, because most of the UK’s arable land is in the south. Europe is self-sufficient, broadly speaking. I can’t think about the EU – I’m still trying to achieve Brexit closure. Could the UK be self-sufficient? It’s been asked by many people – Scottish ecologist Kenneth Mellanby in 1975 and, more recently, farmer and author Simon Fairlie. They answered yes, but only if we change what we eat. What were the self-sufficient 19th-century Britons eating? Mostly a rough form of bread. Tea, and sugar to sweeten it. A bit of bacon fat – maybe some dried fish. Sounds … carby. It would have been nutritionally inadequate. It’s why they had to lower the height requirement in the army to 5ft during the Boer war. Importing was the best thing for our diets. Varied, diverse, healthier. It’s why the policy goal is food security, not self-sufficiency, meaning some import. So if there’s a terrible harvest, you have supply lines. That said, we have to look at the climate impact. We grow a lot of grain for animals, but we could grow more fruit and vegetables for human consumption. It’s a scandal that our horticultural production has declined because it’s cheaper to import. I still feel awe – in the traditional sense of amazement and terror – holding a banana, knowing how far it’s travelled. But with food poverty at high levels, it’s hard to enthuse about homegrown but pricier produce. The answer to that is the government. So if prices went up, a responsible government might put subsidies in place, or ensure that wages were high enough. Also, we eat a highly processed diet. To make that food here, you need dozens of ingredients, plus the processing tech, plus the packaging material tech, etc. So it’s not as simple as seeing an empty shelf and thinking, “Why can’t we just make or grow that here?” Which is actually all anyone’s talking about on my neighbourhood forum. It’s quite sweet, actually. I think the people from No 5 are hoping to replace the local supermarket as the street’s spud supplier. That is interesting to me. People think there are going to be food shortages. Shortages, yes, but also wanting to do something for the planet, and having spare time in lockdown. My local jumble sale was mostly people touting their garden veg. Well, that is fantastic. Yes, I suppose it is. Though I get nervous of everyone going survivalist. What if it starts getting isolationist, almost Trumpy – an attitude of “I don’t need you or society”. Am I paranoid? Yeah … there are probably a few steps in between growing some potatoes and having a gun on the lawn.Germany’s fourth wave of the pandemic could reach a “sad peak” in intensive care units around the country around Christmas, the outgoing health minister, Jens Spahn, has said as he defended the decision to bar unvaccinated people from many areas of public life. On Thursday the German government and heads of the federal states agreed that only those who have been vaccinated or recently recovered from Covid should be allowed in restaurants, cinemas, leisure facilities and many shops, and they mooted introducing a general vaccine mandate from February. The capital, Berlin, announced on Friday that from next Wednesday it would bar unvaccinated people from Christmas markets, as well as generally limit the size of crowds allowed at public gatherings. Nightclubs in Berlin are allowed to stay open but visitors will not be allowed to dance. German states with high infection rates, such as Bavaria, Baden-Württemberg and Saxony, will from Saturday go back to holding football matches behind closed doors. “We should have displayed this consistency in our treatment of unvaccinated people at a much earlier stage”, said Spahn, who is due to hand over his job to a successor from the new government next Wednesday. Spahn said the number of Covid patients on intensive care wards would “significantly rise” above the 5,000 mark in the coming weeks and months. On Friday morning there were 4,793 patients with the disease in intensive care beds at hospitals around Germany, about half of whom were intubated. The Robert Koch Institute (RKI), Germany’s disease control agency, reported a national incidence rate of 442.1 cases per 100,000 citizens over the space of seven days, with 390 patients having died with the disease in the last 24 hours. “Reduce your contacts as much as possible,” Spahn urged. “Do your part to help reduce further suffering.” Germany’s incidence rate has stagnated over the last week and marginally reduced over the last three days, though politicians and scientists warn off investing too much hope in the figures. The head of the Robert Koch Institute, Lothar Wieler, said on Friday he was confident that restrictions were already having an effect in some German regions. Other states such as Saxony or Thuringia, however, were so inundated with new cases that health authorities were struggling to report them accurately as laboratories’ capacities reached their limit. Germany’s incoming “traffic light” coalition government has said it wants parliamentarians to have a free, unwhipped vote on following Austria’s lead to make vaccination mandatory from next year. Leading figures from the three coalition parties, including the chancellor-designate, Olaf Scholz, and the finance minister, Christian Lindner, have in recent days signalled they would back such a move. Spahn signalled on Friday that he would vote against a general mandate, saying his position was “very sceptical in principle”. In the past, the conservative politician had given his word that vaccination would not become mandatory, and he said “that will determine my voting behaviour”. Speaking at the same press conference, Wieler declined to position himself in favour of a general mandate. “I believe this country has to do a lot more debating,” he said. “My wish is for there to be an informed debate, followed by an informed decision.” Unless the country had sufficient immunity against Covid-19, Wieler said, “we will struggle to bring the pandemic to a standstill”.Watford have an injury crisis. A 12-storey crisis with a magnificent entrance hall, carpeting throughout, 24-hour portage, and an enormous sign on the roof, saying “This Is a Large Crisis”. A large crisis requires a large plan so Watford can count themselves lucky they have Claudio Ranieri in the dugout. Who better to dream up another win over a side from Manchester? Well, one manager leaps to mind, Pep Guardiola. Manchester City are navigating their own injury problems with aplomb and, as Jack Grealish and Phil Foden return to full fitness, a fifth win in succession will be expected. The chance to go top if Chelsea drop points against West Ham will only add fuel to the fire. Watford could also rappel into the relegation zone if they lose and Burnley beat Newcastle. Graham Searles Saturday 5.30pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Vicarage Road Last season n/a Referee Kevin Friend This season G5 Y31 R2 6.6 cards/game Odds H 16-1 A 2-9 D 7-1 WATFORD Subs from Elliot, Fletcher, Gosling, Tufan, Hernández, Louza, Femenía, Kabasele Doubtful None Injured Sema (knee, 10 Dec), Sierralta (hamstring, 10 Dec), Foster (groin, Jan), Etebo (quadriceps, Mar), Nkoulou (hamstring, unknown), Sarr (knee, unknown), Masina (hamstring, unknown), Baah (ankle, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y31 R1 Form WLLWLL Leading scorer Dennis 6 MANCHESTER CITY Subs from Steffen, Carson, Palmer, Fernandinho, Jesus, Aké, Mbete, Zinchenko, Silva, Stones, Delap, De Bruyne Doubtful None Injured Torres (foot, Jan) Suspended None Discipline Y21 R1 Form WLWWWW Leading scorer Silva 5Britain’s energy regulator has said today that is launching a review into the power networks’ response to Storm Arwen which left tens of thousands of people without power last week when strong winds swept across many parts of the country. Ofgem said 10,500 homes are still without power in parts of Scotland and the north of England after gusts of up to 100 miles per hour destroyed power lines. It has lifted the cap on compensation, which means households can calaim up to £140 a day for every day they are without power. The US economy added 210,000 jobs in November, less than half the jobs growth that economists had expected, while the unemployment rate fell more than expected to 4.2% from 4.6%. The Bank of England could benefit from waiting to see the impact of the Omicron coronavirus variant on the UK economy before raising interest rates, one of its policymakers has said. Michael Saunders, who voted last month to raise interest rates, said he believed there could be advantages from taking no action when the central bank meets to set borrowing costs in just under two weeks’ time. Our other main stories: Thank you for reading. Have a great weekend! We’ll be back next week. Bye, JK The US economy added 210,000 jobs in November, less than half the jobs growth that economists had expected in a report that was compiled before the discovery of the Omicron coronavirus variant that now threatens to derail the economic recovery from the pandemic, reports Dominic Rushe in the US. The unemployment rate dropped to 4.2% as employers added jobs in business services, transportation, warehousing and construction. The overall gain was less than half the 500,000 plus jobs that economists had expected to be added over the month. November’s jobs report comes after the US added 531,000 in October, a sharp increase after a slowdown in hiring triggered by the spread of the Delta coronavirus variant over the summer. It remains to be seen whether the Omicron variant will have a similar damping effect on the jobs market. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) thinktank warned this week that Omicron and rising inflation could prove significant threats to the global economy. Ofgem said 10,500 homes are still without power in parts of Scotland and the north of England after gusts of up to 100 miles per hour destroyed power lines and freezing conditions caused faults. Ofgem chief executive Jonathan Brearley said: The absolute priority remains getting people back on power as quickly as possible, but for those who have not had power because of Storm Arwen, there are ways for customers to claim compensation by contacting their network company. The Energy Network Association, which represents the UK’s electricity and gas network companies, said that by Wednesday, 97% of affected homes had been reconnected. Mark Brown, our north of England correspondent, has spoken to people who have been affected by Storm Arwen. “Anyone who thinks there is romanticism to reading by candlelight needs their head examined,” said 69-year-old Fran Marshall as she braced herself for a sixth night without power. “There is no romance. None whatsoever. It has been freezing cold and it has been miserable.” Yesterday, 30,000 households were still without power, a week after Storm Arwen’s gusts of nearly 100mph hit parts of the UK. The energy companies have said they have reconnected about a million homes. The army has been deployed to help residents in northern England and Scotland who have been without power since the storm caused “catastrophic damage” to the electricity network. Durham county council said about 100 forces staff would be based in Weardale to help local people. Consumer group Which? has spelled out customers’ rights here. Typically your electricity distribution company has 24 hours to restore your electricity supply if it fails due to a storm. Although after a severe storm like Arwen this deadline can be increased to 48 hours. If power isn’t restored by this deadline, £70 should be paid to customers, with a further £70 to be paid for each additional period of 12 hours in which supply is not restored, up to a cap of £700. But, as just reported, Ofgem is lifting the cap on compensation. Hooray! Over here, Britain’s energy regulator has said today that is launching a review into the power networks’ response to Storm Arwen which left tens of thousands of people without power last week when strong winds swept across many parts of the country. The review is aimed at offering better support to customers in case of extreme weather in the future, Ofgem said, adding that the £700 cap on compensation for customers had been removed. Customers can now receive up to £140 a day, for every day they are without power. NEWSFLASH: The US economy added 210,000 jobs in November, far less than the 550,000 expected, while October’s increase was revised higher to 546,000 from 531,000 and September was revised to 379,000 from 312,000, according to official data. At the same time, the jobless rate fell more than expected, to 4.2% from October’s 4.6%, while economists had expected a dip to 4.5%. In just a few minutes, we’ll be getting the closely-watched non-farm payrolls data from the US. They are expected to show that the economy added 550,000 jobs in November, compared with 531,000 in October. A strong number would bolster the case for faster tapering of the US Federal Reserve’s bond-buying programme, and earlier interest rate hikes. The unemployment rate is forecast to have dipped to 4.5% from 4.6%, while wage growth will also be watched closely. Bank of England policymaker Michael Saunders sums up the main points of his speech thus: At the November MPC meeting I voted to tighten monetary policy by curtailing the asset purchase program and raising Bank Rate to 0.25%. If the economy develops as I expect, then some additional tightening, on top of such a move, probably will be needed fairly soon. But policy is not on auto pilot. The pace, and scale, of any monetary policy changes will depend on economic developments and the outlook. In particular, at the December meeting, a key consideration for me will be the possible economic effects of the new Omicron Covid variant, and the potential costs and benefits of waiting to see more data on this before – if necessary – adjusting policy. It is likely that any rise in Bank Rate will be limited given that the neutral level of interest rates remains low. Provided we do not delay too long, it should be a case of easing off the accelerator rather than applying the brakes. Europe’s main stock markets are all trading higher again, although gains are pretty small, as this week’s rollercoaster ride continues in response to the new Omicron variant and hawkish comments from the US Federal Reserve. UK’s FTSE 100 index up 29 points, or 0.4%, at 7,158 Germany’s Dax up 32 points, or 0.2%, at 15,295 France’s CAC flat at 6,797 Italy’s FTSE MiB up 95 points, or 0.37%, at 26,100 The government failed to guard properly against fraud in its £47bn Covid emergency lending programme for small businesses, opening itself up to billions of pounds of losses, the UK’s public spending watchdog has said. The bounce-back loan scheme launched in May 2020 and did not include credit checks or fully verify the identity of small businesses applying for loans, the National Audit Office, which scrutinises public-sector spending, said. “Government prioritised getting bounce-back loans to small businesses quickly but failed to put adequate fraud prevention measures in place,” said Gareth Davies, the NAO’s comptroller and auditor general. “One impact of these decisions is apparent in the high levels of estimated fraud.” ‘The fruit bowl is emptier and petrol is shocking’: one family’s experience of soaring cost of living – from our Money editor Hilary Osborne. From running a car, to food bills and pet products, everything has become more expensive and UK household expenditure is stacking up. Here is our full story on Nationwide appointing TSB boss Debbie Crosbie as the first female chief executive in the building society’s 175-year history. The 51-year-old, who has led the turnaround of the troubled bank TSB as its chief executive since May 2019, will take over from Joe Garner, who has run Nationwide for the last six years. And our full story on the Chinese ride-hailing firm Didi planning to move its listing from the New York stock exchange to Hong Kong, as Beijing cracks down on the country’s biggest technology companies. Shell is dominating the headlines today after its decision to pull out of the controversial Cambo oilfield off the Shetland Islands. Our energy correspondent Jillian Ambrose has another story on the company. Royal Dutch Shell will move ahead with seismic tests to explore for oil in vital whale breeding grounds along South Africa’s eastern coastline after a court dismissed an 11th-hour legal challenge by environmental groups, she writes. The judgment, by a South African high court, allows Shell to begin firing within days extremely loud sound waves through the relatively untouched marine environment of the Wild Coast, which is home to whales, dolphins and seals. Campaigners filed an urgent legal challenge against the seismic survey, which was scheduled to begin on Wednesday, but the last-minute interdict was dismissed by a judge on Friday morning. Germany’s BioNTech should be able to adapt its coronavirus vaccine relatively quickly in response to the emergence of the Omicron variant, its chief executive Ugur Sahin told the Reuters Next conference today. BioNTech and Pfizer Inc together produced one of the first vaccines against Covid-19 and Sahin also reiterated that vaccines should continue to provide protection against severe disease, despite mutations. Sahin said: This variant might be able to infect vaccinated people. We anticipate that infected people who have been vaccinated will still be protected against severe disease. The BioNTech chief also said that mutations in the virus meant it was more likely that annual jabs would become likely, as is the case with seasonal flu and that a new vaccine would be needed against Covid-19, although it was not yet clear when it would be required. Much remains unknown about Omicron, which was first detected in southern Africa last month and has been spotted in at least two dozen countries, just as parts of Europe were already grappling with a wave of infections of the Delta variant. We expect this variant might be able to infect vaccinated people and this variant will most likely be able to infect people with high exposure. That is one of the things that is now getting more and more clear. It is not clear whether this variant produces more severe disease, Sahin said. He said the new variant had emerged sooner than he had expected, adding that he had anticipated one some time in 2022. Bank of England policymaker Michael Saunders, who voted for an interest rate hike last month, said today that he wanted more information about the impact of the new Omicron strain on public health and the economy, before deciding how to vote this month. He said in a speech: At present, given the new omicron Covid variant has only been detected quite recently, there could be particular advantages in waiting to see more evidence on its possible effects on public health outcomes and hence on the economy. But he also warned against the risks of waiting too long before raising borrowing costs, because the record low in the Bank’s main interest rate could cause the labour market to tighten further and push up long-term inflation expectations which are already rising. This could require a more abrupt and painful policy tightening later. For me, the balance between these considerations is likely to be a key factor at the December meeting. Saunders has long advocated higher borrowing costs, and was one of two members of the Bank’s nine-strong monetary policy committee who voted to raise Bank rate to 0.25% from its all-time low of 0.1%. You can read his speech in full here. Retail sales increased by 0.2% in the euro area and by 0.3% in the EU in October, compared with September, according to Eurostat, the statistical office of the European Union. Petrol and diesel sales were strong while food, drink and tobacco sales fell. Yesterday we heard from Germany, where retail sales dropped 0.3% in October. On the currency markets, sterling is down 0.2% against the dollar at $1.3279, and down by a similar amount against the euro at €1.1741. Lawrence Kaplin, senior dealer at the international business payments firm Equals Money, says: Sterling continues to be rangebound as events elsewhere dominate markets. UK/EU Brexit trade talks are set to continue today but with both sides remaining steadfast in their respective positions the prospects for a post Brexit trade deal hang in the balance. Ahead of the talks, Irish foreign affairs minister, Simon Coveney, poured cold water over hopes of a full deal being agreed before Christmas, and with the UK continuing to threaten invoking Article 16, and French PM Macron calling Boris “a clown” and “a knucklehead” the mood music going into the talks is hardly conducive to a deal being reached. With no major UK economic data slated for today, the pound will continue to trade in line with broader market sentiment. Turkey’s annual inflation jumped more than expected to a three-year high of 21.31% in November, official data showed on Friday, laying bare the risks of recent aggressive rate cuts that prompted a historic slide in the lira. Under pressure from President Tayyip Erdogan, the central bank has slashed the policy interest rate to 15% from 19% since September, leaving Turkey’s real yields deeply negative, a red flag for investors and savers. The consumer price index rose 3.5% from the previous month, the Turkish Statistical Institute said. Producer prices rose 10% from the previous month and 56.6% on the year. This suggested the lira’s depreciation is stoking import prices and will feed through to overall inflation in the coming months, with economists forecasting annual inflation to approach 30%. Europe’s main indices have turned negative again, wile the FTSE 100 index in London is flat at 7,129. Germany’s Dax down 0.1% at 15,247 France’s CAC down 0.1% at 6,789 Italy’s FTSE MiB down 0.15% at 25,967 Nationwide Building Society has appointed the TSB boss Debbie Crosbie as chief executive, the building society’s first female boss in its 175-year-history. Crosbie, 51, will take up her new position in the second half of next year and Joe Garner is set to remain as CEO in the meantime. It is an interesting time for the mortgage lender, Britain’s biggest mutual, with UK interest rates expected to go up. There aren’t many female CEOs in UK banking. Crosbie is only the second woman to lead a major lender, alongside Alison Rose who heads up NatWest, formerly known as Royal Bank of Scotland. Goodbody analyst John Cronin says Crosbie is an “excellent choice” for Nationwide while it is disappointing for TSB to see her go. Crosbie is currently CEO of TSB and has delivered a remarkable turnaround in financial performance at the lender on the back of relentless restructuring efforts. We think she is an excellent choice for the Nationwide CEO seat, and we wish her well in the new role. TSB has appointed Robin Bulloch, its chief customer officer and a former MD at Lloyds, as interim CEO, another strong appointment, he says. In the UK, government departments are reportedly cancelling Christmas parties, ignoring calls by the prime minister to go ahead with them. The Times reports “Omi-shambles in Whitehall” as multiple government departments call off festive celebrations. The education department has already suspended plans for its annual talent show, says the newspaper, and the business department has decided against putting on a staff Christmas party. However, Oliver Dowden, who co-chairs the Conservative party, says he does not plan to cancel the Tories’ Christmas party. You can read more on our Covid-19 live blog here. On the Covid-19 front, the World Health Organization has urged countries to boost healthcare capacity and vaccinate their populations to fight a surge in inflections driven by the new Omicron variant, saying travel restrictions could buy time but weren’t really the answer. Takeshi Kasai, the WHO’s western Pacific director, told a media briefing: Border controls can buy time but every country and every community must prepare for new surges in cases. People should not only rely on border measures. What is most important is to prepare for these variants with potential high transmissibility. So far the information available suggests we don’t have to change our approach. Aside from vaccinations, the WHO recommended preventative measures such as mask wearing and social distancing. The composite survey for the UK, which comprises both services and manufacturing, dipped to 57.6 last month from 57.8 in October, but remained well above the 50 no change mark for a ninth month. Service sector growth (index at 58.5) remained much stronger than the recovery in manufacturing production (52.7), with the latter once again held back by shortages of raw materials and electronics components. The UK service sector recorded strong growth in November, helped by the fastest rise in new business intakes in five months. Export sales were key, with looser travel rules contributing to the steepest upturn in new business from abroad since March 2017. The headline business activity index was 58.5 last month, a tad higher than the flash rating of 58.6 and down only slightly slightly from October’s three-month high of 59.1. The latest survey from IHS Markit and CIPS highlights another round of rapid cost inflation, driven by higher fuel prices, wages and utility bills. Prices charged by service providers also increased at the fastest rate since the survey began in July 1996. Final Eurozone Composite Output Index: 55.4 (Flash: 55.8, Oct Final: 54.2) Final Eurozone Services Business Activity Index: 55.9 (Flash: 56.6, Oct Final: 54.6) The final readings for the eurozone as a whole show that economic growth in the private sector re-accelerated last month. IHS Markit, which compiles the surveys, says that rate of expansion was sold and remained above its historical average, mainly reflecting resilience in the service sector while manufacturers were held back by severe supply shortages. However, the strongest rates of growth were seen away from the two largest euro area economies monitored by the survey, with Germany in particular recording a weak rate of growth in November. And there was a further intensification of price pressures across the bloc, with rates of output charge and input cost inflation both accelerating to fresh highs. Countries ranked by Composite PMI, which comprises manufacturing and services: Ireland 59.3, 7-month low Spain 58.3, 3-month high Italy 57.6, 3-month high France 56.1 (flash: 56.3), 4-month high Germany 52.2 (flash: 52.8), 2-month high In Germany, Europe’s biggest economy, the picture is more subdued. Services firms recorded another moderate rise in business activity in November following a similar result in October, with the sector’s growth having slowed notably since the third quarter. Near-term prospects also dimmed, as a fourth wave of Covid infections saw inflows of new business fall whilst also dampening business confidence. The headline business activity index edged up to 52.7 from 52.4 in October, a six-month low. It was the second-lowest reading since services returned to growth in May following the third wave of infections. Hotels and restaurants are particularly weak. Phil Smith, economics associate director at IHS Markit, says: Germany’s service sector was able to eke out further modest growth in November, but the survey’s forward-looking indicators gave reason for concern. Given what we’ve seen in the survey data so far and the potential new risks posed by the Omicron variant, the economy is, at best, set for a notable slowdown in growth in the final quarter. The survey data showed a further intensification of inflationary pressures in November driven by a surge in energy costs, with service providers joining manufacturers in recording an unprecedented rise in prices. This was despite signs of inflation already easing across consumer-facing sectors. Another strong round of hiring across the service sector in November maintained the labour market’s solid pace of recovery. However, with recruitment tending to lag movements in activity and underlying demand, we can reasonably expect the pace of job creation to slow in line with weaker economic growth and lower business confidence. Over in France, services activity accelerated to a five-month high in November, with the PMI headline activity reading at 57.4 versus 56.6 in October. Businesses responded to higher cost burdens by raising their own selling prices in November. The rate of increase accelerated and was the strongest since June 2011. Joe Hayes, senior economist at IHS Markit, which compiles the survey, says: To be clear though, the service sector is what is keeping the economy afloat at the moment as France’s manufacturing sector is struggling with massive supplyrelated constraints. This puts the wider economy in a precarious position, because as we’ve seen on other parts of Europe, the fate of the service sector is still a function of the trajectory of Covid-19 cases. Policymakers in France have so far talked down the potential for the most stringent of restrictions being implemented, which bodes well for economic activity through the next couple of quarters, but as we’ve seen before, this can change rapidly. That said, if France manages the current wave of infections, this should allow robust growth in the service sector to continue. Similar to Spain, Italy’s service industries enjoyed faster expansion in November. The PMI business activity index rose to 55.9 from 52.4 in October to signal a seventh monthly uplift in services and the sharpest since August. Inflationary pressures grew with both cost burdens and firms’ average charge rising at the fastest rates on record. Lewis Cooper, economist at IHS Markit, which compiles the survey, says: Italy’s service sector recorded stronger growth during November, with both business activity and new work rising at their fastest rates since August amid reports of strong client demand. Subsequently, companies expanded their workforces further, with job creation the strongest for four months and solid. Across the private sector as a whole, output expanded at the fastest pace for three months, with the quicker upturn in services activity met with a near record rate of increase in factory production. This bodes well for the Italian economy as we enter the final month of 2021. Concerns around inflationary pressures, which intensified at an unprecedented pace amid supply issues and rising energy and transport costs, as well as the resurgence of Covid-19 cases did dampen business confidence to a ten-month low, but overall firms remain upbeat towards activity over the next 12 months. The FTSE 100 index in London is on track for a weekly gain, boosted by oil stocks. BP and Royal Dutch Shell are 2% and 1.2% ahead respectively on the back of a jump in oil prices. Brent crude has gained 3.4%, or $2.34, to $72.01 a barrel while US light crude has risen 3.3%, or $2.16 a barrel, to $68.67 a barrel. Insurance stocks Prudential and Legal &amp; General have both gained more than 1% after the German insurance giant Allianz raised its targets for shareholder returns for 2022 to 2024. A UK trial of seven different vaccines – the first study of how well Covid booster jabs work – has shown that the Moderna and Pfizer/BioNTech shots are the most effective. They are the jabs being used as boosters in the UK. Covid booster shots can dramatically strengthen the body’s immune defences, according to the study that raises hopes of preventing another wave of severe disease driven by the Omicron variant, writes our science editor Ian Sample. In a study published in the Lancet, researchers on the UK-based Cov-Boost trial measured immune responses in nearly 3,000 people who received one of seven Covid-19 boosters or a control jab two to three months after their second dose of either AstraZeneca or Pfizer vaccine. Those boosted with Pfizer after two doses of AstraZeneca had antibody levels a month later nearly 25 times higher than controls. When the Pfizer booster was given following two Pfizer shots, antibody levels rose more than eightfold. The most potent booster in the study was a full dose of the Moderna vaccine, which raised antibody levels 32-fold in the AstraZeneca group and 11-fold in the Pfizer group. When Moderna is used in the UK booster programme, it is given at a half-dose. While the findings show that both Pfizer and Moderna mRNA vaccines are highly effective boosters, scientists cautioned about comparing their performance as people started with different antibody levels. For example, antibody levels tend to remain high a few months after a Pfizer vaccination, so a booster would not be able to drive them much higher. “These are remarkably effective immunological boosters, way above what is needed to prevent hospitalisation and death,” said Prof Saul Faust, the trial lead and director of the NIHR clinical research facility at University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust. While side-effects varied, most people who reported them had fatigue, headache or arm pain and the study found no safety concerns. Growth in Spain’s service sector hit a three-month high in November, according to the latest PMI survey from IHS Markit, although it warned that this could be short-lived. Incoming new business rose sharply but price pressures also intensified, at the fastest rate in the 22-year-history of the survey. The headline business activity index rose to 59.8 in November from 56.6 in October. Paul Smith, economics director at IHS Markit, which compiles the survey, says: Spain’s service sector enjoyed a stellar November, expanding sharply on the back of a positive evolution of demand and new business. This encouraged firms to take on additional staff at a firmer rate as they struggled to keep on top of workloads. “However, a number of downside risks to the outlook persist. Cost inflation shows no sign of abating, and this is being passed on to clients wherever possible, whilst foreign demand growth remains weak. With concerns rising over new emerging lockdowns and restrictions due to Covid also reported, there is a feeling that the sector’s current rate of expansion will be hard to sustain in the coming months. Chinese Uber rival Didi Chuxing is to move its listing from the New York Stock Exchange to Hong Kong, as Beijing continues its regulatory crackdown on the country’s biggest technology companies, reports my colleague Mark Sweney. The company, which like other leading Chinese tech companies such as Jack Ma’s Alibaba, said it is to start “immediate” preparations to de-list in New York and prepare to go public in Hong Kong. “After a careful study, the company will start delisting on the New York Stock Exchange immediately, and start preparations for listing in Hong Kong,” the company posted on its Weibo account on Friday, a Twitter-like service in China. Didi made its $4.4bn flotation in New York in June, making it the biggest listing by a Chinese company in the US since Alibaba in 2014, only to see investors sharply sell-off shares days later as China’s internet regulator ordered its ride-hailing app to be taken off domestic app stores. It was also banned from signing up new users, and subjected to a “cyber security review”, as Beijing flexed its muscle to curtail Didi’s international expansion plans. In August, Didi suspended plans to launch in Europe and the UK, where it had secured licences to operate in Manchester, Salford and Sheffield. Richard Hunter, head of markets at the trading platform interactive investor, says: Markets have regained some poise at the end of a difficult week which was marred by Omicron fears and an increasingly hawkish outlook from central banks. Investors switched into optimistic mode following the earlier Federal Reserve suggestion that the end of the tapering programme and therefore the beginning of interest rate hikes could come earlier than expected next year. Alongside no immediate change to its supply plans at Opec, there is a growing feeling that future variants may not, after all, be enough to derail economic policy per se. Even so, the volatility index remains elevated in anticipation of further details on the variant, while the oil price has continued to whipsaw on unclear demand in the coming months. Despite the latest bout of volatility, oil remains up by 37% in the year to date, although some way off its more recent highs. The next indication on the strength of the US economy will come in the form on the non-farm payrolls figure later. After a stronger-than-expected reading of 531,000 jobs being added in October, the expectations for the November outturn is a figure of 550,000. As ever, a stronger reading would tend to add weight to any Federal Reserve decision to accelerate tapering, while a lower figure would once more muddy the waters. Despite the volatility, the performance of the main indices remains in rude health, with the Dow Jones having added 13.2% in the year to date, the S&amp;P500 21.9% and the Nasdaq 19.3%. Asian markets were rather more subdued overnight, as the announcement that the ride-hailing company Didi would delist from New York reignited concerns on both the fractious relationship between the US and China, as well as the general spectre of tech regulation. European stocks have followed Wall Street’s lead to trade higher at the open. The UK’s FTSE 100 index in London is up nearly 50 points, or 0.7%, at 7,178 while Germany’s Dax and France’s CAC have both added 1%, and Italy’s FTSE MiB and Spain’s Ibex are both 0.8% ahead in early trading. Also overnight, the $75bn takeover of Cambridge-based chip designer Arm by its rival Nvidia is in jeopardy after US regulators followed the UK and Europe in moving to block “the largest semiconductor chip merger in history,” reports my colleague Mark Sweney. The Federal Trade Commission has sued to stop the takeover of Arm, which has ballooned in value from $40bn to $75bn since the offer was made last September due to a stock market surge in the chip sector, as seemingly almost insurmountable opposition now mounts after regulator action in Europe and the UK. “The FTC is suing to block the largest semiconductor chip merger in history to prevent a chip conglomerate from stifling the innovation pipeline for next-generation technologies,” said Holly Vedova, bureau of competition director at the FTC. “This proposed deal would distort Arm’s incentives in chip markets and allow the combined firm to unfairly undermine Nvidia’s rivals.” In other big news overnight, Shell has pulled out of a controversial new oilfield off the Shetland Islands, plunging the future of oil exploration in the area into doubt. Shell, which was planning to exploit the field along with the private equity-backed fossil fuel explorer Siccar Point, cited a weak economic case as its reason for deciding not to go ahead with the project, writes our economics correspondent Fiona Harvey. “After comprehensive screening of the proposed Cambo development, we have concluded the economic case for investment in this project is not strong enough at this time, as well as having the potential for delays,” Shell said. Ipek Ozkardeskaya, senior analyst at the Swiss banking group Swissquote, has also looked at the US jobs. Today’s non-farm payrolls data is important, but it is not as important as when the Fed focused on improving the health of the US labour market. There is a chance that today’s data won’t matter much for the Fed expectations, unless we see a surprisingly weak number that the Fed could not ignore. But we also know that even with a weak number, the Fed can’t do much to improve the labour numbers, as it needs to deal with inflation; it has its hands tied. So, the worst-case scenario for the market mood would be a meaningfully low non-farm payrolls number combined with hawkish Fed expectations. But that’s not the consensus. The expectation is that the US economy added 550K new nonfarm jobs in November, slightly more than last month’s 530K. It is also in line with the ADP figure printed on Wednesday, which was around 530K. A strong read on the other hand should be perceived as good news for stock prices, given that whether we see a soft or a strong non-farm payrolls read, the Fed will need to pull back support in the coming months; a strong number would at least mean that the economy needs less help. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Stock markets have been on a rollercoaster this week, as investors are trying to figure out what the new Covid variant Omicron means for the pandemic, and markets going forward. US stocks rebounded on Wall Street yesterday on expectations that Omicron is more contagious but less deadly (after the WHO said early indications are most cases are mild), but volatility remains high. The Dow Jones closed 1.8% higher, the S&amp;P 500 up 1.4% and the Nasdaq gaining 0.8%. Meanwhile Asian indices are mixed: Hong Kong’s Hang Seng is 0.4% lower while Japan’s Nikkei has gained 1% and the Shanghai composite index is also up nearly 1%. European markets are set to open higher, and the pan-European Stoxx 600 is still on track for a modest weekly gain despite a rocky week. Oil prices are climbing, extending yesterday’s gains after the Opec oil cartel and its allies stuck to plans to to pump more 400,000 more barrels of oil per day from January. In an unusual move, though, oil producers agreed to review supply ahead of the next scheduled meeting, thereby leaving the door open to putting the brakes on production should the Omicron variant lead to further restrictions on travel and trade. Brent crude, the global benchmark, has added 2% or $1.39 to $71.06 a barrel, while US light crude is 2.1% ahead at $67.92 a barrel. The latest Caixin PMI survey of the services sector in China showed a softening in growth last month, with the headline business activity index falling from 53.8 in October to 52.1 in November. This is the third month of expansion. Higher labour, raw material and energy costs drove a sharper rise in firms’ input costs to a six-month high, prompting them to raise their own prices. The composite survey, which comprises manufacturing and services, dropped to 51.2 from 51.5, indicating a slight weakening in growth at Chinese companies. We’ll be getting PMI readings for mainland Europe and the UK this morning, and economists are expecting modest improvements in Italy, France, and Germany PMIs to 54.5, 58.2 and 53.4 respectively, although the improvements could prove temporary, in light of the recent surge in Covid-19 infections and renewed restrictions across Europe, even before Omicron was identified. The UK services PMI is expected to come in at 58.6, and US services at 57. Today’s highlight is the November US jobs data, particularly after Federal Reserve chair Jerome Powell’s surprise hawkish tilt earlier this week, which raised expectations that the Fed will scale back its economic stimulus programme more quickly. Economists are expecting 550,000 more jobs to have been added to the economy. The unemployment rate is expected to fall further to 4.5%. Wage growth will also be watched closely, with evidence from retailers and some other big US employers that they are having to pay up for staff. Michael Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets UK, has looked at this in detail. The October payrolls report helped to reaffirm the Federal Reserve’s decision a few days before to set the ball rolling on tapering its $120bn a month asset purchase program. 531k new jobs were added to the US labour market in October, while we also saw a decent upgrade to September from 194k to 312k. The unemployment rate fell to 4.6%, from 4.8% while the participation rate remained unchanged at 61.6%. By any measure the numbers were positive and with wages also rising, jobs growth is expected to accelerate as we head into year end, especially around the holiday period when hiring trends tend to pick up. This is already being borne out in the continuing claims numbers which are now only 200k above where they were pre-pandemic. With recent US economic data showing decent levels of resilience, the conversation around tapering has moved on to the speed and level of the withdrawal of stimulus... We also have several policymakers arguing the central bank needs to go faster, which means that today’s November payrolls report has the potential to move this discussion fast forward to when the Fed meets later this month, if we see a similarly strong jobs report today. The Agenda 8.15am GMT – 9am GMT: Markit Composite and services PMIs for November from Spain, Italy, France, Germany, eurozone 8.30am GMT: ECB President Christine Lagarde speaks 9.30am GMT: UK Markit/CIPS Composite and services PMIs for November 10am GMT: Eurozone retail sales for October (forecast: 0.2%) 11am GMT: Bank of England policymaker Michael Saunders speaks 11am GMT: Ireland GDP for Q3 1.30pm GMT: US Non-farm payrolls for November (forecast: 550,000) 3pm GMT: US ISM Non-Manufacturing PMI for NovemberThe father of a British teenager mauled by a crocodile in southern Africa has revealed he received a text message from a medic who was evacuating her from the scene by air, reading: “You have one hell of a brave girl there, sir.” Amelie Osborn-Smith, 18, was left with her right foot “hanging loose” and hip dislocated after a large crocodile bit her leg while she was swimming in the Zambezi River in Zambia during a break from a white water rafting expedition. Her father, Brent Osborn-Smith, an osteopath whose practice is based in Sloane Square in London, said his daughter was grateful to be alive and hoped to return to the UK this weekend. “Amelie is a fit, intelligent, brave and conscientious individual who is extremely grateful to be alive and to have been looked after so well by all those involved in her rescue,” he said. The teenager was on a gap-year trip after passing her A-levels at school in Hampshire, and was taking part in a professionally organised rafting expedition when the attack happened on Tuesday. The group stopped for lunch on a quieter stretch of the river between rapids and, Brent Osborn-Smith claimed, the group were encouraged by the guides to have “a quick dip” over the side to cool off as the area was deemed to be safe. “When returning to the boat, Amelie was bitten on the leg by a large crocodile, which attempted to drag her down into a characteristic death roll in order to subdue its prey,” he said. “Amelie fought back with great courage and refused to be subdued or taken under. Due to the quick thinking and intervention of all those onboard, the reptile’s attack was repulsed and Amelie was then brought quickly back on to the boat.” The team administered first aid, stemming blood loss. The father was told his daughter “remained calm and collected throughout” and the crew were “amazed that she didn’t even shed a tear”. A helicopter evacuation was called and she was flown to a hospital post in nearby Livingstone. It was during this flight that the father received the medic’s message. After stabilisation in Livingstone, she was flown for a further 90 minutes by helicopter to the capital, Lusaka. She was treated for possible infection, crocodile bites are often highly contaminated, and after “several very professional initial surgical procedures” her foot was saved. Arrangements were in place to have her transferred to specialist care at a teaching hospital in London, her father said. “Amelie remains traumatised and heavily sedated but we will know more about her ultimate progress in the coming days,” he said. “We are humbled by and profoundly appreciative of the courage and professionalism of all those involved in Amelie’s life-saving rescue and her subsequent care and treatment.”In the context of Mikel Arteta’s expansive answers, it was jarring to hear him suddenly stop short. And revealing. The Arsenal manager was trying to make sense of Thursday night’s 3-2 defeat at Manchester United, a game that his team had controlled at various points, when he was asked whether his senior players had to give him more. “Absolutely the balance that we need is right,” Arteta began. “The senior players have to lead and the young players have to follow.” Cue a nod and a steely stare. The notion that Arsenal would lose had felt outlandish after the first 15 minutes when they led through Emile Smith Rowe’s bizarre goal – scored while the United goalkeeper, David de Gea, was lying injured. United’s start had been error-strewn, their nerves jangling, with Fred in particular, looking a danger to his own team. The feeling would be similar after Martin Ødegaard’s equaliser for 2-2 on 54 minutes, which had represented a strong response to the concession to Cristiano Ronaldo shortly before. “We were in our best moment then,” Arteta said. “We had total control and dominance. That’s when you have to give the next step and go and win.” Instead, Arsenal shot themselves in the foot, Ødegaard guilty of a foolish challenge on Fred which allowed Ronaldo to score what would prove to be the winner from the spot. At 1-0, Arsenal had started to treat the ball like a hot coal, surrendering it under minimal pressure and inviting United to generate momentum, which culminated in Bruno Fernandes’s equaliser in the 44th minute from Fred’s assist. Even at 3-2, Arsenal had the chances to equalise without ever offering the impression that they would take one and it would add up to surely their most galling defeat of the season. For Arteta, the overall picture remains positive. Rewind to his lowest ebb – the period leading up to last Boxing Day, when the club were on a run of five points from 10 Premier League games. Since then, they have played 38 matches in the competition – equivalent to a full season – and taken 70 points. It is top-four form. But the next step that Arteta mentions has often eluded them, particularly in high-profile games away from home. There were breakthroughs last season, notably the 1-0 win at Old Trafford in November and another 1-0 success at Chelsea in the final weeks. The United result had been the first away victory in the league at a so-called big-six rival since January 2015 when they beat Manchester City 2-0 with goals from Santi Cazorla and Olivier Giroud. After the drubbings at City and Liverpool this season, Arteta had wanted a statement result at United; his players to show that they would not crumble under the pressure. It did not happen and it was difficult not to conflate the shortcomings all over the pitch with a collective lack of experience. The average age of Arteta’s lineup was a shade over 24. Who were the senior players and where were they? They were the captain, Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, 32, and Thomas Partey, 28 – supported by Mohamed Elneny, 29, who had been thrust into his first league start of the season. Arteta remembered how well Elneny had done in the corresponding fixture last season and he preferred his know-how to the smooth technique of the 22-year-old Albert Sambi Lokonga. Nobody really expected Elneny to dominate in midfield, particularly having had so little recent football, but it was Partey’s display alongside him that was the real disappointment. Partey was loose at times and unable to impose himself. Which brings us to Aubameyang, who has four league goals for the season and is plainly struggling. There was a moment early on when he closed down Victor Lindelöf to help Arsenal win the ball in a good area, which hinted at him driving the team. It was an isolated highlight, his evening marked by a strange scruffiness with his finishing; a lack of power and conviction. He failed to beat De Gea in a one-on-one on 78 minutes, although an offside flag would spare his embarrassment. Nevertheless it was reflective of his low confidence. Arteta is not blessed with many other senior players, with Alexandre Lacazette, 30, and the injured Granit Xhaka, 29, the only ones he appears to count on. It means the journey will inevitably take in nights like Thursday, when the focus is drawn to mistakes at both ends and holes in the middle. It does not make them any less frustrating.Ron DeSantis, the Florida governor, has proposed an extraordinary plan to create a state paramilitary unit that he, rather than the federal government, would control. DeSantis, a Republican, has asked state lawmakers to fund the establishment of what he is calling the Florida state guard to assist with “state-specific emergencies”. This force of 200 selected volunteers would “not be encumbered by the federal government”, the governor said. If the $3.5m plan goes ahead, Florida would gain a state-run force alongside its national guard, which is jointly funded by the federal government and the state. Florida has previously created a state guard in 1941 to fill in for national guard members who were fighting in the second world war, but the unit was disbanded in 1947. “Re-establishing the Florida state guard will allow civilians from all over the state to be trained in the best emergency response techniques and have the ability to mobilize very, very quickly,” DeSantis said on Thursday. Florida would become the 23rd state with a state guard, according to the governor’s office. The proposal has been sharply criticized by Democrats, who accused DeSantis of authoritarian motives. “No governor should have his own handpicked secret police,” tweeted Charlie Crist, a Democrat who is running for Florida governor in elections held next year, having previously served as governor as a Republican. DeSantis said the state guard would be deployed to deal with the aftermath of natural disasters, such as the hurricanes that routinely hit Florida, although these troops could be put to other tasks. In 2015, Greg Abbott, the Republican governor of Texas, used the state guard there to monitor federal military exercises in his state, amid a baseless rumor that the federal government was nefariously using Walmart supermarket parking lots to establish military control. The push to establish a new state guard comes amid tensions between the Pentagon and Republican-led states over the vaccination of national guard members to protect them from Covid-19. Troops have long received a variety of mandatory vaccinations while serving but the Covid vaccine has proved too controversial for some, despite repeated evidence showing its safety and efficacy. The Department of Defense has said it may dock the pay of any soldier who refuses the jab. DeSantis has not joined the pushback against military inoculations, although he has attempted to ban vaccine requirements, pay the fines of businesses that flout the federal vaccine mandate and plans bonuses to lure police officers from elsewhere who resist vaccine mandates. DeSantis is following the rightwing populist mould of Donald Trump and is seen as a leading contender for the GOP’s presidential nomination for 2024, should the twice-impeached former president not secure it for himself.My son is 15 and causing no end of trouble. He is a good kid, pushing against the boundaries and learning to grow up. But getting caught (not for the first time) with an e-cigarette at school has really brought everything to a head. He has now been excluded for two days, and my husband and I have been called in to be (what feels like) shamed for being bad parents. What has become apparent is the constant lying, not only about the big things but also stupid, silly little things, that are inconsequential. I accept that lying to parents is normal – I still remember being a teenager myself. However, the lies on top of lies have destroyed all trust. Not only at home, but also at school. I feel we cannot trust anything that comes out of his mouth. It’s exhausting and feels as if we are stuck with no way out of the hurt. How do we get the trust back? I am not averse to counselling but I have no idea what I am looking for. Am I blowing it out of proportion and is there something we can work on ourselves? I’m sure the school doesn’t think you are bad parents; I think it may take a bit more than that. And your reaction to this is quite telling. If you feel shame at being called in to school, we can perhaps start to imagine that your son feels that, too. I’d like you to practise feeling curious about why he’s lying instead of defaulting to shame. Curiosity is a more useful tool in parenting. I wonder if perhaps your son doesn’t trust you with his feelings? “Fundamentally,” says adolescent specialist psychotherapist Anthea Benjamin (psychotherapy.org.uk), “teenagers lie because of a stress-protection mechanism. It may be to protect themselves or not wanting to disappoint you or because they feel shame. Lies can be about keeping safe from the reality of how difficult and out of control they feel [life is].” Lies are also a way for people to distance themselves – from a situation or a person. You didn’t go into detail about what these lies are. If they are of the “I didn’t do this”, then shame is usually involved. If they augment or invent a situation – “I did this” – then it can be a sign of unhappiness and wishing life were different. Both need exploration. Loss of trust is a biggie and I sympathise – it is, as you say, exhausting when you feel you can’t trust someone. Benjamin wondered if there was something going on for your son, a source of stress, maybe at school, that you haven’t discovered yet? Instead of wanting to catch your son out maybe you could deploy the aforementioned curiosity here. You may need to decide “to pick your battles”, Benjamin says. “Could you [sometimes] ignore the lie, but not the child, and see it as a form of communication? Even if you know he’s lying, maybe it’s more important for the relationship with him to be nurtured and try to create a connection again?” In your search for truth you may be sowing more distrust between you. You also asked how to rebuild that trust. Sometimes talking endlessly isn’t the answer, especially given your son clearly finds this tricky. Benjamin suggested doing “low-key, structured activities with him, that you know he’ll do and where you can have positive times together”. And where there’s no pressure to have deep and meaningful conversations. Something like bowling, where little talking is needed and you’re all concentrated on a common “something else”. Feeling as if he’s letting you down all the time must be eroding his self-esteem, so also try to focus on what he does well. What does he like and is there an outlet for this? You mention counselling and while it would be great for him to have an outlet that’s just for him, I’m not sure if he needs more than a school counsellor at the moment (if there is one?). Benjamin also wondered if his school did a mentoring programme. Adolescence can be such a tricky time: teens learn independence and detach from their parents, and in turn parents can feel rejected. Have a listen tomy podcast on the teenage brain which has lots of useful information for the parental tool box. If you would like advice on a family matter, email ask.annalisa@theguardian.com. See gu.com/letters-terms for terms and conditions Conversations With Annalisa Barbieri, a new podcast series, is available here. Comments on this piece are pre-moderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article. Please be aware that there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.Pick of the week The Wife When Glenn Close was nominated a seventh time for an Oscar for this 2017 drama, many thought this would be the one for the win. Sadly it wasn’t to be, but Björn Runge’s fine film revolves round her subtle performance. She plays Joan Castleman, married for years to womanising, narcissistic novelist Joe (a marvellously insufferable Jonathan Pryce) who has just been awarded the 1992 Nobel prize in literature. As they visit Stockholm for the ceremony, secrets from the past about his and her creative lives seep to the surface. Close is simply mesmerising here, her face revealing flickers of discomfort, sadness, anger – until the dutiful spouse character she invented sticks in her throat once too often. Sunday 5 December, 11.10pm, BBC Two *** First Love The output of indecently prolific Japanese director Takashi Miike (100 films and counting) will always be hit-and-miss. This 2019 effort is most definitely a hit, a frenetic yakuza comedy thriller with a surprisingly tender meet-cute at its heart. Tokyo boxer Leo (Masataka Kubota) is caught up in a criminal double-cross when he saves enslaved, drug-addicted sex worker Monica (Sakurako Konishi) from a corrupt cop. The long night that ensues includes hallucinations in Y-fronts, a fight in a DIY store and even a spot of animation, as the couple flee competing gangs. Saturday 4 December, 11.15pm, Film4 *** Topsy-Turvy This 1999 film was a bit of a sidestep by social-realist comedy master Mike Leigh, its subject being the Victorian light opera duo WS Gilbert (Jim Broadbent) and Arthur Sullivan (Allan Corduner) and their creation of The Mikado. Still, it’s a visual treat, with costume, makeup and set design bringing the theatrical world of 1884 to vivid, scrappy life. Naturally, being Leigh, the troubles of the time aren’t neglected but they’re more of a side-issue to the real dilemma Gilbert and Sullivan face: how to follow up their last hit when the creative well has run dry. Monday 6 December, 11.25pm, Film4 *** The Manchurian Candidate John Frankenheimer’s 1962 film is one of the great American conspiracy thrillers, with real reds under the bed sweatily bent on disrupting the US democratic process. Frank Sinatra’s Marco and Laurence Harvey’s Shaw are GIs captured by the Chinese during the Korean war. After their release, Shaw’s heroism is exploited by his mother (Angela Lansbury) on behalf of her senator husband’s political ambitions. But Shaw has been brainwashed by the communists as a sleeper assassin, and Marco races against time to uncover his mission and stop him. Thursday 9 December, 9pm, BBC Four *** Touching the Void This 2003 documentary, adapted by Kevin Macdonald from Joe Simpson’s book, tells a scarcely believable tale of human endurance and sheer bloody-mindedness. Simpson and climbing companion Simon Yates were descending a peak in Peru in 1985 when Simpson fell down a crevasse; Yates, unable to locate him and assuming he was dead, returned to camp. How the severely injured Simpson survived and made his way out to safety is related expertly through dramatic reconstructions and interviews. Available to rent on Amazon Prime Video *** Encounter What starts out as a potential cross between Invasion of the Body Snatchers and Phase IV evolves into a touching tale of family breakup and a soldier’s trauma in Michael Pearce’s drama. Riz Ahmed’s former Marine, Malik, turns up at ex-wife’s house and spirits away his two young sons to save them from parasitical “non-terrestrial micro-organisms” taking over humanity. But, as becomes clear during their road trip across arid lands, the roots of his paranoia are more prosaic. Ahmed’s skill at playing intense, off-kilter characters is to the fore, while Octavia Spencer gives steady support as his parole officer. Friday 10 December, Amazon Prime Video *** Mr Jones Gareth Jones was a foreign office adviser and journalist who exposed the deaths of millions in the Soviet famine of the early 1930s, but was belittled by the press and ignored by governments more concerned with international relations. Agnieszka Holland’s historical thriller brings his story to light, albeit with some fictional embellishments, using Jones’s supposed influence on George Orwell to frame it in Animal Farm references. James Norton portrays him as an engaging if naive character who slips into Ukraine to witness the deadly lie of communist progress. Friday 10 December, Amazon Prime Video • This article was amended on 3 December 2021 as the 2003 film Touching the Void is available to rent on Amazon Prime Video but is not showing on Sky Arts on 9 December.It was one of the most eye-catching moves in Keir Starmer’s shadow cabinet reshuffle, marking a comeback for a former cabinet minister who first cut her teeth in government under Tony Blair. And Yvette Cooper has wasted little time putting herself at the forefront of her party’s pitch to win the next general election. In an interview with the Guardian, the new shadow home secretary said Labour now had a top team that “could be in government tomorrow”, and could credibly challenge the Tories on law and order. Asked about her new role, Cooper said: “The thing that feels important about it is, I’ve had now 11 years of working in detail on Home Office issues, as well as obviously, past experience in government as the courts minister, and cabinet experience as well. And Keir was obviously five years as the director of public prosecutions. So I think together, we bring very strong experience and a Labour alternative.” Asked whether the reshuffle marked a shift to the political right, she said “it’s a focus on a shadow cabinet that could be in government tomorrow”, contrasting that with a government she called “shambolic, and not really capable of doing the job”. Cooper was shadow home secretary during Ed Miliband’s leadership, before returning to the backbenches as chair of the home affairs select committee for the past five years. Speaking for the first time since her appointment, Cooper attacked Boris Johnson for undermining the rule of law; demanded more action on “spiking”; and underscored Labour’s calls for predeparture testing to slow the spread of the Omicron variant. With the prime minister under pressure over a Downing Street Christmas party apparently held last December while strict limits on socialising were in place, Cooper said Johnson’s scant regard for rules meant the Tories’ claim to be the party of law an order was a “joke”. “He still really thinks it’s one rule for him and another for everyone else,” she said. “They have undermined all of the institutions that hold up the criminal justice system, from policing, to prevention, to the courts, and they have stepped back and done nothing while it’s frankly become much easier to be a criminal. But also, they actually just show no respect for following the rules.” She contrasted that with what she called Starmer’s “serious steadiness”. Cooper said Labour was the party of “safer communities” and would take a more active approach than the Tories in tackling crime at its roots, citing as an example the spiking of drinks. “I just think it should be treated as a serious crime: it’s not being. And actually, it’s poisoning people,” she said. “How have we allowed a situation to arise, where young people go to clubs or to pubs and have to protect their drinks? “An active Home Office would say: OK we’ve got evidence that there’s a problem that seems to be getting worse. Is it linked to something that’s happening online? Is it linked to changing crime patterns? Is there work that local authorities can do working with police forces? “The Tories don’t do any of that, because they don’t think it’s their responsibility. We believe in active government, to do something about it.” Cooper said she would back the government on some issues, such as countering terrorist threats, but in other areas Labour would be “calling on them to get a grip, but also setting out: actually here’s what grip would look like.” On immigration, where the Tories have consistently sough to portray Labour as soft, Cooper says she believes the public are ready for a “calm, sensible conversation”. “What does a fair immigration system look like, that supports the economy, that allows people to fall in love across borders, to get married?” she said. Labour is not backing the government’s nationality and borders bill, which returns to parliament next week and includes measures Johnson has claimed will allow the Border Force to turn back people trying to reach England in small boats. Rather than criticise the bill as illiberal, Cooper said: “This legislation is just a sham, and they’re making a lot of promises, but actually all they’ve got is unworkable measures.” The home secretary, Priti Patel, has been touring Europe this week in an effort to agree a response to the growing number of desperate people risking their lives at sea in the hope of claiming asylum in the UK. Cooper echoes the approach of her predecessor Nick Thomas-Symonds by calling for the government to negotiate a post-Brexit successor to the Dublin agreement, which allows some asylum seekers to be returned to the first EU country in which they arrived, to help tackle the challenge of preventing so many people risking their lives by taking to the sea in flimsy vessels. “That included family reunion, that included safe legal routes, and it included safe returns as well,” she said. She points out that the government has returned just five asylum seekers in the past nine months, despite its tough rhetoric, compared with 289 last year when the UK was still bound by the Dublin agreement. One of Cooper’s first interventions has been to join with the new shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, to call on the government to reintroduce predeparture testing for all passengers arriving in the UK to slow the spread of the Omicron Covid variant. “Why on earth not do just something as basic as requiring people to get a test before they get on a plane?” she said in the exasperated tone she has made her trademark while grilling successive home secretaries. “If you arrive at an airport, you can get on a busy, crowded plane, you can arrive in a really crowded arrivals hall, get on to a busy tube train, get on to a busy train, a busy bus, arrive home, see your housemates or your family. All of those things can happen and you’ve never had a test anywhere along the way.” Cooper has frequently been linked with a potential leadership challenge and some Labour sources have suggested her arrival in the shadow cabinet marks a truce amid fears she or another centrist contender could challenge Starmer. Asked if she saw herself as a potential future Labour leader, Cooper said: “I want to be home secretary.” On whether Starmer has what it takes to be prime minister, she said: “Look, he’s prosecuted terrorists. He would be absolutely capable of taking the difficult decisions that a prime minister needs to take.”Nine lawyers allied with Donald Trump were ordered on Thursday to pay Detroit and Michigan a total of $175,000 in sanctions for abusing the court system with a sham lawsuit challenging the 2020 election results. The money, which must be paid within 30 days, will cover the legal costs of defending against the suit, which were more than $153,000 for the city and nearly $22,000 for the state. US district judge Linda Parker, who agreed to impose sanctions in August in a scathing opinion, rejected most of the attorneys’ objections to Detroit’s proposed award, but she did reduce it by about $29,000. Those sanctioned include Sidney Powell, L Lin Wood and seven other lawyers who were part of the lawsuit filed on behalf of six Republican voters after Joe Biden’s 154,000-vote victory over Trump in what officials have called the most secure election in US history. “Plaintiffs’ attorneys, many of whom seek donations from the public to fund lawsuits like this one … have the ability to pay this sanction,” Parker wrote. She previously ordered each of the lawyers to undergo 12 hours of legal education, including six hours in election law. Michigan’s top three elected officials, the governor, Gretchen Whitmer, state attorney general Dana Nessel and Michigan secretary of state Jocelyn Benson, all Democrats, are seeking the disbarment of four of the nine attorneys, including Powell. She is licensed in Texas. The other three are admitted to practice in Michigan. Powell could not be reached for comment. Wood said he will appeal the order. “I undertook no act in Michigan and I had no involvement in the Michigan lawsuit filed by Sidney Powell,” he said in an email. Wood’s name was on the lawsuit, but he has insisted he had no role other than to tell Powell he would be available if needed. Powell is best known for saying she would “release the kraken”, a mythical sea creature, to destroy Biden’s claim on the White House. But baseless lawsuits in Michigan and elsewhere went nowhere. “There are consequences to filing meritless lawsuits to grab media attention and mislead Americans,” Benson, the state’s chief election official, said in a statement. “The sanctions awarded in this case are a testament to that, even if the dollar amounts pale in comparison to the damage that’s already been done to our nation’s democracy.”Stephen Colbert On The Late Show, Stephen Colbert started by discussing one of the week’s biggest stories: the possible dismantling of abortion laws in the US. The supreme court has been discussing the landmark case Roe v Wade, in relation to a Mississippi case brought in front of them. He remarked that “it is looking rough for Roe”. Amy Coney Barrett, Trump’s final appointee to the supreme court, used mandated Covid vaccinations as a comparison to comments about abortion. “Vaccines are mandated because Covid is contagious,” Colbert said. “No one ever says, ‘Can you put a mask on your belly? I don’t want to catch baby.’” Colbert summed up the issue of a heavily right-tilting court by saying: “I don’t want to get too technical but we, what’s the word, don’t live in a democracy.” He reminded his audience that five of the nine justices were appointed by presidents who lost the popular vote. The rise in Omicron cases has had anti-vaxxers coming out with their latest theories, an excuse to “make up crazy crap” such as noting that it must be a hoax because the letters can be reassembled to make the word moronic. “That theory is incredibly Omicron,” he joked. Jimmy Kimmel Jimmy Kimmel spoke about congress trying to avoid a shutdown due to finance issues. “I don’t understand this,” he said. “Donald Trump isn’t president any more – why are we still running the country like one of his businesses?” This week has also seen the German government institute a new lockdown for those who refuse to get vaccinated. “It’s always a bit scary when you hear the words Germany and lockdown in the same sentence,” he said. Trump appeared on Fox &amp; Friends this week to give “a lesson in revisionist history” as he claimed that people were fighting to get the vaccine while he was in office, despite the fact that the vaccine became available after he was no longer president. “The only thing people were fighting over when you were president was toilet paper,” Kimmel joked. But he added that “it hardly seems possible, but there’s an even dumber Donald Trump out there” before showing footage of Donald Trump Jr, also on Fox, making wild claims about Fauci and the economy. “He sure does talk about the economy a lot for someone who never had to go out and get a job,” Kimmel said. Trevor Noah On The Daily Show, Trevor Noah hosted a segment about German chancellor Angela Merkel, who has been “underestimated by everybody”. Before she rose to power, she was often the butt of jokes because of her appearance and supposed fragility, which Noah said must sting “because Germans only make one joke a year, and they saved it for her”. But she proved everyone wrong, and Noah said that “if there’s one thing we’ve learned from movies it’s that you should never underestimate the shy, mousy woman: She’s All That, The Devil Wears Prada, The Blair Witch Project”. He showed a montage of male leaders trying to disrespect Merkel, from Putin to Trump. “The way these leaders treated her is embarrassing,” he said before remarking that it’s a tough situation to sort as “there’s no HR for world leaders”. “Luckily as a German, Merkel wasn’t fazed by the sausage-fest,” he said before saluting her: “You kept things stable, you stood up for democracy and you never once appeared on Jeffrey Epstein’s flight logs.”‘I wanna be in the room where it happens,” sings Aaron Burr in Hamilton. Since most of us have the desire to know what goes on behind closed doors, there is a riveting fascination to Colin Murphy’s play The Treaty, about the Anglo-Irish Treaty, the centenary of which falls on 6 December. Fishamble recently staged the play in Dublin and I caught it at the Irish embassy in London where it has a handful of performances before being streamed next week. It is a remarkable piece of political theatre. Murphy has compressed two months of negotiation into 90 minutes. The Dublin delegation led by Arthur Griffith, the founder of Sinn Féin, and Michael Collins come to London in 1921 seeking formal recognition of an Irish republic independent of the British empire. The British team, spearheaded by the prime minister David Lloyd George and colonial secretary Winston Churchill, are equally determined to keep Ireland within the empire and protect the rights of Ulster’s six counties. Gradually, the two sides edge towards compromise with the last-minute signing of a treaty that has huge consequences for the countries and the individuals involved. Murphy makes brilliantly clear what is at stake. The diehards on the Irish side want to reject any treaty that involves allegiance to the crown. Meanwhile, Lloyd George argues that, for Britain, solving the Irish question is the key to all politics and Churchill claims that “any government that facilitated a republic would be smashed to atoms”. But Murphy also shows that in politics the devil is in the details and that compromise can be achieved through alteration of a single phrase. How about, asks the British lawyer Lord Birkenhead, if we leave out the word “empire” and substitute “Commonwealth of Nations”? I was gripped by Conall Morrison’s production, which contains some of the best gender-blind casting I have seen: Karen Ardiff as Griffith, Jane Brennan as Éamon de Valera and Camille Lucy Ross as Churchill all capture the essence of their characters. I was also reminded of other works that prove the political process is inherently dramatic. A classic example was David Edgar’s The Shape of the Table, which showed how an east European communist country’s transition to democracy hinged on forming the right seating-plan. James Graham’s This House focused on the desperate stratagems of the Labour party from 1974 to 1979 to survive a hung parliament and a wafer-thin majority. And a whole series of tribunal plays edited by Richard Norton-Taylor and staged by Nicolas Kent, from The Colour of Justice to the more recent Grenfell: Value Engineering, have used verbatim techniques to expose the fissures in British society. All these plays employ different methods but they prove that political theatre, often assumed to be in mortal decline, is still vibrantly alive. The Treaty, in fact, is part of an honourable tradition in that it shows drama’s capacity, by admitting us to inner counsels, to reveal history in the making. We still wanna be in the room where it happens. • The Treaty is at the Embassy of Ireland, London, until 4 December. Then available online, 6-12 December.Poland is planning to introduce a centralised register of pregnancies that would oblige doctors to report all pregnancies and miscarriages to the government. The proposed register would come into effect in January 2022, a year after Poland introduced a near-total ban on abortion. This has raised serious concerns among women’s rights activists, who believe that in light of the abortion ban, the register could be used to cause legal difficulties for women who have self-administered abortions. The draft legislation is part of a wide-ranging project to update the medical information system in Poland. “It’s about control, it’s about making sure that pregnancies end with birth,” Natalia Broniarczyk, an activist from Aborcyjny Dream Team told the Polish weekly Gazeta Wyborcza. The plan prompted online protests. A social media initiative titled “I’d like to politely report that I am not pregnant” encouraged Polish women to email photos of their used sanitary pads, tampons and underwear to the Polish ministry of health. The ministry has strongly denied the project amounts to a centralised pregnancy register, with a spokesperson saying the changes are simply part of wide-ranging digitalisation project that will update the way data about a multitude of conditions, including allergies, is stored. The spokesperson said doctors always had information on pregnancies, but before it was stored on paper by hospitals, rather than centrally by the government. The concerns of activists about the register grew considerably after a bill proposed by the government that would establish an “institute of family and demographics” passed first reading in the Polish parliament by one vote on Thursday. The institute would aim to monitor family policy, pass opinion on legislation and educate citizens on the “vital role of family to the social order” and the importance of “cultural-social reproduction” in the context of marriage. The institute would have access to citizens’ personal data and prosecutorial powers in the realm of family law, prompting worries it could be used to enforce the country’s strict abortion law. The project has drawn widespread criticism from Polish academics and civil rights advocates. “Maybe just call it the ‘Red Center of Rachel and Leah’,” a feminist organisation from Łódź said in an Instagram post, referencing Margaret Atwood’s dystopian novel The Handmaid’s Tale. In the novel the Rachel and Leah Center is a training facility for women designated to be “breeders” by the authoritarian regime. The committee of demographic researchers at the Polish Academy of Sciences has issued a statement expressing concerns that the “pro-natalist propaganda” would take precedent over scientific research at the institute. “The project aims exclusively to promote traditional model of family,” Adam Bodnar, Poland’s former ombudsman for citizen rights, told the Polish news website Oko.press. “It could also become a tool against those who fall outside this model, for example those who do not conform to heteronormative norms.”A woman who killed her six-year-old stepson, who had been poisoned, starved and beaten in the weeks before his death, has been sentenced to life in prison with a minimum term of 29 years. Emma Tustin, 32, was sentenced for the murder of Arthur Labinjo-Hughes, alongside his father, 29-year-old Thomas Hughes, who was given 21 years in prison for manslaughter. “Arthur was subjected to the most unimaginable suffering at the hands of both of you. You both told lies to conceal what was happening in that house. Your behaviour towards him was often spiteful and at times sadistic,” said Mr Justice Wall as he passed sentence at Coventry crown court on Friday. “This is without doubt one of the most distressing and disturbing cases with which I have had to deal.” The pair were convicted on Thursday after an eight-week trial that revealed how Arthur was subjected to “incomprehensible and escalating cruelty”, prosecutors argued. He was physically assaulted, poisoned with salt and forced to stand in isolation for up to 14 hours a day in the months leading up to his death. Wall described Tustin, who refused to come to the dock for the sentencing, as a “manipulative woman who will tell any lie and shift the blame on to anyone to save her own skin”. He said it was a “shocking feature of the case” that Tustin’s own two children, aged four and five, “lived a perfectly happy, normal life in that household while this appalling cruelty to Arthur was taking place”. Addressing Hughes, he said the father had apparently cared properly for Arthur “before you became infatuated with Tustin to the extent that it obliterated all your love for your son”. Tustin killed Arthur on 16 June last year by violently shaking and hitting his head, causing injuries that were “extensive and devastating”, Wall said. “The amount of violence you used on him produced forces on his body said to be equivalent to those which might otherwise have been produced by a high-speed road traffic collision.” Tustin poisoned Arthur with salt over a number of weeks, giving him a significant amount in the hours before his death. When he was admitted to hospital, the levels of sodium in his blood were so high they could not accurately be measured by hospital equipment, and 130 bruises were found on his body, a number described as “staggering” by a medical expert. An investigation has been launched into local social services, which failed to detect the abuse that began when Hughes moved into Tustin’s home in Solihull with his son during lockdown last year. Social workers visited Tustin’s house two months before Arthur’s death after concerns were raised by his grandmother, Joanne Hughes, about bruises on his back, but they concluded there were “no safeguarding concerns”. West Midlands police are also being investigated by the police watchdog for their actions after being forwarded photos of the bruises on Arthur’s body. In a victim impact statement read out in court before sentencing, Joanne Hughes said: “It is clear from the evidence that I have heard that Arthur was failed by the very authorities that we, as a society, are led to believe are there to ensure the safety of everyone.” The family said that prior to Tustin’s involvement Arthur was “the model of a happy, joyous, exuberant and loving six-year-old” who loved dressing up as superheroes, playing cricket and football, and they “would always remember him so”. Birmingham City, the football club Arthur supported, said it would encourage fans to take part in a minute’s applause in the sixth minute of its game against Millwall on Saturday in tribute to Arthur. Wall said “the mental image of Hughes deliberately ripping up [Arthur’s] beloved Birmingham City football shirt” was one of many that would “live with anyone who attended this trial for a very long time”. In messages to his partner, Hughes often referred to his son using expletives, and compared him to Hitler and Satan, part of a pattern of dehumanisation that enabled the abuse, the prosecution argued. “The less human he seemed to be, the more freedom you had to abuse him,” Wall said. Hughes’ encouragement of his partner’s actions was chilling, he said. “You were Arthur’s father, in a position of trust, and bore primary responsibility for protecting him.”Chelsea got away with one against Watford last Wednesday and they will have to up their game when they visit the London Stadium. That will be tough without N’Golo Kanté, but Jorginho should return in midfield and Reece James has likely recovered from an ankle problem. West Ham, meanwhile, have a slight doubt over Michail Antonio and will hope that Aaron Cresswell shakes off a back injury in time. They will need a strong performance if they are to end a run of three games without a win. Jacob Steinberg Saturday 12.30pm BT Sport 1 Venue London Stadium Last season West Ham 0 Chelsea 1 Referee Andre Marriner This season G8 Y36 R2 4.75 cards/game Odds H 4-1 A 13-16 D 11-4 WEST HAM Subs from Areola, Randolph, Fredericks, Diop, Masuaku, Cresswell, Kral, Noble, Benrahma, Vlasic, Ashby, Chesters, Yarmolenko, Baptiste, Perkins Doubtful Antonio (knee), Cresswell (back) Injured Ogbonna (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y16 R1 Form WWWLLD Leading scorer Antonio 6 CHELSEA Subs from Arrizabalaga, Bettinelli, Azpilicueta, Sarr, Saúl, Ziyech, Pulisic, Vale, Barkley, Lukaku, Werner Doubtful James (ankle) Injured Kanté (knee, 8 Dec), Chalobah (hamstring, unknown), Chilwell (knee (unknown), Kovacic (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y18 R1 Form WWDWDW Leading scorers James, Mount 4The Labour MP Chris Bryant has said that Downing Street’s focus on culture wars has contributed to an ideological environment in which he feels “less physically safe as a gay man” than was the case 30 years ago. Bryant, the MP for Rhondda since 2001, whose work as chair of the Commons standards committee has seen him take a leading role in recent discussions about parliamentary sleaze, said he had discussed his worries about fomenting culture wars with “people who work in Downing Street”. Speaking to Nick Robinson’s Political Thinking, produced by the BBC, Bryant said that while he did not believe Boris Johnson was personally homophobic, attempts to stir social divisions inevitably meant people from minority groups would be targeted. “They’ve learned this trick in America from Trump and, in the end, culture wars will always pick on those who are slightly different and that means the gays, the Jews and the blacks and that’s always the list that crops up whenever a populist government gets into power,” Bryant argued. Questioned about examples of culture war policies, Bryant noted the government’s position on transgender people, adding that ministers were also seemingly not prepared to put in place a full ban on conversion practices. “There’s a world where people think it’s politically advantageous to stir that pot and that makes me genuinely fearful,” he said. ‘I’m not accusing the prime minister of being homophobic but I do feel less physically safe as a gay man than I did 30 years ago.” While Bryant said he did not spend each day “worrying I’m going to be gay-bashed”, he was concerned about levels of crimes targeting LGBT people, adding that homophobia is “a very strong part of people’s experience of modern Britain”. Johnson has been regularly accused of seeking political advantage by using divisive cultural issues to woo supporters, and to disparage opponents. Much of the impetus for such policies within No 10 is said to come from Johnson’s adviser, Munira Mirza, and her colleague and husband, Dougie Smith. As a policy it has manifested in various ways, including regular attacks on “woke” opinions, and attempts to stack cultural institutions and other organisations with ideologically like-minded people. Mirza was the key organiser behind Downing Street’s official response to racial justice movements in March this year, which played down the impact of structural factors in ethnic disparities and said the UK should be seen as an exemplar of equality. Such tactics have backfired in the past, such as when Johnson and his ministers had to hastily backtrack from criticisms of the decision of England football players to take the knee before matches amid widespread support for the team during last year’s Euro 2020 tournament.Three months into her new job, Megan McCracken has never met most of the members of her team. So the office Christmas party was a big deal. “We’re spread out all over the country,” said the 25-year-old, who lives in Sheffield. “It would have been so good to have the chance to actually see them in person. When the party was announced, it was put out there as this chance to spend time together.” The plan was a training awayday followed by dinner, a party and a night in a hotel. “It was a big deal because we’ve had such a terrible couple of years. It was light at the end of the tunnel.” Then Omicron happened. McCracken’s company, an occupational health firm with a keen sense of the importance of practising what it preaches, cancelled. While understanding the decision, McCracken says her own friends are still keen to see each other. “I think a lot of people would feel uncomfortable about a big thing now, but everyone is still very much up for meeting up in smaller groups,” she said. “Otherwise it’s like that light at the end of the tunnel has gone. And you have this feeling: are we in this for ever now?” Al, a 32-year-old advertising account manager in London, has also had her work Christmas do called off, but she isn’t particularly fussed. “I would say I actually like about one in three of my colleagues, I’m not that up for watching them get off with each other and vomit on themselves,” she said, hastily adding that she had probably better not use her last name. “But seeing your mates is a different thing. Going out is the best bit of Christmas, isn’t it?” A university reunion, a pub crawl and two karaoke evenings are the tentpole events of her schedule, and she reckons she will be out four nights a week until Christmas Eve. “I do feel a bit guilty about all of it, but until Boris Johnson literally says ‘do not leave your house’ I’m not going to cancel,” she said. “Sod that.” In this, the season of pissed and mellow boozefulness, the heartsinking news of Omicron has led companies across the country to conclude they have no choice but to call things off. NatWest, Aviva, University College London, Bandai, Age UK, NHS trusts and the BBC are among those to have gone beyond official guidance to cancel planned Christmas parties. A survey by the Covid-testing company Prenetics of 2,000 office workers concluded that about 52% of workplaces had decided not to hold the usual annual knees-up, and the online bookings platform Design My Night says cancellations went up by 14% after the government announced masks would be compulsory in shops in England last week. At the same time, though, party-starved veterans of last year’s grim December appear largely determined to press on, on their own terms. It’s a tale of two Christmases, and nobody is quite sure what the ending will be. Simon Potts, the managing director of The Alchemist, a cocktail bar and restaurant group with 18 sites across England and Wales, said his clientele – 22- to 34-year-olds – had been committed to going out since around July. “We know people have been sat on cash, and there’s plenty of supporting data to suggest young people particularly are keen to live in the moment,” he said. While there had been “a little flurry of spooked corporate bookings where a CEO somewhere has pulled the plug,” for his company “I’m not sure there’s a shortfall at all … office workers are still going out, just in different guises.” For hospitality businesses with more corporate bookings, though, the impact is making itself felt. Simon Wood, the MasterChef winner who runs two restaurants, Wood Manchester and WoodKraft Cheltenham, said he was now “militant” about deposits and, at Wood Manchester, late cancellation penalties to deal with the problem. Even so, a big corporate cancellation hurts. “I understand if a booking for six becomes a booking for four, we just have to roll with that,” Wood said. “But we lost a 40-person breakfast booking in Cheltenham because their office won’t let them socialise in a big group.” “The biggest issue is no-shows,” said Michael Kill, the chief executive of the Night Time Industries Association. He blamed “confused” government messaging, which is hard to argue with: on the one hand Jenny Harries, the chief executive of the UK Health Security Agency, has suggested people shouldn’t socialise “when they don’t particularly need to”, and the science minister George Freeman has said his department would not be holding a large event; on the other, Sajid Javid and Boris Johnson have urged people to carry on as normal. Reports of parties in Downing Street last December have done little to dampen a sense of confusion. And then there was Thérèse Coffey, the work and pensions secretary, giving a highly specific warning against snogging strangers, only for Downing Street to reiterate that people could get off with whoever they like. The official position is that the “necessary and proportionate” return to compulsory face masks in shops and on public transport, as well as enhanced measures for international travellers, are all that is necessary for now. “The government doesn’t seem to understand that any representation of doubt just has a market reaction,” Kill said. “Nobody really knows what they’re supposed to do.” To many events businesses that rely on a big December peak to get them through the quiet new year months, the message appears to be one of caution without compensation. “It needs to be what it needs to be,” said Ceri Steed, director (and, it should be noted, chief juggler) at Exitus Escape Rooms in Cardiff. “If we’re told that you have to close to protect the NHS, that’s fine. But at the moment it feels like they’re saying don’t come, but also we’re not going to support you.” Steed is dying to make full use of her purpose-designed Christmas Chaos room – “the elves had a bit too much mulled wine at the Christmas party,” the Exitus website says, resulting in the loss of various presents, and it is the participants’ job to get them back under the tree – but has seen some cancellations from out-of-town visitors. “But we’re holding up with companies – our advantage is that the room isn’t shared with anyone outside of their group, so it’s different to a restaurant or a pub.” In the face of so much uncertainty, even those who are determined to have a good time are also resigned to the prospect that they may soon not have a choice. “You hear so many conflicting things about Omicron,” Al said. “We were talking about it in the pub last night. And then I wondered if I should be there at all.” Did she leave? “I did,” she said. “But only after another two pints.”A FINAL RECKONING As The Fiver’s English cousin $exually Repressed Morris Dancing Fiver rolled out of the scratcher on Sunday 11 July, it was coming home. The clouds had formed into the shape of the Three Lions and Sweet Caroline was pumping out of every wireless in the neighbourhood. Cry God for Harry Kane, Ingerlund and St George! Ten full hours until kick-off, how else to build up to the Euro Not 2020 final than tucking into the super-strength Tin and some of that jazz salt Weird Uncle Fiver has dropped off by a man in a motorbike helmet? And there were fireworks, too, with one in particular custom-made to be placed where the sun doesn’t shine and lit, thus making everyone outside the BoxPark lol at the epic b@ntz. After all, what other possible way was there to behave on the day of Ingerlund’s first major final in 55 years? $exually Repressed Morris Dancing Fiver is English, goddamnit, and this is how he celebrates nice things. It kills the tension, see, and everyone else is doing it, so why can’t he? Sir Gareth had given the English something to celebrate after the Great Unpleasantness had kept him swilling Tin indoors for so many months. Many fans decided they would head on down to Wembley Way to take part in the fun, and there things got heated. As confirmed in a 129-page report published on Friday, around 2,000 ticketless people stormed Wem-ber-lee after 17 “mass breaches” of the stadium gates, many forcing their way through disabled access entrances by punching and kicking stewards. “The Euro 2020 final was a potentially glorious national occasion that turned into a day of national shame,” said Baroness Louise Casey, the former UK government official who authored the independent report. The behaviour of a large minority of England supporters was not just disgraceful, it recklessly endangered lives. The threats, aggression, violence, smoke and flare use, throwing of missiles – including faeces – excessive consumption of alcohol and cocaine all combined to fuel a febrile atmosphere.” And worse, Wembley’s disabled entrances were targeted. “A ticketless fan tried to impersonate a steward and hijack a disabled child and separated him from his father, in order to trick his way through a pass gate,” reads the report. It also suggests the chaos would have deepened had England actually beaten Italy and a horde of 6,000 stormed through the exit gates. Baroness Casey has asked for a new class of fixture, one of “national significance”, demanding greater response from organisers. The report said of those running the Euro Not 2020 final that “no one was fully prepared for what happened that day and it can’t be allowed to happen again”. But “the primary responsibility … lies with those who lost control of their own behaviour that day,” she said. QUOTE OF THE DAY “Maybe if they ask my opinion and everything goes well and we develop the team I might even make the same recommendation to the board that I did at Leipzig twice when I recommended it might be a good idea to keep working with me for one year” – Ralf Rangnick has only been at his Manchester United desk a few hours and he’s already thinking about how to get rid of that interim manager tag. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Get your ears around Football Weekly Extra, here. FIVER LETTERS “So long, Michael Carrick. He leaves management at Old Trafford with a 67% win ratio. No mean feat for a coach who chose to bring Evil Edna back to the centre of defence after a brief suspension” – Mark McFadden. “Michael Monroe Asks if things can get worse than relying on The Fiver for wisdom (Yesterday’s Fiver). Fancy a date with Weird Uncle Fiver or a meal with Granny Fiver? I thought not” – Mike Wilner. “Michael Monroe can stop worrying. The Fiver shamelessly nicked that line from John Cleese’s character in the wonderful film Clockwise. The actual quote is ‘It’s not the despair, Laura. I can take the despair. It’s the hope I can’t stand’. As a Villa fan I’ve long been convinced that it should be our new club motto” – Richard O’Hagan. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Mark McFadden. And prizes are back on Monday, folks! We’ll have five copies of a revised and updated version of Richard Foster’s Premier League Nuggets to give away through the week. It is also available to buy here. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Europe’s clubs are seeking urgent talks with Fifa after raising concerns over player safety at next month’s Africa Cup of Nations. Who is going to inspire Newcastle to their first win of the season? Joelinton, that’s who. “I wouldn’t swap [him],” parped Eddie Howe. “I really like him as a person and I think we can take his game to new heights.” Like The Fiver when we first played Manic Miner, Arsenal just can’t get to that next level – and it’s annoying Mikel Arteta to the extent that he wants the oldies in his squad to do more. “The senior players have to lead and the young players have to follow,” he blabbed. Tommy T is determined to find some way of making Saúl Ñíguez useful. “I think that he could play in a wing-back role for us,” soothed the Chelsea boss. “Even if we play in a dominant game, an offensive game because he is very strong in arriving in the opponents’ box.” Pep Guardiola can put his tiny violin away because Manchester City’s injury “emergency” is over now that Kevin De Bruyne, Ilkay Gündogan, John Stones and Kyle Walker are training again. And Jürgen Klopp is delighted to have former Brazil international Taffarel on board as a Liverpool goalkeeping coach. “It is important because he’s older than me and I am no longer the oldest member of the coaching staff,” he cheered. STILL WANT MORE? Blind football requires unique physical and mental skills and changes its players for life – and the FA wants it to grow. Paul MacInnes has the story. Ralf Rangnick’s 24-match task is very simple, suggests Jamie Jackson. Go fourth with Manchester United. Dortmund fans have often been slightly restrained in their adoration of Erling Haaland but it’s hard to think of a young foreign player more straightforwardly loved by the yellow wall than Jude Bellingham, writes Jonathan Liew ahead of Saturday’s Klassiker. Erin Cuthbert’s dad, Steve, still won’t let her win at anything but that terrier spirit drives her ambition. The Chelsea and Scotland midfielder gets her chat on with Suzanne Wrack before Sunday’s FA Cup final against Arsenal. Tariq Lamptey, Adama Traoré and Patrick Bamford are among the Premier League protagonists cast into the spotlight by our writers in this weekend’s 10 things to look out for. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! ROLL ON SUNDAYThe first formal talks between western powers and the new Iranian regime on how to restore the 2015 nuclear deal were suspended on Friday, with Europe warning that Iran had walked back all previous diplomatic progress and fast-forwarded its nuclear programme. It now seems possible the talks will collapse next week if Iran does not modify its demands, potentially risking an attack on Iran by Israel. The EU’s chief negotiator, Enrique Mora, said the talks would reconvene next week, but warned that time was not unlimited. Diplomats representing the three European powers at the talks – Britain, France and Germany – said they were disappointed and concerned by the impasse. They said: “Tehran is walking back almost all of the difficult compromises crafted after many months of hard work,” adding that major changes were being demanded. “Over five months ago, Iran interrupted negotiations. Since then, Iran has fast-forwarded its nuclear programme. This week, it has backtracked on the diplomatic progress made.” They said it was “unclear how these new gaps can be closed in a realistic timeframe on the basis of Iranian drafts. We have asked the coordinator to reconvene shortly.” They said the purpose of the suspension was to “allow delegations to return to capitals to assess the situation and seek instructions”, before reconvening next week “to see whether gaps can be closed or not”. The statement added: “Our governments remain fully committed to a diplomatic way forward. But time is running out.” Iran’s new government, elected in June, tabled revised documents on the sanctions the US would be required to lift, as well as new proposals on what Iran would be required to do to come back into full compliance with the deal. A third paper on the benchmarks – including levels of oil exports and foreign currency transactions – that would have to be met before Iran would judge that sanctions have been effectively lifted has been published but not formally tabled. EU diplomats said the proposals required the US to lift some sanctions imposed by Joe Biden that were clearly unrelated to the nuclear deal, and so represented a hardening of Iranian demands agreed in the prior six round of talks with the previous set of Iranian negotiators. The west is likely to return to the talks next Wednesday, but has the option of referring Iran to the UN security council for being in breach of its obligations under the 2015 deal. It is possible Iran would respond to such a reference by withdrawing from the nuclear non-proliferation treaty and refuse to rejoin unless Israel is required to join. Iran admitted that progress was slow, adding that its proposals could not be rejected since they were in line with the 2015 agreement. Israel, not a participant in the talks, said its western allies needed to realise that Iran was stalling as it continued to develop its nuclear programme. Strenuous efforts to reopen talks on how the IAEA, the UN nuclear inspectorate, could reach an agreement on the operation of its cameras at nuclear sites have made little progress, adding to the sense of gloom. The talks in Vienna are being held between Iran, Russia, China, Britain France and Germany. A US negotiating team is in Vienna but is not permitted to join the talks by Iran, on the basis that Donald Trump left the deal in 2018. Iran’s chief negotiator, Ali Bagheri Kani, said: “We are negotiating a comprehensive agreement. We are negotiating a comprehensive agreement that will pave the way for the return of a country that has left the agreement. We are seeking the lifting of unjust illegal US sanctions.” Mohammed Morandi, described as a member of the Iranian negotiating team but in effect acting as a spokesperson to the western media, accused Biden of criticising Trump’s policy of maximum pressure against Iran but continuing the same policy against Iran since taking office. As well as the direct talks in Vienna, the French president, Emmanuel Macron, spoke with the Iranian president, Ebrahim Raisi, in an attempt to break the deadlock, but he admitted the Vienna talks had not been a success.We would like to hear about the impact the pandemic has had on five year olds, particularly on their mental health and wellbeing. If you are a parent and/or teacher, we want to know how this age group is coping. What are you seeing in the classroom, and how are your children when they are at home, going to or leaving school? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The manner of the death of six-year-old Arthur Labinjo-Hughes at the hands of his father and stepmother, now convicted of manslaughter and murder respectively, is shocking. The evidence heard in court was some of the most tragic I’ve seen and heard in a social work career lasting more than 40 years. This was echoed by the judge who said: “[Arthur] was subjected to the most unimaginable suffering at the hands of both of you … Your behaviour towards him was often spiteful and at times sadistic.” Little wonder serious questions are being asked about how this was allowed to happen. Evidence appears to show that family members reported at least some of their concerns about Arthur to social workers and the police, including sending photos of bruises on his body. It was reported that social workers concluded there were “no safeguarding concerns”. A review of the role of children’s social work services is under way and an investigation by the Independent Office for Police Conduct is expected to report soon. How might we begin to make sense of how professionals missed what appears to us now with hindsight as obvious signs of dreadful child abuse? Media reports are placing a great deal of emphasis on the fact that Arthur and his father moved into the home of his stepmother at the start of the first Covid lockdown in March 2020. As soon as April, the wider family had reported suspected abuse and social workers had visited. I am part of a research team that examined the impact of Covid and social distancing measures on the capacity of social workers to keep children safe and help families during the first nine months of the pandemic. On the basis of our findings it seems likely that Arthur was in part let down due to the restrictions of social distancing and school closures. Social workers were directed by national and local government to minimise where possible having to go into family homes by seeing children and parents on doorsteps, in their gardens, or through video calls. It was very clear, though, that where serious child abuse was suspected, seeing children inside their homes was essential. Social workers were advised to wear PPE – especially face masks – and maintain a two-metre distance from children and parents. When adequate, and sometimes any, PPE was unavailable, we found that social workers consistently took significant personal risks to try to protect children. In the nine months we spoke to social workers, we consistently found that social distancing didn’t happen, not least because children often initiated physical contact with the worker. Invariably, social workers responded by providing the play, physical touch and nurture the children were reaching out for. But still, it is very important that inquiries take the effects of poor resourcing and the wider impact of austerity into account when looking into how social workers interacted with Arthur. Careful analysis of the actual bodily, interpersonal dynamics between Arthur and professionals will be crucial. Did social workers, the police and doctors see bruises? Was the child medically examined? It is important to stress that such routine child protection work did go on during lockdowns and our data shows that many children and families were kept safe and helped. That said, it was clear from our data that child protection workers did not have the same capacity and freedom to get close to children and to find out what their lives are like in the ways they could pre-pandemic. Two factors were crucial to this. First, especially during the initial lockdown, social workers were often the only professionals visiting children and going into family homes on a regular basis. Health visitors, early help and therapeutic services that normally support young children and parents retreated from homes and either went online or stopped altogether. Many schools made tremendous efforts to stay in touch with vulnerable children, doing telephone and doorstep visits, and the police visited in emergency situations, but the net result was that social workers often ended up being the sole agency going into homes. Just one in 10 parents of children in the UK aged under two saw a health visitor face-to-face during the first lockdown. This stopping of services for at-risk children was a major error, as the Institute of Health Visiting warned at the time, and should never be allowed to happen again. What abused children like Arthur need are safe spaces to talk about their lives and for as many professionals as possible to have access to them. In some high-risk cases in our study, social workers were able to make arrangements to see children in schools but this was wholly dependent upon parents allowing it. Lockdown made it possible for Arthur’s parents to legitimately keep him off school and torture him at will. Social workers often shared their fears with us that some parents were using the risk of Covid infection as an excuse to deny them the right to visit. Which brings us to a final hugely influential factor: the parents and their emotional impact. It is clear that they were frighteningly strategic in their abuse of Arthur and no doubt in concealing it. It has become commonplace for inquiries into such cases to conclude that social workers and others lack “professional curiosity” and miss the obvious because they are too “optimistic”; that the “rule of optimism” results in professionals naively and hopefully believing what parents tell them, and denying what is in front of them. My years of practice and research into child protection social work suggests that far from being optimistic, when faced with such aggressive and manipulative parents, social workers’ states of mind are often closer to helplessness. They are outmanoeuvred and overcome by the suffering and sadness in the atmosphere of such homes and in the children’s lives. It’s a very painful truth that when faced with the helplessness of children, social workers and other professionals can become helpless because they find the children’s suffering unbearable and the organisational support is not available to help them recognise the impact of fear and anxiety and their distorted thinking. It is difficult for us to even think of what Arthur went through, but think the unthinkable we must, and build a child protection system that supports social workers emotionally and practically to do just that. News reports and social media suggest that the appalling abuse Arthur suffered and the fact that opportunities to protect him were missed are already feeding a public desire to find professionals, usually social workers, to blame. Child protection work has always been difficult, but Covid, social distancing and the personal risks social workers routinely had to take to see children in their homes increased the complexity still further. The more that is taken into account – along with the emotional demands and funding deficits and systemic problems that mean social workers are faced with obstacles that make their job much more difficult than it needs to be – the more can be learned from Arthur’s tragic death. Harry Ferguson is professor of social work at the University of Birmingham. More information on the UKRI- and ESRC-funded study on the impact of Covid-19 on social work and child protection is available here • This article was amended on 7 December 2021 to include reference to the Institute of Health Visitors, which in April 2020 was among a group of care organisations who warned government about the risk of redeploying staff away from frontline safeguarding work. For clarity, a reference to a “retreat of services” was amended to “stopping of services”.For weeks Kaurna elders Aunty Madge Wanganeen and Uncle Major “Moogy” Sumner have been preparing the skeletal remains of their ancestors for reburial on the outskirts of Adelaide. As the first step of what will likely be the world’s biggest mass internment of stolen and otherwise unearthed Indigenous ancestral skeletons, Wanganeen and Sumner carefully took the bones out of cardboard storage boxes at the South Australian Museum, where the remains of about 4,600 mostly Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are kept. They unwrapped the bones of each individual from the bubble wrap or tissue in which they have been stored – some for upwards of a century. They then secured each in brown paper and woollen twine before placing them into crates that will soon be transported to a specially designed site at Smithfield Memorial Park. There the remains will be enfolded in traditional paperbark ahead of what will be an emotional ceremonial reburial on Tuesday. Wanganeen spoke softly to her ancestors as she worked, telling them precisely what she was doing. She assured them she was there to care for them. Soon, she told them, they will be at rest in Kaurna soil – Kaurna country – for all time. More than 100 Kaurna people from the north of the Adelaide Plains will be buried – this time in perpetuity – at one of four burial mounds on the landscaped memorial park in land dedicated by the Adelaide Cemeteries Authority. The three other mounds are for the eventual reburial of the remains identified as coming from the south, east and west. Wanganeen and Sumner are members of the Kaurna Smithfield reference group. For about the past two years, in anticipation of the reburial, they have been working through archival records to determine how and when the museum acquired the remains. More importantly, a combination of museum, state, police and newspaper records has made it possible to determine, in the overwhelming number of cases of the 800 or so old people who will eventually be reburied in the mounds, the precise part of Kaurna country from which each was initially unearthed. “It’s been an overwhelming thing, a great thing, because it’s never ever happened before – to know the stories of each one of them is just a remarkable thing,” says Wanganeen, as she sits in the room with the boxes of remains shrouded with Aboriginal flags. “Sometimes … people out there just think of them as bones and now they are being recognised as human beings. It’s just an overwhelming feeling because I’m in the process of actually wrapping them up and knowing where they came from and how they got here – it’s a great feeling for me. She says wrapping the remains in brown paper and tying them with woollen string is appropriate for the ceremonial reburial. “Me and Uncle Moogy have sat down and spoken about it and this is the way we decided to do it. It brings dignity to every one of them. “I get overwhelmed – I’m feeling it now actually – just talking about it. Now is the time they are going to get laid to rest and not disturbed any more. So it makes me feel proud of what I’m doing.” Wanganeen explains how she reassures the ancestors as she prepares them for reburial. “Yes, I do speak to them. I tell them I’m here for them and I get very emotional. I sit in this room by myself sometimes and I just tell them that, you know, I’ve got your back … and that this is such an important time for all of us.” Sumner says he’s been repatriating people from all over the world for decades and has returned people to the country of his father (Ngarrindjeri) and now his mother (Kaurna). “It’s draining and it takes it out of you. But it makes you feel good that you’re doing it,” he says. “What really got me was we were sitting down there and then you will get one of the old people’s remains – and we are not just talking about old people. These are little children. Little babies. Their remains. “Why did they die – how did they die? They’d never seen life yet … we don’t know why. But it makes you feel very, very sad for them – for their spirit. It affects me because I’ve got a lot of grandchildren and I’d hate that to happen to my grandchildren.” Reburial in the first of the four Smithfield mounds will liberate these Indigenous remains from the cardboard boxes many have been kept in for decades or longer. It will also allow their spirits to finally rest, in perpetuity. Traditional belief has it that the spirit remains restless until the body is permanently returned to its country. Accordingly, the Kaurna-led reference group overseeing development of the Smithfield resting place ensured that soil from all parts of the Adelaide Plains was scattered across the memorial park. Kaurna wanted ancestors from across the region to find home in this new place – to be buried in their own soil with the smells of their own country. The place, called Wangayarta, is a new kind of country that deals with the question of how to bury Indigenous people from different regions in one place. But what was behind the necessity of building a memorial park to rebury the skeletal remains of Indigenous people whose bodies came to form part of the collection of one of Australia’s oldest museums? Kept as curios Tuesday’s reburial of the first 100 or so Kaurna people from the northern part of Adelaide at the Wangayarta Kaurna site (“wanga” meaning grave and “yarta” meaning earth, soil or country) represents the start of a closing chapter for some of the 4,600 mostly Indigenous people, whose remains the South Australian Museum collected. Behind that collection is a sordid, shameful history of Indigenous dispossession and the disturbance of ceremonial burial grounds as the city expanded, with the institutional theft of remains by some of the city’s most historically respected figures. From the mid-1800s until well into the 20th century, Adelaide’s government, medical, bureaucratic, academic and museological leaders routinely stole and swapped the remains of thousands of mostly Indigenous individuals. Some were pillaged from traditional burial grounds while others were stolen when the life had scarcely left them – from the morgue, the hospital and the old “insane asylum”. Thousands of bodies were stolen, collected and traded locally, nationally and internationally – many to satisfy the curiosity of medical scientists who fallaciously regarded Indigenous Australians as a rung on Darwin’s ladder of human evolution – somewhere between primates and modern man. The scientific truth was quite contrary; the Indigenes of this continent have been proven to be the world’s most enduring modern humans – homo sapiens. Other Indigenous people in the South Australian Museum collection were snatched upon request by frontier workers and police who either came across the dead or killed the living to render them collectibles. Some of the skulls in the collection bear bullet holes. Others who died on the streets, in institutions – the asylum, hospital and hospices for elderly people – were “anatomised” (a euphemism for defleshed), and their intact heads, skulls and skeletons were turned into collectibles. Some of Adelaide’s most esteemed civic, medical and cultural pioneers – including Sir Edward Stirling, Dr William Lennox Cleland, Dr William Ramsay Smith and Archibald Watson obsessively collected, traded and exported Indigenous remains. The horror underwriting the story of the museum’s remains collection is at odds with Adelaide’s cultivated myth of some benign settlement devoid of convict stain. The truth is that not only was Adelaide established, in part, courtesy of the proceeds of slavery, the Kaurna in life and death were often treated as chattels. The city’s archives are replete with stories of Indigenous remains being accidentally dug up. When this happened in the 1850s, the bones were often reburied. But as the city grew along with the misguided sentiment that the colony – like all the others in Australia – was witnessing “the passing of the race”, more and more remains were kept as curios. ‘We always cried silently inside’ It is with the onerous weight of such dark history – with the descendants’ terrible burden of knowing the remains of the old people have sat in boxes for too long while they were powerless to rebury them – that the first reinterments will take place. The Kaurna will establish a sorry camp – part of the process of finally farewelling the ancestors – at Smithfield Memorial Park this weekend before the bodies, so tenderly readied by Wanganeen and Sumner, arrive. “We always cried silently inside, you know? The tears were inside us. That pain and that anger that we carry with us about it always,” says Uncle Jeffrey Newchurch, chairof the Kaurna Yerta Aboriginal Corporation. He has been integral to Kaurna Indigenous repatriation for decades and is pivotal to the establishment of Wangayarta. “Aboriginal people have not had proper access to those ancestors. I call it the brick walls … with trapdoors of rules and regulations … that meant we may or may not get in. “There is that dark side, you know, where the Ramsay Smiths of this world and others have used [the remains] for bargaining power or sent them overseas to England and all that.” He says the weekend camp will be about “sitting by the campfire, to heal, to share in that sorrow and that grief”. “Now we can deal with that anger and frustration … and camping on country – sorry camp – we’ve forgotten those old ways,” he says. “Reigniting that [tradition] allows positive energy to come into it all so you can deal with that negativity.” The development of the Smithfield site evolved after an initial conversation between Newchurch and the Adelaide Cemetery Authority’s Robert Pitt several years ago. “Having done some sums, and made some high-level assumptions, I estimate Kaurna country covers about 800,000 hectares of country. I reckon there’sa hectare or two amongst these 800,000 for the Kaurna people to rebury their ancestors,” Pitt says. On behalf of the authority, he offered the Kaurna two distinct one-hectare plots – one in which to rebury the ancestors from the museum, the nearby second to bury contemporary descendants. Pitt says he approached that initial conversation with a sense that “the whole thing isn’t right” and “just had to be fixed”. “I said we have got some land down at Smithfield and we would be willing to work with you to develop a reburial ground,” he says. “It also seemed to make sense that if you’ve got your ancestors and old people buried in the reburial ground … that you would have a burial ground adjacent to that for contemporary Kaurna burials.” Pitt and the cemetery authority later met with the museum’s head of humanities John Carty and Aboriginal heritage manager Anna Russo. He confirmed the offer of the Smithfield land, the site of a relatively new general cemetery. On taking up his position six years ago, Carty’s priority was to investigate the museum’s historical and current position on the collection of human remains – and to prioritise returning to country as many as possible. He and Russo were acutely mindful of the fraught cultural and practical sensitivities of returning and reburying so many sets of Aboriginal remains. “It all had to be done with such deep sensitivity to the pressures Kaurna face in making these huge decisions. Each step has had to be slow. It took a few years, but that’s nothing compared to the generations of trauma that preceded this day, the trauma that people have had to work through in order to bring their own ancestors to peace,” Carty says. “We always said this is a Kaurna-led project, not a museum project. The Kaurna rebury their ancestors. The museum does not rebury people. It is being done by the community for the community. Our role is to support that ambition, and to advocate for it at all levels of government. “There is so much risk involved in it for the [Kaurna] people leading the process. People never reburied hundreds of ancestors, let alone built a burial ground to make that happen. It’s not a burden that should ever have been placed on this generation, or any generation. “But the Kaurna leadership were resolute that they weren’t going to pass this burden on to their grandkids. Proceeding came with some fear of getting it wrong. But ultimately everyone came to the view that nothing could be more wrong than your ancestors sitting in a box in a museum.” Russo, who has worked alone for years with the remains in the museum’s collection, tracing provenance and trying to establish individual identities, says that working on the Kaurna Smithfield project has helped her see her city differently. “I can see and hear the old families playing in the sandhills near the beach, walking across Country in the hot sun, finding places to shelter from the rain. There are roads and houses there now, but the curves of the landscape are still there. The burial sites have introduced me to the Old People of Adelaide who carefully buried the people they loved,” she says. “I’m warmed by the small objects people were buried with – their shells and small stone tools … Even though Kaurna Smithfield has been the most challenging project I have ever worked on, I think to myself how lucky am I to be with Kaurna people today … The Kaurna people, past and present, have taught me more than I could have ever imagined.” The Kaurna people, in partnership with the museum, won support from the Liberal state government, which has paid for the elaborately landscaped burial ground comprising the mounds, a water feature, native plantings and a large ceremonial grassed area (shaped like a traditional Kaurna shield). The ancestors will be reburied in perpetuity, thanks to likely amendments to the state’s Burial and Cremation Act, which did not guarantee permanent burial. This renders the land at Smithfield one of the few – or perhaps only – parts of Australia permanently guaranteed to Indigenous people, such is the enduring legacy of widespread dispossession. Besides Kaurna, the reference group behind the Smithfield project comprises representatives of the River Murray and Mallee people and the Ngarrindjeri, whose ancestors (500 and 1,200 respectively) are in the museum collection. They are learning from the Kaurna mass reburial while considering how to meet the daunting prospect of reinterring their own dead. The 2,000-plus other people in the museum collection include 800 sets of unprovenanced remains, other more distant South Australian people, and skeletons from the Northern Territory and other states. The reburial on Tuesday represents a prescient landmark in the repatriation and reburial of stolen Australian Indigenous remains. It is also a rare gesture of dignity in this tawdry historic episode for the stolen dead and their descendants who share the pain of the restless spirits. Sumner reflects on the poignant reburial day as it nears. “I’ll be carrying them from the smoking ceremony to the burial place,” he says. “Then I will be down there in the mound and other people will be passing me the old people and I’ll be placing them in different parts of that reburial site.”When scientists predicted, months ago, that Covid-19 could be entering an endemic phase, many felt ready for the crisis period of the pandemic to be over. The tantalising suggestion that coronavirus might, at some foreseeable point, be just another seasonal cold felt welcome. But the emergence of the Omicron variant, just weeks before Christmas, shows this is not guaranteed to be a smooth or quick transition. Will the virus become milder? A recurring suggestion is that pathogens evolve, over some undefined period, to be more transmissible and less virulent, bringing virus and host towards a state of benign coexistence. If Omicron is spreading so quickly, some wondered, perhaps it will at least be milder. But experts say this expectation has no scientific basis. “Put simply, this has been one of the most baffling misinformation myths peddled during the pandemic,” said Prof Alan McNally, director of the Institute of Microbiology and Infection at the University of Birmingham. “There is almost no evidence of any human pathogenic virus evolving towards reduced virulence.” The simplistic argument behind the idea is that if a pathogen kills its host, or makes them too sick to leave the house, then it gives itself a worse chance of propagating. So by the logic of survival of the fittest, there would be a selective pressure for milder strains. Sadly, the dynamic is more complex in the real world. “It’s really unpredictable what will happen to the evolution of the host or the virus,” said Brian Ferguson, an immunologist at the University of Cambridge. “You can pick out examples of things going one way or the other depending on what point you want to make.” In the case of coronavirus, there is also an obvious hole in the argument: transmission normally occurs before symptoms start or during the earliest stage of symptoms, meaning that severity of illness has little influence on the spread of the virus. The impact of Covid may become less each year as immunity builds up through infection, vaccination and – possibly – annual boosters. Will it keep getting more transmissible? Yes, probably. “Strains that transmit more easily and that evade existing immunity will have an advantage over those strains which are less transmissible and more susceptible to immunity,” said Prof Kit Yates, a senior lecturer in mathematics at the University of Bath. We have already seen this occurring with the shift from the original variant, which had a basic R number of about 3, followed by Alpha, estimated to have an R0 of 4-5 and Delta, with an R0 of 6-8. “There’s no reason to believe this won’t go any higher,” said Yates. “Measles, which is one of the most infectious human-to-human diseases, has an R0 which has been estimated to be as high as 18. There’s certainly still room for the R0 of Covid to increase.” Scientists say predicting where the ceiling might be is extremely difficult. “It’s probably not very sensible to try and second-guess that,” said McNally. “Numerous human pathogenic viruses have been co-evolving with us for hundreds of thousands of years. So I don’t think there could ever be a confident prediction of a ceiling being reached.” On the plus side, R0 is a less pressing concern in a vaccinated population, where there is more protection from serious disease. Will it keep escaping our vaccines? To some extent, although scientists are not expecting new strains to completely evade immunity and put us back to square one. “The broad scientific consensus is that this is not what will happen with Omicron,” said Yates. “It is believed that existing immunity will still provide some defence against the new variant, especially against severe disease.” There is also a limit to how much the virus’s spike protein can evolve, because the spike is the key that allows it to infect our cells. Nevertheless, there is still a scenario where protection is weakened enough to require an update to existing vaccines – and companies are already playing out whether Omicron meets these criteria. This poses vaccine makers with a dilemma. One option is to make a new variant vaccine that is closely matched to Omicron, for example. This creates a vulnerability, however, because new variants could emerge from Delta or earlier strains, for which the updated vaccine would be an even worse match. And if different strains are dominant in different regions, the question of which vaccines to deploy where becomes complicated. “We’re questioning whether chasing the globe to hunt down the next variant to tweak the vaccine again and again is necessarily the best way of going,” said Prof Danny Altmann, an immunologist at Imperial College London. He and others are investigating vaccine strategies that would give broader protection, which they hope will be less sensitive to future mutations of the spike protein. “We’d love to slow down and do the homework properly and find out which version of this is going to give you a future-proofed answer,” he said.The Bank of England could benefit from waiting to see the impact of the Omicron coronavirus variant on the UK economy before raising interest rates, one of its policymakers has said. Michael Saunders said he believed there could be advantages from taking no action when the central bank meets to set borrowing costs in just under two weeks’ time. Saunders, an external member of the Bank’s nine-strong monetary policy committee, opted to raise interest rates at its last meeting in November. But he was outvoted and the MPC unexpectedly held back from raising rates for the first time since the spread of Covid-19, instead leaving rates unchanged at an all-time low of 0.1%. “At present, given the new Omicron Covid variant has only been detected quite recently, there could be particular advantages in waiting to see more evidence on its possible effects on public health outcomes and hence on the economy,” Saunders said in an online speech on Friday. He said, however, there could also be potential costs from delaying a rate rise if the variant turned out to have a limited impact on demand for goods and services amid rising inflationary pressures across the British economy. “There are potential costs and benefits of waiting for more data. You can see the potential benefit; you get to learn a bit more about how Omicron might effect the economy,” he said. “The potential cost is that inflation expectations have drifted up recently, especially among households and financial markets. I have some concern about that.” Saunders said holding interest rates at 0.1% could further add to expectations for higher levels of inflation, if Omicron turns out to be relatively benign for the economy. The new variant could also increase disruption for global supply chains, exacerbating existing bottlenecks in a development that could add to inflationary pressures. “[That would] mean subsequently tightening policy turns out to be more abrupt, more painful than might otherwise be the case,” he said. Financial markets were pricing a 33% chance of a December rise in interest rates after the speech, down from about 75% last week before news of the Omicron variant first broke. Saunders was one of two members of the MPC who voted in early November for an immediate rise in interest rates to 0.25%. The rate-setting panel’s next decision will be announced on 16 December. “If it wasn’t for Omicron you could probably guess what the direction of my policy vote would be,” he said.Schools leaders are exasperated with “unhelpful” recommendations from government that in-person nativity plays and concerts go ahead as more are forced to cancel due to rising coronavirus cases. In the week following the detection of the new Omicron variant, many schools have decided to shift their festive concerts and nativity plays online to reduce the risk of audiences spreading infection. Headteachers who spoke to the Guardian said it had been a difficult decision exacerbated by government guidance stating that schools and nurseries “can continue to hold events where visitors such as parents are on-site” while acknowledging that the decision is a matter for individual schools and local public health teams. On Friday, during a visit to Oswestry in Shropshire before an upcoming byelection, Boris Johnson said that Christmas this year should go ahead “normally”. The prime minister said: “On the subject of Christmas parties, I’ve noticed there’s been quite a lot of to-ing and fro-ing about it, people concerned that they need to cancel their Christmas parties. That’s not right, we’re not saying that and we’re not saying that nativity plays have to be cancelled …Christmas should go ahead as normally as possible.” But guidance from Croydon council seen by the Guardian said it was “strongly recommending” to all schools the “cancelling of in-person Christmas carol services and performances (unless outdoors)” as well as reverting to in-person bubbles. One head at a primary school in Bury, Lancashire, said that the local public health team had advised her school against inviting an audience due to the school’s “significant amount” of Covid cases. In Scotland, nativity plays are banned as part of restrictions on large school gatherings, a move welcomed by education leaders. In Wales, the health minister, Eluned Morgan, has advised caution but fell short of saying whether parties and larger gatherings should take place. Mass gatherings in schools are still permitted in Northern Ireland. In England, Geoff Barton, the general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said government advice had handed school leaders “a poisoned chalice”. “Many will feel uncomfortable about going ahead, potentially putting them at loggerheads with parents as they try to manage their expectations.” Sara Herriott, deputy head of Brampton Abbotts primary school in Herefordshire, said her school shifted the nativity play online due to high community infection rates, but noted this was “not an easy option as it involves hours of filming, editing and uploading”. She said she was angry due to a since-deleted tweet sent by the DfE on 30 November, which suggested heads could “decide if they want to host” nativity plays.“It’s dangerous but also disingenuous,” she said. “If heads make that decision, it will be based on risk assessment in their setting as opposed to simply whether they want to or not.” Another headteacher feels the messaging does not reflect the challenges schools face at present. “I’ve heard people say in years gone by that the profession is haemorrhaging staff in the past but I never saw it. Now it’s scary. Schools just don’t have the time or staff to organise events.” Duncan Thompson, the head of Shawlands primary school in Barnsley, said he had shifted the nativity play online after half-term since he felt “an early, clear decision” would be better for parents, staff and children. “We didn’t want to risk parents booking time off work and a stage nativity being ready only to be cancelled at the last minute, as this causes a lot of upset and frustration for parents.” He added that the government guidance was “ambiguous” and that this “doesn’t help in situations where the school and parents don’t see eye to eye”. Rachel Hornsey, head at Sutton Courtenay primary school in Oxfordshire, said her school moved the show online last week to avoid “potentially ruining people’s Christmases”, a decision shared by leaders of about 30 schools in the same academy trust. She said there were benefits to filming productions, which teach children how media is produced, allow for creative set design and enable more family members to watch the show at a time that suits them. “You can never replace the excitement of children standing up speaking to a large audience, that boosts their confidence massively, but we found that with filming we could allow children to do their scene, watch it back, and we could instil the idea that you have to do things lots of times until you’re happy with it.” Some schools are planning to go ahead using mandatory lateral flows, mask wearing, heavily ventilated rooms and outdoor spaces for socialising. Dr Simon Williams, a behavioural scientist, recommended that vulnerable people should consider not attending and parents should minimise social contacts in the run-up to the play. “The more mixing that occurs indoors the more opportunities a virus has to spread,” he said. • This article was amended on 6 December 2021 because an earlier version misattributed to Sara Herriott a further quote which in fact came from a another headteacher.The pace of Covid infections in the South African province of Gauteng is outstripping anything seen in previous waves, and officials say Omicron is now the dominant variant. Angelique Coetzee, the chair of the South African Medical Association, said Omicron’s R number, measuring its ability to spread, was believed to be above 6. The R number for Delta, the dominant variant globally, is estimated to be above 5. Speaking to the BBC’s PM programme, Coetzee said: “We know currently that the virus is transmissible. According to the scientists, the R value is 6.3, I think.” The chief scientist at the World Health Organization (WHO) urged people not to panic, saying it was impossible to predict whether Omicron would become the dominant variant worldwide. Soumya Swaminathan said South Africa’s experience showed that Omicron “was highly transmissible”, but added: “How worried should we be? We need to be prepared and cautious, not panic, because we’re in a different situation to a year ago. Delta accounts for 99% of infections around the world. This variant would have to be more transmissible to outcompete and become dominant worldwide. It is possible, but it’s not possible to predict.” In Gauteng, a populous province that includes Johannesburg and is the centre of the outbreak, public health officials say case positivity rates have climbed from 2% in mid-November to 24% this week. However, most of the cases seen in the province so far, including by Coetzee, have been described as mild and are in younger patients, who make up a significantly greater proportion of the country’s unvaccinated. Prof Bruce Mellado, who advises the provincial government, told the Daily Maverick that health officials had seen such a rapid increase in cases in Gauteng over the past few weeks that they had had to recalibrate their projection models. The increase was at a rate not seen before, he said, not even in the third wave, which Mellado described as a “very serious situation”. Other officials in the province described a 20% rise in the seven-day rolling average of daily Covid cases, and increasing hospital admissions, driven by Omicron. First reported by South African scientists to the WHO on 24 November, Omicron has prompted some countries to shut their borders, reimpose travel restrictions and ramp up vaccination programmes. Among the concerns is whether Omicron might be infecting infants with more severe disease than previous variants, after a rise in admissions of under-fives to some hospitals. At a news conference on Friday, Waasila Jassat, of the National Institute for Communicable Diseases, said: “We’ve seen quite a sharp increase [in hospitalisations] across all age groups, particularly in the under-fives. The incidence in those under-fives is now second highest, and second only to the incidence in those over 60.” However, the number of infant cases remains relatively small and it is unclear how many of those hospitalisations were due to Omicron. Despite a rise in virus-related hospital admissions in South Africa, deaths appear to be increasing at a lower rate than during the country’s third wave of Covid. This was underlined by a statement from the WHO on Friday saying it had yet to see any reports of deaths related to Omicron. Amid increasing evidence that current vaccines are likely to offer a high level of protection against serious disease from the variant, the chief executive of Germany’s BioNTech said it should be able to adapt its vaccine relatively quickly in response to Omicron. Uğur Şahin told the Reuters Next conference on Friday that vaccines should continue to provide protection against severe disease despite mutations. “This variant might be able to infect vaccinated people. We anticipate that infected people who have been vaccinated will still be protected against severe disease,” Şahin said. He said mutations in the virus meant it was more likely that annual vaccinations would become the norm, as is the case with seasonal flu, and that new vaccines would be needed, although it was not yet clear when. The WHO called on makers of Covid vaccines to gear up for the likelihood of needing to adjust their products to protect against Omicron.The legal battle against the Mail on Sunday may finally be over. But for the Duke and Duchess of Sussex, another one looms, and this could make it all the way to trial. On this occasion, phone hacking is the heart of a case the prince has brought against the Sun, the News of the World and the Daily Mirror – newspapers, he claims, illegally intercepted his voice messages. It is expected to come to court next year, the Guardian understands, in another case that would pit one half of the Sussexes against powerful players in the tabloid press. Prince Harry is claiming damages of more than £200,000 in the legal action, first lodged in 2019. In court papers he has said it affected his relationships with friends and family and that he ultimately experienced a breakdown in trust. Articles highlighted include ones relating to his relationship with Chelsy Davy, which ended in 2010. For more than a decade, phone-hacking victims have invariably been accepting generous settlements from the tabloids that hacked them before the cases reached court but it is possible – particularly given Meghan’s comments on Thursday – that Harry could be the one to break the mould. The Guardian understands that there is no sign of a settlement at present. There is no love lost between the parties, and for one, News Group Newspapers has alleged it is too late to bring the claim. In a court filing, obtained by Newsweek, the Rupert Murdoch-owned company admitted that Harry’s phone was hacked by the News of the World royal correspondent Clive Goodman and private investigator Glenn Mulcaire. Among the articles it has conceded were based on hacking are an April 2006 report that “Prince Harry has been given a furious Chelsy Davy dressing down over his late-night antics in a lapdancing bar” and an August 2005 article about a disagreement between Harry and Prince Andrew over a shooting weekend at Balmoral. But the filing said: “These were first published over six years prior to the issue of these proceedings and this claim is therefore statute-barred and it is denied that [Prince Harry] is entitled to any relief in relation to it.” News Group has challenged other aspects of the prince’s claims including that the Sun hacked his phone. The other obstacle to settlement could be Harry digging in heels in with a determination to instead obtain judgment against the two newspaper groups in court. With other victims of phone hacking – Harry is believed to be the last big name with an outstanding claim – the pattern has been consistent with a settlement eventually being made and accepted. However, given Meghan’s desire to change a model that she said “rewards chaos above truth”, there remains the possibility that even if News Group Newspapers and Reach plc admit his claim is merited – and there is no sign of that – Harry will be determined to have his day in court. That would amount to a powerful statement of intent, given that it would risk leaving him heavily out of pocket, as the cost of a symbolic victory. In civil cases, if the claimant refuses a settlement offer they could be held liable for the other party’s subsequent legal costs if the judge then awards the claimant a sum less than what was offered before going to trial. In other words, by refusing a settlement, Harry would risk having to pay out legal fees for the sake of – hopefully – having a judge rule in his favour against his adversaries. For most people that would be unthinkable but the couple’s wealth and the unprecedented – for royals – manner in which they have taken on the tabloid press head-on, means it is a possibility. And it is possible that, having one legal battle, they could be tempted into more where they feel they have been wronged by the press. Speaking after Thursday’s court victory against the Mail on Sunday for publishing a private letter she sent to her father, Meghan made clear the Sussexes weren’t done yet. “What matters most is that we are now collectively brave enough to reshape a tabloid industry that conditions people to be cruel, and profits from the lies and pain that they create,” she said. Reach plc declined to comment. News Group and the Sussexes were also approached for comment. • This article was amended on 4 December 2021. Settlement offers are not lodged with the courts as stated in an earlier version.It’s understandable if you thought the threat had gone. Donald Trump left office nearly a year ago, is no longer serving up daily outrages by tweet, and is reduced to appearing with Nigel Farage on GB News. But the menace he represented lingers, and not only because Trump remains the most likely Republican presidential nominee for 2024, a contest he could well win given the parlous approval ratings of the current incumbent. Trumpism lives on in the legacy he left behind, its most visible incarnation perhaps the three ultra-conservative judges he selected for the supreme court, who this week began hearing a case on abortion – one that many expect to result in the removal of American women’s constitutionally protected right to end an unwanted pregnancy. But Trumpism endures too in the party he remade in his own image. He has left behind a Republican party no longer committed to democracy. That sounds hyperbolic but, if anything, it understates the case. Republicans are breaking from the principle that precedes the idea of democracy and is even more fundamental: the belief that arguments between citizens should be resolved by peaceful means. Today’s Republican party is normalising the notion of violence as a means of securing a political outcome. Start with the case of Paul Gosar, the Republican member of Congress for Arizona. He retweeted an anime-style video that depicted him murdering his Democratic colleague, Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, as well as swinging a sword at Joe Biden. Appalling though that was, especially at a time when AOC and others face constant threats of violence, more telling was the response of Gosar’s party. When Democrats moved to censure him, only two Republicans voted with them. The 200-odd others gave Gosar their blessing. Earlier, Republicans had had to make a similar decision. Before her election to Congress in 2020, Marjorie Taylor Greene had posted on Facebook a photograph of herself holding a gun next to an image of AOC and two other members of the so-called Squad, made up of left-leaning Democratic women of colour. Taylor Greene also all but called for the execution of the House speaker, Nancy Pelosi. Yet when Democrats voted to kick the Georgia Republican off the various congressional committees she sat on, only 11 members of her party voted with them. The rest stood with her. Of course, the pattern was set with the Republican response to Trump himself, and his encouragement of the attempt to overturn a democratic election by force earlier this year. Republicans could have repudiated the storming of the Capitol on 6 January by joining their Democratic colleagues in voting to impeach the outgoing president for “inciting an insurrection”. But only 10 Republicans did so. Since then, those 10 dissenters have been pilloried and ostracised by their fellow Republicans. Among the shunned is Liz Cheney, who was stripped of her House leadership role and expelled from the state Republican party in her native Wyoming. She’s an arch-conservative like her former vice-president father, but that didn’t matter. Cheney believes in respecting elections – and that was enough to put her beyond the pale. These responses – coddling the advocates of violence, punishing those who denounce it – prove the truth of the declaration that Taylor Greene made this week: “We are not the fringe. We are the base of the party.” She’s right. She and Gosar are in lockstep with a Republican party whose face can be seen in the death threats now routinely meted out not only to nationally famous politicians such as AOC, but to the officials and volunteers who serve in public health, local government or on school boards across the country. Trump’s downplaying of the dangers of the pandemic and his hostility to mask-wearing made those stances articles of faith among his most ardent supporters – who now threaten murderous violence against those who cross them, their fury directed especially at schools that require their pupils to wear masks. In early October, the US attorney general, Merrick Garland, felt it necessary to send in the FBI to help protect school administrators, who were facing what the National School Boards Association calls “a form of domestic terrorism”. To be clear, not every Republican in the House or Senate agrees with Gosar, Taylor Greene or the Republican candidate in Pennsylvania who promised to bring “20 strong men” to a school board meeting because “this is how you get stuff done” – but they are terrified of them, just as they are terrified of Trump and his supporters. They know that if they step out of line, they will soon face an internal, primary challenge for their own seat. So they say nothing. The espousal of, or acquiescence in, political violence is the sharpest expression of Republicans’ steady march away from democracy, but it is not the only one. At the milder end is the unabashed gerrymandering under way in many of the states where Republicans are in control, redrawing boundaries to give themselves permanent and insurmountable majorities. More troubling still are the hundreds of voter suppression measures advanced by Republican state legislatures, nakedly designed to make voting harder for groups that tend to vote Democratic, especially low-income Americans and those from ethnic minorities. Whether it’s demanding stricter proof of identity, reducing early or postal voting – say, by allowing only one dropbox in each county, no matter how many people live there or how large it is – the desired goal is the same: to shrink the franchise, hurting Democrats and helping Republicans. The drive is, once again, fealty to Trump. Polls show that 68% of Republicans believe the former president’s big lie that the 2020 election was stolen from him – and they are determined to make sure it won’t happen again. To ensure there is no risk of Trump losing in 2024, Republicans are both making it harder for Democrats to vote and working to install reliable allies as election scrutineers: they want no repeat of 2020, when Republican officials allowed the votes to be counted fairly and declared Biden the winner. What is fuelling this shift is not solely the cult of personality that still envelopes Donald Trump, though that devotion is a mighty force. Studies have long shown a potent authoritarian impulse on the American right – drawn to the notion of a strong leader imposing order and guarding the nation against outsiders – one greater than in comparable countries. As always with the US, race plays a central role. Enough white Americans fear a future in which they are no longer the dominant majority and are ready to do what it takes to stay in charge: to avert demography, they’ll sacrifice democracy. This represents a mortal threat to the American republic. But the US remains the world’s most powerful nation. As of now, only one of its two governing parties is committed to democracy – and that poses a danger to us all. Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnistThe terrible death of six-year-old Arthur Labinjo-Hughes, murdered by his stepmother Emma Tustin after weeks of abuse and torture, may be an outlier in terms of its sheer brutality but is unlikely to be the only case of its kind to emerge from the lockdown period. Arthur was killed in June 2020, just weeks after his father, Thomas Hughes, (who was convicted of Arthur’s manslaughter) moved with him into Tustin’s home at the start of lockdown in March 2020. As the pandemic raged, the couple’s staggering cruelty appears to have gone largely unnoticed. The independent review of Arthur’s case now under way will examine exactly why the authorities in Solihull – social workers, police, schoolteachers – failed to spot the signs of abuse, or intervene, despite warnings from members of his wider family. Any individual errors, and system failures, are likely to be highlighted. But it may also look at the impact of lockdown on the local safeguarding arrangements. With schools closed, much of normal social life coming to an abrupt halt, and families spending long periods behind closed doors, did the usual early warning system collapse, making it harder for the signs of abuse to be seen? How far was the effectiveness of the local children’s services department blunted as staff fell ill, were forced to isolate, or unable to carry out the face-to-face family assessments and maintain the relationships that are so crucial to detecting the signs of abuse? Were the police affected by the same pressures? According to Brid Featherstone, professor of social work at the University of Huddersfield, many social workers worked “heroically” to keep in touch with families despite Covid restrictions. Yet DI Laura Harrison from West Midlands police was clear there had been gaps: “The usual professionals that should have been involved in safeguarding a child weren’t because of the lockdown.” Referrals to council children’s social care departments in England fell by a fifth in the first few months of the pandemic, according to the Local Government Association, suggesting that the usual levels of vigilance were not maintained. During the same period about 1,600 children were looked after, down a third on previous years. During this period families came under unprecedented pressure, suffering isolation, financial hardship, and job loss on top of pre-existing stresses. Domestic violence increased under lockdown and rates of mental illness soared – although it is hard to see Arthur’s killers as driven by anything other than callous cruelty. Official data indicates the first year of the pandemic witnessed a big rise in the numbers of serious incidents involving children in England. Child harm cases reported by local authorities were up by 20%, and child deaths by 19%. There were 536 such notifications in 2020-21, up from 229 the previous year. There was a 20% rise in babies being killed or harmed. This was not unanticipated. England’s chief inspector of schools, Amanda Spielman, suggested the pandemic had increased the “invisibility of vulnerable children” over a year ago. The then children’s commissioner for England, Anne Longfield, warned just six months into the pandemic that vulnerable children would “slip out of view”. Arthur’s death may lead to questions about whether enough has been done to ensure those at-risk youngsters remained in sight. This may in turn focus attention on the immense damage caused by huge cuts over the past decade imposed on increasingly fragile children’s departments, and on ways to improve safeguarding and family support services. It may also trigger a kneejerk media and political reaction, as seen in previous tragedies such as the deaths of Peter Connelly, known as Baby P, and Victoria Climbié. “One of my biggest fears,” says Featherstone, “is that this will become a ‘this must never happen again’ moment and we’ll go back to scapegoating social workers.”Debenhams has returned to the high street under new owners Boohoo with a beauty store at Manchester’s Arndale shopping centre. The two-floor, 7,552 sq ft shop, which was formerly an outlet for fashion chain Gap, is understood to be necessary for Boohoo to meet historic contractual deals with key brands after Debenhams exited its department stores in January. Jeanette Whithear, beauty and homeware director at Debenhams.com, said: “Debenhams.com hopes to create a destination that is fresh, modern and unique space where customers can experience the latest in beauty.” She said the store, which is close to Boohoo’s Manchester head office and will feature interactive screens that can flag social media posts, merged “digital and physical elements”. Boohoo is not expected to open further high street outlets. However, the concept opened after Next turned a number of former Debenhams sites into its own upmarket beauty concept, while Harrods now has three H Beauty specialist stores around the country, in a battle to snap up Debenhams’ share of the beauty market. Debenhams closed its final 124 stores, leaving large gaps on high streets around the country, after online specialist Boohoo bought the brand, but not the stores, out of administration. Boohoo relaunched Debenhams’ website and began selling beauty products earlier this year including well-known brands such as Lancôme, Benefit and Yves Saint Laurent. Scott Linard, portfolio director at property group M&amp;G which owns the Arndale Centre, said the Debenhams outlet was a “great boost … for bricks and mortar retail and demonstrates that there will continue to be a balance between online and in-person shopping”.Control, control, control: Ralf Rangnick’s mantra regarding what Manchester United are missing was also an apt characterisation of a 63-year-old who having just strode into a behemoth global football club oozed calm and clarity during his first media conference as their interim manager. The big poser, of course, is how long this will last should United struggle? But, for the moment, Rangnick illustrated why the club trust him. Arriving five minutes before the advertised 9am start, the German was dry-witted, smart, deferential and, most pertinently, displayed a forensic eye regarding his new side after their impersonation of a rabble over much of the last two months. Unlike Louis van Gaal, a predecessor whose bow before the media in summer 2014 featured him criticising United for being too commercial, Rangnick’s strategy was touchy-feely, illustrated when dedicating his opening remarks to the gathered fourth estate. “Thanks for coming early; this is the earliest press conference of my life – I am looking forward to working with you,” he said, before discoursing on precisely why United are listing, 12 points behind the leaders, Chelsea. “I have watched the latest games – not only last night’s game [the 3-2 win over Arsenal] but also the games against Watford [4-1 loss] and against Chelsea [1-1] on TV. Before I knew I would be contacted in the following days I watched, out of interest, the games against Liverpool and Manchester City [5-0 and 2-0 losses, respectively]. “It’s pretty obvious the team has an abundance of young, talented players and enough experienced players. The major target in the next couple of days and weeks is to bring more balance into the team. Yesterday we conceded two goals, we needed three goals to win and if you look at the total number of goals conceded, it is almost two on average per game. “This is my approach: to help the team to get more balance, more control of the game. Yesterday’s game was exciting for fans, but for myself, as the future coach, those are not the games that we need every day because football is about minimising the coincidence factor and having control and gaining control.” If this was Rangnick as hard-nosed head coach, there was a sight of “the godfather of pressing” as jester when fielding a question regarding whether he is on a lucrative bonus to sign Borussia Dortmund’s Erling Haaland. Performing a mock flick-through of a notebook, Rangnick said: “Let me have a look – OK, £10m for Erling Haaland, £10m for Kylian Mbappé, £10m for Robert Lewandowski and £10m for Joshua Kimmich. I mean this is nonsense, obviously. There are no such clauses in my contract and it doesn’t make sense to have speculation on different players.” Yet as a former RB Salzburg and RB Leipzig director of football (he also managed the latter) Rangnick could not resist offering a glimpse of his continent-wide contacts in a comment that did not reject the notion of a move for Haaland one day. “Erling Haaland is a fantastic striker. I was together with the people at RB Salzburg and I was a little bit involved in his move from Molde to Salzburg and therefore I know what kind of player he is,” Rangnick said. “In the meantime the whole world has realised how good the player is. Two years ago it was only very few people who believed in this kind of development [from him].” In dark-blue suit jacket, round-neck sweater, white shirt and glasses, Rangnick’s endearing act of gentleman and scholar came in an Old Trafford press room where many visiting managerial greats have sat post-match, and some predecessors, including Sir Alex Ferguson, Van Gaal, José Mourinho and Ole Gunnar Solskjær have held court. There was, however, an intriguing moment where the sure-footedness lapsed and he stumbled slightly. His is a coaching career that began in 1983 at FC Viktoria Backnang and has taken in 15 tenures, plus a move “upstairs” to be the top-ranking football executive at Leipzig, Salzburg, New York Red Bulls and, latterly, Lokomotiv Moscow. Yet he has not managed a team for more than a single season for a decade (Hoffenheim) and was in a quandary when pondering whether he preferred the heat of matchday or the calmer desk-led role he is contracted to fill at United from June. “Yes, I can work in both positions,” Rangnick said. “If somebody asked me in which way do you see yourself more, I don’t know. Right now I feel and think and will very much want to work as a coach, head coach and team manager for the team. This is what I’ve done in, I would say, 90% of the past 25 years in my career.”The UK reported 50,584 new Covid cases and 143 deaths. It marks a slight decline in cases from yesterday - when 53,945 were reported, the highest daily figure since July, and 141 people died - but a 1% rise in weekly cases. Government scientists have issued a stark warning on the Omicron variant, which they say could lead to a “very large wave of infections” and high numbers of people hospitalised. Minutes of a Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) meeting held on 29 November, released today, note that it is highly likely Omicron could escape immunity to some extent, but that it was unclear by how much. The first case of the Omicron variant has been detected in Wales, in the Cardiff and Vale University Health Board area, the Welsh Government has announced. The case is linked to international travel, according to officials. NHS England has said that the acceleration of booster jabs will begin “no later than 13 December”. In a letter to health leaders, NHS England said that the booking service for booster jabs will be updated to reflect the cut in time between the second dose and booster to three months and that it will go live “as soon as possible”. Two people at Oxford University are suspected to have the Omicron variant of coronavirus. The university said the two people are now isolating “in line with government guidance” and that their close contacts have been told and are isolating. Nicola Sturgeon has said that the number of Omicron cases in Scotland is rising and that a Steps concert in Glasgow has been identified as one of the sources. It comes as 16 new cases of the new variant have been recorded in Scotland in the last 24 hours, bringing the total to 29. Number 10 refused to give details of any planned Downing Street Christmas parties, claiming they would be “private events” and would not be announced publicly. Downing Street said it has “no plans” to make vaccines compulsory. A spokesperson said: “We’ve set out our policy on this and we’ve said it’s not something that we would look to introduce.” Around one in six adults in Britain believe that life will never return to what it was pre-pandemic, according to a new survey by the Office of National Statistics (ONS). The results mark the highest proportion to share this view since the start of the pandemic. Covid infections continued to rise across the UK last week, according to the latest figures from the Office for National Statistics (ONS). One in 60 people in England have Covid, 1 in 45 in Northern Ireland and Wales and 1 in 65 in Scotland. The health minister, Edward Argar, has said this winter will be “critical” for the NHS amid Covid and Omicron. Addressing the Commons, he claimed the government is doing everything in its power to keep the NHS “standing strong this winter”. The Metropolitan police has said that it did not receive any complaints related to an alleged Downing Street Christmas party last year. It comes after Angela Rayner, the Labour deputy leader, asked cabinet secretary Simon Case if he is planning to call in police over allegations that parties were held despite Covid restrictions. One in four care home residents are reportedly yet to receive a booster shot, despite government promises that they would be offered one by the start of November. Citing figures from NHS England, the Telegraph reports that only 72% of care home residents have so far received a booster dose. Oliver Dowden has said he doesn’t plan to cancel the Conservatives’ Christmas party which he said is still planned to take place. He told BBC Breakfast: “I think it is still planned, and I don’t intend to cancel it as chairman of the Conservative party.” Britons were today urged to “keep calm and carry on with your Christmas plans” - despite the UK recording its highest cases since July. Oliver Dowden, the Conservative party chair, said people should keep going to pubs and restaurants as he claimed the government has so far taken “sufficient” action against the new Omicron variant. That’s it from me for today. Thanks for reading. For more Covid coverage from the UK and across the world, please follow the global blog: As the Omicron variant dampens the idea that the pandemic might be going away, Hannah Devlin reports on what the future might hold for coronavirus: Tale of two Christmases: as UK firms cancel events, others want to party on. Archie Bland reports: Ministers have given GPs in England the green light to provide less care to patients for the next four months so they can join the “national mission” to urgently deliver Covid booster jabs, reports Denis Campbell. The UK reported 50,584 new Covid cases and 143 deaths. It marks a slight decline in cases from yesterday - when 53,945 were reported, the highest daily figure since July, and 141 people died - but a 1% rise in weekly cases. There were 7,373 patients in hospital with coronavirus yesterday and 895 patients on beds with a mechanical ventilator. Government scientists have issued a stark warning on the Omicron variant, which they say could lead to a “very large wave of infections” and high numbers of people hospitalised. Minutes of a Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) meeting held on 29 November, released today, note that it is highly likely Omicron could escape immunity to some extent, but that it was unclear by how much. The government scientists warned: Even if there continues to be good protection against severe disease for individuals from vaccination (including boosters), any significant reduction in protection against infection could still result in a very large wave of infections. This would in turn lead to potentially high numbers of hospitalisations even with protection against severe disease being less affected. The size of this wave remains highly uncertain but may be of a scale that requires very stringent response measures to avoid unsustainable pressure on the NHS. If vaccine efficacy is substantially reduced, then a wave of severe disease should be expected. They added: It is important to be prepared for a potentially very significant wave of infections with associated hospitalisations now, ahead of data being available. Meanwhile, scientists at a meeting of the New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (Nervtag) subgroup on 25 November said it is capable of causing a new wave of coronavirus infections of a “magnitude similar, or even larger, than previous waves.” In a note of the meeting, released by Sage today, scientists conclude: “We cannot exclude that this wave would be of a magnitude similar, or even larger, than previous waves.” It adds: “Although data on disease severity associated with B.1.1.529 are not yet available, a large wave of infections will be accompanied by a wave of severe cases and the subgroup cannot rule out that this may be sufficient to overwhelm NHS capacity.” Scientists said it is highly likely that omicron is a “fit” virus that is undergoing extensive community transmission in South Africa and potentially in other places. But they said there is insufficient data o make comments on the severity of disease brought by the variant. The first case of the Omicron variant has been detected in Wales, in the Cardiff and Vale University Health Board area, the Welsh government has announced. The case is linked to international travel, according to officials. The government said it was “prepared to respond rapidly to emerging variants of concern and intensive investigations and robust public health action are being taken to slow any spread”. Meanwhile, the public in Wales have been urged to follow steps “which keep us safe”, with the government calling for people to take up the offer of a vaccine. Network Rail says that four out of five passengers at major railway stations are complying with the new rules on face masks. The government-owned company made the estimation based on anecdotal evidence from station staff. From Tuesday, people across the UK are now required by law to wear face masks on public transports and in shops unless they have an exemption. Under the rules, Police and Transport for London (TfL) have enforcement powers to issue fines of £200 for first-time offenders and double for repeat offenders up to a maximum of £6,400. TfL said that 152 people in London were ordered to pay the £200 fine on Tuesday and an additional 125 were asked to leave their services. 127 were stopped from getting on a service or entering a station. Schools leaders are exasperated with “unhelpful” recommendations from government that in-person nativity plays and concerts go ahead as more are forced to cancel due to rising coronavirus cases, reports Rachel Hall. In England, Geoff Barton, the general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said government advice had handed school leaders “a poisoned chalice”. “Many will feel uncomfortable about going ahead, potentially putting them at loggerheads with parents as they try to manage their expectations.” The NHS England letter also said that under the advice of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI), boosters should be expanded to include all 18-39-year-olds and can be given three months after the second dose. It added: We recognise the pressure all local services are under, however as the secretary of state for health and social care has said, the ‘new national mission’ is to increase vaccine capacity. There are no supply challenges with either the Moderna or Pfizer booster stocks, therefore all vaccination sites are now asked to load their NBS calendars to the end of January, where possible. NHS England has said that the acceleration of booster jabs will begin “no later than 13 December”. In a letter to health leaders, NHS England said that the booking service for booster jabs will be updated to reflect the cut in time between the second dose and booster to three months and that it will go live “as soon as possible”. The letter said: The National Booking Service (NBS) is now being updated to reflect the three-month (91 days) interval from second dose to booster. Our intention is to go live as soon as possible and no later than 13 December. As these changes are being made, existing booking arrangements will remain in place: individuals in cohorts 1-10 can book their booster from five months (152 days) post second dose, for slots from six months (182 days) after their second dose. Two people at Oxford University are suspected to have the Omicron variant of coronavirus. The university said the two people are now isolating “in line with government guidance” and that their close contacts have been told and are isolating. A university spokesperson said: We can confirm that two members of Oxford university have tested positive for Covid-19, and the Omicron variant is suspected. The individuals are now isolating in line with government guidance and their close contacts have been notified and are also isolating. The university is working closely with the public health authorities and following their advice. The university has already implemented a number of changes to its health guidance in response to the Omicron variant, based on advice from its clinical academics. There are no further changes to the university’s health guidance at this stage, or any additional actions that students or staff need to take. We are continuing to encourage the whole community to follow all university and government health advice to reduce the risks of Covid-19. Nicola Sturgeon has said that the number of Omicron cases in Scotland is rising and that a Steps concert in Glasgow has been identified as one of the sources. It comes as 16 new cases of the new variant have been recorded in Scotland in the last 24 hours, bringing the total to 29. The first minister said Omicron cases are no longer tied to one event and that she expects cases of the new variant to continue to rise, “perhaps significantly”, in the coming days. She said: The number of Omicron cases now being reported in Scotland is rising, and cases are no longer all linked to a single event, but to several different sources including a Steps concert at the Hydro on 22 November. This confirms our view that there is now community transmission of this variant within Scotland. Given the nature of transmission we would expect to see cases rise, perhaps significantly, in the days ahead. However, health protection teams are continuing work through contact tracing, isolation and testing to slow the spread as far as possible while we learn more about the new variant’s impact. Ministers are also keeping the situation under daily review. Six cases are understood to be linked to the Steps concert, reports PA Media. Those who may have been exposed are being contacted. Scotland has recorded 16 additional Covid deaths and 2,432 new cases in the last 24 hours. The daily test positivity rate was 7.6%, according to data published by the Scottish Government, marking a rise on 7.4% yesterday. As of Wednesday night, there were 652 people in hospital with recently confirmed Covid cases – 46 of which were in intensive care. Randox, the Covid testing company at the centre of a government sleaze row, has commented on changing its terms and conditions to avoid breaching competition laws (see also 12:31). A spokesperson said: “Randox has been happy to engage fully with the CMA [the Competition and Markets Authority] from the outset to ensure the interests of its customers while the company delivers millions of Covid-19 PCR tests to facilitate vital international travel against the changing requirements of governments. “As the industry leader, Randox has been in the ideal position to both review the services required to support the international traveller and provide a consumer-industry standard of terms and conditions. These have, of necessity, evolved over time. “In working with the CMA, Randox’s aim has been to ensure absolute fairness whilst building and providing critical services in a highly volatile and demanding environment.” In Wales, about one in 45 people is estimated to have had coronavirus in the week to 27 November; up from one in 50 the previous week, with the ONS describing the trend as “uncertain”. Infection levels in Wales hit one in 40 people in late October, the highest since estimates began in summer 2020. In Northern Ireland, the latest estimate is also one in 45 people, up from one in 50 the previous week and slightly below the record high of one in 40 in mid-August. For Scotland, the latest estimate is one in 65, up from one in 70 the previous week and below September’s peak of one in 45. All figures are for people in private households and do not include hospitals, care homes and other settings. Covid infections have increased in all four UK nations and remain close to the worst levels on record; though the latest rise is not linked to the arrival of the Omicron variant, new analysis suggests. About one in 60 people in private households in England had Covid in the week to 27 November; up from one in 65 the previous week, according to estimates from the Office for National Statistics (ONS). One in 60 is the equivalent of about 898,900 people. The proportion of people in England who were estimated to have coronavirus at the peak of the second wave in early January was one in 50. This led to a surge in hospital admissions and deaths, along with a nationwide lockdown. But the current wave of infections has so far not resulted in similar numbers of people becoming seriously ill, thanks to the rolout of vaccinations. The ONS said they had not yet identified any infections “compatible with the new Omicron variant”, but will continue to monitor their findings and will report estimates if Omicron becomes “more prevalent among the population”. Referring to the Omicron variant, Rosemary Boyton, a professor of immunology and respiratory medicine at Imperial College London said: The existing vaccines do appear to protect from hospitalisation and death, which is important. And there’s no reason for us to think that that’s not going to be the case. So this is speculation for any subsequent variants. What our paper is showing is that you do have to think about it and it’s a more complex situation. So you can’t just think, I’m going to slot in this new sequence from a new variant, and that’s going to solve all the problems, because that’s probably not going to be the case. What we’ve got to look for is a vaccine strategy that has a very broad repertoire. Boyton told a press briefing it is difficult to make direct comparisons with the data emerging from South Africa, as it has a very different population with a history of infection from different variants, and the vaccination rates are not comparable. We’re absolutely saying that if you’ve been, if you have a different immunological history, in terms of the types of spikes you’ve encountered, then you will have a different repertoire of immune response. And so it does make it extremely difficult to make those broad comparisons. The wave or variant that caused an individual’s Covid infection shapes their response to subsequent infections, according to a new study. This is something called immune imprinting, and researchers found that people imprinted by the Alpha variant make different responses to the Delta variant. The scientists also found that imprinting differences were associated with different levels of waning immunity. In those vaccinated, but not previously infected, antibody protection against Delta waned to zero by week 21 after a second dose, according to the study published in the Science journal. But memory B cells, which also make up part of the immune system, persist, and boosters can help rescue antibody levels. Researchers say their findings may have implications for the development of future Covid-19 vaccines. Danny Altmann, professor of immunology at Imperial College London, said: I think that what we’re saying is the simple answer of saying ‘let’s have a new tweak vaccine every six or nine months’ may not be the best way to go. We’re not criticising any of the vaccine approaches, or any of the attempts to tweak them to the new variants. But I think what we are trying to say loud and clear, and try to be helpful, is that Alpha and Beta and Gamma and Delta and Omicron have come at us thick and fast. And, sure, you could jump to tweak the vaccines for different parts of the world at regular intervals. But the take-home message is: it’s not as if you start with a blank sheet. Each time you start with a pre-existing repertoire. That’s what the immune imprinting concept is all about. So we’d love to slow down and do the homework properly and try and find out which version of this is going to give you the best future-approved answer. Number 10 refuses to give details of any planned Downing Street Christmas parties, claiming they would be “private events” and would not be announced publicly. PA Media reports that when asked if there was going to be a Number 10 Christmas party, the Prime Minister’s spokesman said: The prime minister ... has said that there will continue to be festive events in the run-up to Christmas. You’ll have seen earlier this week the prime minister do the switching on of the No 10 Christmas tree lights, as well as another event the day before, that’ll continue in the run-up to Christmas. Asked whether this meant there would be a Number 10 staff Christmas party, he said: We would obviously inform you of any events closer to the time. I don’t have any details of any of those sort of events now, but as I say there’ll continue to be festive events in the run-up to Christmas. Asked whether he would inform reporters if there were any plans for a Number 10 Christmas party for staff, he said: Obviously, events that happen in No 10 that are private events, we wouldn’t inform you. He added: We obviously wouldn’t set out details of private functions in No 10, but as I say there will be festive events in the run-up to Christmas. The government has “no plans” to make vaccines compulsory, Downing Street has said. Asked if vaccinations could be made mandatory, the prime minister’s spokesperson told reporters: We’ve set out our policy on this and we’ve said it’s not something that we would look to introduce. You’re aware of the changes we made in terms of social care settings and for NHS workers, given the importance of protecting the most vulnerable in our society. But there’s no plans above and beyond that in that regard. In response to a question about whether separate lockdown measures for the unvaccinated could be implemented in the future, the spokesperson said: I think you can look back at the restrictions we’ve had previously and the fact that we’ve never introduced something along those lines. Our priority is to continue to promote vaccinations and promote boosters now that we are rolling out more and more boosters to more and more people. That is our priority, that’s our focus, and that’s what we’re asking people to come forward and take. Around one in six adults in Britain believe that life will never return to what it was pre-pandemic, according to a new survey by the Office of National Statistics (ONS). The results mark the highest proportion to share this view since the start of the pandemic. The ONS opinions and lifestyle survey, conducted between 18 and 28 November, found that 16% of adults believed that life will never return to normal. This compares to 11% between 20 and 31 October. Randox, the Covid-19 testing firm at the centre of a government sleaze row, has improved its terms and conditions in a bid to avoid breaching competition laws. The Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) said the company has made changes to provide customers with clearer information, particularly relating to when it will provide PCR tests and results. Owen Paterson resigned as a Conservative MP last month after being found to have repeatedly lobbied the government on behalf of Randox and another company while working as a paid consultant for them. The government awarded Randox nearly £600m of Covid testing contracts. Covid infections continued to rise across the UK last week, according to the latest figures from the Office for National Statistics (ONS). One in 60 people in England have Covid, 1 in 45 in Northern Ireland and Wales and 1 in 65 in Scotland. The ONS said it marked an increase in infections in England, Northern Ireland and Scotland, while in Wales the trend was “uncertain”. In England, infections increased in the North East, Yorkshire and The Humber and London in the week ending 27 November, while cases decreased in the West Midlands. In England cases increased in children aged two to the school year six and among those aged 35 to 49. There was a decrease among people aged 70 and above. It comes after the UK yesterday recorded its highest number of cases since July. Advertising boss Martin Sorrell has criticised the government’s messaging on Covid which he said has been “slipshod” and “chaotic”. The executive chairman of S4 Capital told Sky News that “messaging we’ve been getting from the government to date has been very mixed” amid a period of “great uncertainty”. It comes after the prime minister said people should not be cancelling Christmas parties, despite rising Covid infections and the emergence of new variant Omicron. He said there have been “significant cancellations” of events. At his own firm he said they are encouraging employees to wear masks and taking a “flexible attitude” to working from home. He said they will be holding Christmas events but at on a smaller scale. Labour’s new shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, has accused the government of failing to provide a “serious plan” for winter. He told MPs: Ministers cannot possibly believe that what we have been given today is a credible plan to meet these enormous challenges. If this were genuinely a plan about preparing for the winter, why does it arrive on December 3? A serious plan to bring down waiting lists would have the workforce at its heart, a serious plan to bring down waiting lists would have clear targets and deadlines, and a serious plan to bring down waiting lists would recognise that unless we focus on prevention, early intervention and fixing the social care crisis, ministers have no chance of bringing waiting lists down to the record low levels we saw under the last Labour government. He added: Without a serious strategy to build the health and social care workforce that we need, this plan really isn’t a plan at all. The health minister, Edward Argar, has said this winter will be “critical” for the NHS amid Covid and Omicron. Addressing the Commons, he claimed the government is doing everything in its power to keep the NHS “standing strong this winter” by trying to recruit more staff, providing greater support and to increase capacity. He told MPs this winter will be “critical for our NHS” as “we face the challenge of fighting Covid-19 and a new Omicron variant, along with other challenges like flu that winter can bring”. He said the government is doing “everything in our power to give our NHS what it needs and keep it standing strong this winter, including our plans to recruit more staff, give greater support to the NHS and bolster capacity across urgent and emergency care”. He said: We are doing everything we can to strengthen our vital defences. One of our main defences is, of course, our vaccination programmes and we are expanding our booster programme, which hit the milestone of 19 million doses yesterday, along with delivering the largest flu vaccination programme in UK history. Yesterday, we announced how we will buying a total of 114 million additional Pfizer and Moderna doses for 2022 and 2023, which will future-proof our great British vaccination efforts and make sure we can protect even more people in the years ahead. He added: We are determined to maximise the capacity of the NHS to keep elective services going over the winter months, so that people can keep getting routine treatments like hip surgery and diagnostic tests. Today, I am pleased to update the house on a 700 million fund that we announced in September for elective recovery. The Metropolitan police has said that it did not receive any complaints related to an alleged Downing Street Christmas party last year. It comes after Angela Rayner, the Labour deputy leader, asked cabinet secretary Simon Case if he is planning to call in police over allegations that parties were held despite Covid restrictions. Metropolitan police commissioner Cressida Dick said today that she is not aware of any complaints. She told a caller on LBC radio: “You asked if we are investigating - the answer to that is no. And, as far as I’m aware, we have had no complaints and therefore I really can’t comment on what did or didn’t happen there.” Asked what would happen if she received a letter, she said: “If I get a letter, I’ll read a letter.” She added: “This is the Met. We are professional. We are impartial. We act without fear or favour. We follow evidence. That’s what we do.” It comes after the Daily Mirror reported earlier this week that the prime minister Boris Johnson gave a speech at a packed leaving party when the country was in lockdown last year and that members of his team held another party days before Christmas. One in four care home residents are reportedly yet to receive a booster shot, despite government promises that they would be offered one by the start of November. Citing figures from NHS England, the Telegraph reports that only 72% of care home residents have so far received a booster dose. At a press conference on 15 November, Boris Johnson said that 80% of eligible people in care homes had received a booster, but charities claimed the new data raises questions over the prime minister’s claim. Gavin Terry, head of policy at Alzheimer’s Society, said the figures were “providing further cause for concern”, telling the newspaper: Given the Prime Minister announced on November 15 that 80 per cent of eligible older people in care homes had received a booster, it’s clear that last month’s data did not provide an accurate picture of what was really happening. The promise to offer jabs to all people living in care homes by November 1 is also now long overdue. We’re left wondering whether the vaccination drive in care homes has ground to a halt to make way for lower risk groups before the Government has met its promise to the most vulnerable. NHS England told the Telegraph that GPs and care home mangers were working together closely to vaccinate residents but that some may have been postponed by norovirus outbreaks and that some may have died since having their earlier vaccines. Face mask use is far from universal in British shops and on public transport, according to a new survey by the Office for National Statistics (ONS). Just 19% of adults reported seeing that everyone or almost everyone was wearing a face mask while shopping in the final week of November and the equivalent figure for public transport was just 21%. However, 71% said that they either always or often wore a face mask while shopping and 70% said they always wore it on public transport. UK holiday park company Away Resorts says Omicron has led to a surge in Christmas bookings amid renewed travel restrictions. Chief executive Carl Castledine told Sky News that Christmas bookings are up by 55% and that they are seeing “absolutely sensational levels of consumer desire to get away this Christmas”. He said record bookings are being driven by families who are looking for a break, experiencing pandemic fatigue and looking for a chance to celebrate together. Meanwhile, government departments were reportedly cancelling Christmas parties yesterday, ignoring calls by the prime minister to go ahead with them. The Times reports “Omi-shambles in Whitehall” as multiple government departments call off festive celebrations. The education department has already suspended plans for its annual talent show, reports the newspaper, and the business department has decided against putting on a staff Christmas party. It comes despite calls from senior government figures - including Boris Johnson (see also 9:33), Rishi Sunak and Sajid Javid (who has said the health department will not have a big party, but that he will take some staff out for dinner) - for big Christmas celebrations to go ahead, despite the threat posed by Omicron. Oliver Dowden has said he doesn’t plan to cancel the Conservatives’ Christmas party which he said is still planned to take place. He told BBC Breakfast: “I think it is still planned, and I don’t intend to cancel it as chairman of the Conservative party.” The British Medical Association (BMA) has said that people should be encouraged to “avoid large groups” and, where possible, meet outdoors during the festive period. It comes after Boris Johnson has come under pressure in recent days to explain reports of two No 10 parties during lockdown last winter, one of which was allegedly attended by the prime minister. It comes after an influential scientist last night warned that he wouldn’t feel safe going to a Christmas party this year. Prof Peter Openshaw, a member of the Government’s New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (Nervtag), said the “chances of getting infected were too high” to have a party. He told the BBC’s Question Time: We have not been planning to have a Christmas party. Because with things as they are, regardless of Omicron, we thought that the chances of getting infected were too high. Asked about the prime minister’s comments on Christmas plans, he said: Personally, I wouldn’t feel safe going to a party at the moment, if it involves being indoors in an enclosed space where you’re close to other people, and people are not wearing masks. Even if they’ve been tested and vaccinated, I wouldn’t feel safe. Britons were today urged to “keep calm and carry on with your Christmas plans” - despite the UK recording its highest cases since July. Oliver Dowden, the Conservative party chair, said people should keep going to pubs and restaurants as he claimed the government has so far taken “sufficient” action against the new Omicron variant. “The message to people is fairly straightforward, which is keep calm, carry on with your Christmas plans,” he told Sky News this morning. “We’ve put the necessary restrictions in place, but beyond that, keep calm and carry on.” The UK has so far recorded 42 Omicron cases and yesterday reported its highest daily cases since July with 53,945 cases and an additional 141 deaths. Dowden’s words echo those of the prime minister yesterday who said in an interview that people should not be cancelling Christmas parties. “The most important thing is that people should follow the guidance we’ve set out,” he said in a pooled broadcast interview. “People shouldn’t be cancelling things. There’s no need for that at all. It’s not what we are saying.” So far the government has responded to the new variant by reintroducing face mask requirements and tightening self-isolation rules and restrictions on travel. Responding to criticism from the hospitality industry over the government’s mixed messages, Dowden insisted the government is not discouraging people from going out. “We have not changed the advice around people taking part in hospitality - so going to the pub, going to restaurants and so on,” he said. “And actually I think most pubs and restaurants up until very recently have been doing very well during this season and we’re not discouraging people to do so.” While he said he was “confident” that this Christmas would be better than last, he urged people to get a Covid booster when they are eligible. He said: All of our advice is based on scientific evidence and indeed the chief medical officer [Professor Chris Whitty] and chief scientific adviser [Sir Patrick Vallance] attend cabinet and were at cabinet when we discussed this earlier this week. Hi, I’ll be looking after the blog today covering UK covid news. Please get in touch with any tips or suggestions: miranda.bryant@guardian.co.ukTo sign off, here’s Jamie Jackson’s take on the Ralf Rangnick regime. Thanks for sticking with us all day. Some real football-man respect paid to Brendan Rodgers by Steven Gerrard; that’s because the former Liverpool manager and captain face each other on Super Sunday when Aston Villa host Leicester. Brendan is a top coach. He came in at Liverpool at a time when we needed someone like him in terms of a modern coach who was going to take us forward, but also play some attractive football. I think the biggest thing was his delivery on the training pitch. You could see quite clearly that he had got a lot of experience and he was a good manager to play for in terms of a personal relationship. It would have been very naive from my point of view not to try and learn as much as I can and what I could from Brendan, and I continued to do it even when we never worked together because obviously I came up against him in Scotland and I have seen how well he has done in the Premier League, which is certainly no surprise to me. He is one of many managers who I watch closely and, in my position, when you are new and starting out and trying to gain that experience then they are the type of people you try to learn from. There is a mutual respect there. He always helped me as a player and I’ll always remember that, but once the whistle goes, we’ll be ready to compete for the points. Today’s Fiver on epic banter at the Euros, and the fall-out from it. Some more Rafa Benítez from his press conference this morning. Everton play Arsenal on Monday. Now is a time we have to stick together, go into January in the best position we can. You can complain about our mistakes, quality, things like that - but not commitment. We must work really hard. Why am I still positive? Because we did it at the beginning. You can’t be a bad or good manager in one week. If the team was really good, signed two wingers, made crosses - we can’t be wrong in everything after six weeks. My main thing is to concentrate on football issues, analyse the mistakes. I don’t want to blame individuals, we win or lose as a group. We know the problems, the club has been changing managers for a while and it wasn’t changing the situation. West Ham have slipped up, while Chelsea were a bit lucky against Watford. What a London derby awaits us. Arrest made after missile thrown at Hearts player. Per PA Media. A man has been arrested after missiles were thrown at Hearts winger Barrie McKay at Celtic Park on Thursday. McKay was struck on the back with what appeared to be a plastic bottle of juice, and other items were thrown down towards him on several occasions as he prepared to take corners in front of the standing section. The former Rangers player made referee Bobby Madden aware of the problem during his team’s 1-0 defeat but did not appear to be hurt and carried on playing. A police spokesperson said: “A 24-year-old man has been arrested in connection with items thrown on to the pitch during a match at Celtic Park on the evening of Thursday, December 2. A report will be submitted to the procurator fiscal and further enquiries are ongoing.” A spokesman for the Scottish Professional Football League said the league was awaiting the match delegate’s report. Which brings us to Aubameyang, who has four league goals for the season and is plainly struggling. There was a moment early on when he closed down Victor Lindelöf to help Arsenal win the ball in a good area, which hinted at him driving the team. It was an isolated highlight, his evening marked by a strange scruffiness with his finishing; a lack of power and conviction. He failed to beat De Gea in a one-on-one on 78 minutes, although an offside flag would spare his embarrassment. Nevertheless it was reflective of his low confidence. Pep Guardiola has lavished praise on Claudio Ranieri, who he will face as Watford manager on Saturday evening. Football has to be grateful we still have important people like Claudio Ranieri. What he’s done in his career is amazing. Of course Leicester is the benchmark but with what he has done in Spain, Italy, France, everywhere, I admire this type of person. After they lost to Liverpool he was confident to say, ‘If they follow me we will win’. I admire a lot that passion and energy. It will be a pleasure to see him again. Only four weeks until the transfer window slams open! Kevin De Bruyne back for City? Watch out, Watford. Here’s the scorelines between the teams since the 2016-17 season 0-6, 3-1, 1-2, 3-1, 6-0, 8-0, 0-4. And every one of them is a City win. Here is a slice of life in Zaatari refugee camp in Jordan, the world’s largest for Syrian refugees, and a story that follows the friendship of football-mad Fawzi and Mahmoud from their teenage years to early adulthood. Wolves have stopped scoring goals, but Liverpool haven’t. Dominic Calvert-Lewin is still at least a couple of weeks away from being in contention to play for Everton. He has not played this season after suffering a thigh injury in August. “I was talking with the physio and fitness coach and he is getting better but still a couple of weeks minimum,” said Rafa Benítez, who at this rate may never get to play DLC in a match. “We have to be very careful with him as he’s had two injuries so we want to be sure he is getting stronger and well and now is the time to progress and he is doing really well.” Yerry Mina, who has not featured for two months because of a hamstring problem, is on the verge of a return with Everton set to host Arsenal on Monday. Sports Quiz of the Week is here, and honestly, I got 9/10 on this. That has much to do with my current work/life balance but beat that if you can. Antonio Conte has backed Harry Kane to rediscover his goalscoring form for Spurs. Kane has scored just once in 12 Premier League matches but Conte backs his man. Conte said: First of all, I’m sure Harry is happy if we win and he doesn’t score. Because Tottenham is the first thought for us and Harry. It’s important to have chances to score and we’re improving a lot in this aspect. I’m sure Harry is going to score many goals. I’m sure he’s going to have a good performance in the same way he had against Brentford against every team we play. I’m very pleased for the way that he’s playing. Then I know the striker wants to score but we want to give him many chances to score. I think we’re on the right path to do this type of situation. It’s not quite happened for Leon Bailey at Aston Villa, and it looks like it won’t be happening for a while yet. He’s done his thigh muscle, having hobbled off during the 2-1 home defeat to Manchester City on Wednesday night. “Unfortunately for Leon he has had a scan and that has confirmed there is a muscle injury in the quad area,” said Steven Gerrard. “It’s going to be quite a long one so he’s going to be missing for a number of weeks. It is difficult to put a date on it right now but we won’t be seeing him before Christmas.” That’s it from me. I’ll hand over to John Brewin to take you through to the end of the day. Thanks for your time, Rob. Great news for Manchester City fans as Kevin De Bruyne is back in contention for Saturday’s 5.30pm kick-off at Watford after recovering from coronavirus. Kyle Walker, John Stones and Ilkay Gündogan are also available after missing the win at Villa Park and Aymeric Laporte returns from suspension. PA Media reports that Guardiola was a contented man at his press conference. “It is much better than before the game against Aston Villa when we didn’t have everyone,” he stated. “Where is the history of my club,” Patrice Evra said on TV last night in a reminder that not everyone is over the moon with Ralf Rangnick’s appointment as interim manager at United. What do you think? Football Weekly Extra is here and this week the main topics of conversation are Michael Carrick, Bernardo Silva, Lionel Messi and Steve Claridge. What a set of players? Arsenal spurned a great opportunity to ruin Rangnick’s arrival last night, and Thomas Partey has admitted his own form must improve. “For me, I have to keep on doing my best, keep trying, keep improving, try to come back to my best, because the team needs me,” he told the Arsenal website. But the 28-year-old in convinced Mikel Arteta’s side are a growing force … “I think we’re improving each day and it’s going to be good. If we want to be at the top it’s normal that we have to fight, we have to be under control and try to win the games. I think the team came out to win [at Manchester United]. We did everything we could, we played well, we created a lot of chances and I think that we were unlucky. Our writers’ match previews of the Premier League games are starting to roll in. Looks like Eddie Howe is gonna stick with with his attacking formation as he searches for Newcastle’s first win of the season, while Neal Maupay will get the chance to back up his wonder goal at West ham with another start up front at Southampton … Thanks Dave, and hello again everyone. Taffarel eh? Why stop there Jürgen? Why not get Edmundo and Romário in to help the strikers. It would sure be painful for Manchester United fans. Just click the watch on YouTube button here for the memories. Sorry Gary … Before I disappear down a rabbit hole of Brazil World Cup goalies, I’ll hand over to Rob Bleaney. By the way, who remembers their 1986 stopper Carlos? A man Lawrie McMenemy memorably described as looking like a ringer for Lennie Bennett. Another line from the Liverpool press conference is that the Reds have added Brazil goalkeeping great Claudio Taffarel to the staff. Remember him from the 1998 World Cup? However, Jurgen Klopp says it is to work under main goalkeeping coach John Achterberg not to replace him as the Dutchman has just signed a new contract. Klopp explained: “We spoke to Ali (Brazilian Alisson Becker) and he was quite pleased. He loved the idea as well. He’s a brilliant guy. “And John Achterberg has renewed his contract by the way until 2024. He’s the head of the goalie department.” Excellent feature here from Paul MacInnes on England’s blind football team. “If you have experienced blind football, perhaps the five-a-side competition that is part of the Paralympics, you will know it is mesmerising. At the top level, it is characterised by sinuous dribbling and rasping finishes. It is a game with a rhythm of its own. But to watch it, as a sighted person, gives only a partial sense of its complexity and challenges. It is a sport, its advocates insist, which offers transformative effects for those who play.” Brighton boss Graham Potter says he has to resist the temptation to give more minutes to Tariq Lamptey. The fans are desperate for the Chelsea youth product to get extra game time, especially after watching recent performances. Lamptey gave Leeds the runaround for 75 minutes in last weekend’s 0-0 draw before being withdrawn and then came off the bench to set up Neal Maupay’s equaliser at West Ham. But with the 21-year-old right-back still coming back to full strength after a serious hamstring injury which put him out for nine months, Potter is erring on the side of caution. “We’re going through a period where we’re going to play lots of games in a short space of time so that’s the only thing that’s going to stop the regularity of Tariq,” said Potter. “We all know his qualities and what he brings to the team. It’s just the close proximity of games will challenge him and us in terms of how much he plays and when he plays.” Here’s Potter on opposite number Ralph Hasenhüttl ahead of the south-coast derby against Southampton. “I like Southampton, I like what they do as there is real clarity there. You can see what they’re trying to do, they’re really impressive in the build-up and how they get into the final third. “I am sure they will get better and better as they adjust to each other, with Danny Ings moving on, the identity of how they defend and press is really good. “It’s always a tough game, but another one we are looking forward to. It’s three games in a week for both teams, both have had a busy schedule.” Liverpool manager, Jurgen Klopp, is gearing up for a busy December, a month in which the Reds play nine times. “It’s crazy. It was always crazy and I think it will always be crazy. We have to accept that. We’ll have to dig in and fight through. Super intense.” December has started well thanks to that 4-1 win over Everton on Wednesday although Klopp wasn’t handing out full marks when asked if it was a 9/10 performance. “I don’t even think it was close to an 8, to be honest. Because there was a spell where we let them back into the game. It was our best game at Goodison since I’ve been here but we want more.” Diogo Jota scored the final goal in that Goodison romp and the Portuguese star will be hoping to continue his good form at former club Wolves on Saturday. Jota got the winner for Liverpool in this fixture last season. Klopp on Jota: “An incredible package. Really smart. Structured in a very nice way. The first time I saw him play I thought ‘this could be a player for me’. The intensity he played with.” It’s all hands on decks given the busy fixture list and Klopp says Joe Gomez and Naby Keita joined in ‘big parts’ of training yesterday even though both won’t be in the squad for the trip to Molineux. Klopp added: “They didn’t yet do the full session but they looked brilliant. They will use the next few days to do what they need to do. After this weekend they should be in contention again.” As the transfer window gets ever closer, here’s some analysis from Ben McAleer of WhoScored on which players should be in the crosshairs of Premier League clubs. Jurgen Klopp presser coming up soon but, in the meantime, here’s the ‘Alpine Klopp’, Southampton’s Ralph Hasenhüttl. As he approaches three years in charge, the Saints boss was asked to review his time at the club. It seems some realism has set in. “You want me to give a summary of all that in one minute! “I’ve been here a long time now yes, and I knew that it would be tough. “I was coming from a Champions League club (RB Leipzig) and now I’m at a club where the main goal is to stay in the league. “It’s a survival fight every day, every week, with the limits we have with a club. But we’ve made some good progress. “Even if you sell players for a lot of money we are trying to rebuild the team, this is the way we have to go. “This was a change in my mind also, it took a little bit to understand this, to be honest. “When we were coming here we had targets of bringing the club as high in the table as possible, maybe reaching European places. “But then you see how strong the league is, you see the potential, and there’s another team coming now in Newcastle with absolutely more financial potential than we have. “But the job is not affected by this hard work, it’s still fantastic, I enjoy my job every day, and it’s fantastic to work at this club with my staff and this team. “We do the best to bring good games to the supporters, to make them proud of our team and our club.” His immediate challenge is a south-coast derby against Graham Potter’s Brighton. “We’ve conceded eight goals in three games, okay four against red-hot Liverpool, but this is something I thought we had put out of our game and now it’s back on the list of things we have to solve. “Brighton have a very open-minded manager that picks the best parts of everybody’s games and brings it together. “They are one of the best organised teams and have made fantastic progress, so I have to say absolute congratulations to my opposite number there.” And how about life on the south coast? “My wife and I enjoy life here very much, it’s a wonderful place to live. I love the people, I love the respect they give to you in every part of your life here. “I really must say that from this part, there’s not that much that I miss. Okay maybe I miss the mountains of Austria, but they are not running away, they are waiting for me.” Yep, Ralph will always have the mountains. Eddie Howe is in the hotseat now and the newly-appointed Newcastle boss wants to buck a trend. The Magpies have won precisely none of their opening 14 Premier League games of the season and that puts them in a hall of shame alongside Swindon, QPR and Sheffield United. Needless to say, none of them had the last laugh as all three were relegated. So, Eddie, are you up for a bit of miracle working? “Yes, I am. I’m realistic, but I’m also very, very positive. “I know it’s going to be extremely difficult – if no team has done it, there’s a reason why they haven’t done it. That’s because it’s incredibly tough. “But why not be the first? That’s always been my mindset. Why not change history? That’s what we’re going to have to do. “We’re going to have to do it the hard way, but we’re more than capable.” Howe has been particularly impressed with Joelinton (no, really). The Brazilian has just 11 goals in 93 appearances so far for Newcastle but has perked up in recent games. “When you watch a team from afar, you do have an opinion. I always liked him, but now, working closely with him, I like him even more,” said Howe. “You see the person and the human behind the player. What I see from him is just an incredible guy who really wants to do well. “He’s had a difficult moment, going to a new club for a big fee, but his resilience and attitude to that has been fantastic. He has had no negative reaction, only eagerness to prove his worth to the team, supporters and club. “Longer term, I really think he can do that. I see someone who can make a difference for us and is very motivated to do well.” As for team news ahead of Saturday’s home clash against Burnley, Ciaran Clark is suspended after his red card against Norwich. Jamaal Lascelles and Matt Ritchie are available again after serving bans. Let’s add some Marcelo Bielsa into the mix. The deep-thinking Argentine brings good news: Patrick Bamford and Luke Ayling are back in the Leeds squad. Bamford has been out with an ankle injury since mid-September while a knee problem has sidelined Ayling for the same period. Both came through a run-out for the Under-23s on Monday. Bielsa on Bamford: “Just to say he was a player who scored one goal every two games last season is enough to show his importance. “And even when he doesn’t score, he’s an important part of how the team functions.” Leeds are up to 15th - and just one point behind 11th - after Raphinha’s stoppage-time winner from the penalty spot against Crystal Palace on Tuesday gave them a second straight three points. “To win consecutively fortifies you,” Bielsa said. “When we focus on every game independent of who comes next, given the amount of fixtures we’ve played up until now, the points that we’ve got on the board are few and every fixture is an opportunity to balance our numbers.” He’s also denied - in a very Bielsa way - a fallout with England midfielder Kalvin Phillips. “It’s difficult to express yourself over things that didn’t happen, that there’s nothing behind and that are expressed as a reality,” Bielsa said. “There’s things that correspond to the private part of a relationship so perhaps the media talks about these things that are hidden but this is a next step. This was the spread of something that didn’t happen at all. “The press, not only do they inform, but they have their legitimate need that what they tell wakes up interest and in that process, on occasion it happens that they invent realities to bring attention.” Leeds host Brentford this weekend but then play Chelsea and Manchester City away from home, Arsenal at Elland Road and Liverpool at Anfield. Let the arguments begin... The FA Cup always throws up unlikely stories so take a read of this piece by Will Unwin ahead of the weekend’s second-round action. “We look hard to beat”. Imagine a Norwich boss saying that a month ago. Those are the words of new manager Dean Smith who is unbeaten in three games since taking over. Add in Daniel Farke’s farewell win over Brentford and the Canaries have won two and drawn two of their last four games. Everton would kill for that sort of form. Here’s Smith on the 1-1 draw with Newcastle on Wednesday: “We look hard to beat, I can’t remember Newcastle having many chances. “We’ve felt we left some points out there. With Newcastle going down to 10 men after 10 minutes, we could have been better with the ball and we felt we should have performed a lot better. It’s a solid start and we look hard to beat.” Striker Teemu Pukki netted a superb equaliser at Newcastle but Smith says others need to ease the goalscoring burden on him. “He needs help. Looking at Teemu and speaking to him you wouldn’t know he is carrying such a weight on his shoulders. He seems a real level-headed, laid-back guy who wants to work hard for the team. “He’s one who I knew was a good player but you don’t realise how good a player until you actually work with him. His work-rate, the quality of his finishing, the quality of his runs and he sets the tempo at the top for us. “I’ve been really pleased in what we’ve got. He is setting a standard for the others to follow. But we know we can’t be over-reliant on just one goalscorer in the team. We need goals from other areas. “We’ve spoken about it, that’s why the importance of set-pieces also comes into play. If we can be a little bit more creative in those areas then we will get goals from other players. “What helps is he’s had the experience of playing in the Premier League. He’s got the experience of another season in the Championship, where he’s done really well, and he understands his own body. We help him along the way.” Pukki has five goals this season but just three other Norwich players – Mathias Normann, Andrew Omobamidele and Grant Hanley – have scored in the Premier League. Burnley boss Sean Dyche has been in front of the press giving hot copy on his team’s progress and Newcastle’s spending power. Here’s what the anti-coat wearer had to say ahead of their trip to St James’ Park. “We have found a good balance in our performances this season but there is no naivety, it is one loss in eight but also one win in eight so we have to change that side of things. “You would prefer to be in a situation where you have only lost one in eight, it is a good situation mentally for the players, a reminder of the good work and they know they are not far away. “Now it is about adding in the detail to win games, we have done it many times before and now it is just about delivery.” On Eddie Howe: “I am pleased to see him back. I texted him and said I hoped it goes well, although not against us obviously. “He will still be finding his best route and best mix of players. Long term money is very beneficial, but in the short term you have to find a way to get results. Eddie will know that.” On Newcastle and the January transfer window: “Most teams hang on and hang on and push the financial margins for obvious reasons because they know they only have a certain window to do the deal. “It’s very difficult to get deals done early because everyone’s marketing each other’s players and putting their own sales pitch out. It’s not only agents by the way, the clubs do it as well and before you know it it’s on the yellow line at the bottom of Sky (Sports News). “Then of course you need a player who possibly has a reason to move. Money is obvious of course, or maybe there’s a change of manager or a falling out with the current manager. “All of these things go into it and you have a very short period to sort this out. There are a lot of people looking at each other’s players, trying to align the deal and the right deals that can matter and not get into a position where you make deals that end up not mattering and can cost a lot of money. “But maybe they (Newcastle) have got enough money to make things happen because everyone has a price in football. There are clubs I know that will just go: ‘Yeah, okay we’re going to sell’. “Newcastle might have enough money, teams have done it in the past and they might be one of them. We will have to wait and see.” Here’s last night’s match report of Manchester United 3-2 Arsenal. David Hytner was at Old Trafford (said in Gary Lineker voice). In a week when many of us have been absorbed by the Fab Four, the Premier League has continued to be a shootout between the Fab Three. Chelsea, Manchester City and Liverpool all scored away wins in midweek to move onto 33, 32 and 31 points respectively. It’s seven back to West Ham in fourth. While Manchester United and Arsenal try and get back to where they once belonged, I have a feeling that Antonio Conte’s Spurs could be the best bets to grab fourth place. At the other end of the table, Norwich are starting to dig it after two wins and two draws in their last four. But how many matches until Newcastle finally get a win? Maybe they’ll get one after 909. Elsewhere, Rafa’s not for you Blues following a shocking Merseybeat and Brentford fans will be hoping to dig a Toney as they set off on their long and winding trip to Elland Road. Grab some tea and toast, cancel your Disney subscription and take a look at this weekend’s Premier League fixtures in full. All times GMT. Saturday 4th December West Ham v Chelsea (12.30pm) Newcastle v Burnley (3pm) Southampton v Brighton (3pm) Wolves v Liverpool (3pm) Watford v Manchester City (5.30pm) Sunday 5th December Leeds v Brentford (2pm) Manchester United v Crystal Palace (2pm) Tottenham v Norwich (2pm) Aston Villa v Leicester (4.30pm) Monday 6th December Everton v Arsenal (8pm) Here’s Jamie Jackson’s round-up of the Ralf Rangnick press conference. It includes the new United boss poo-pooing the idea of a January move for Borussia Dortmund’s Erling Haaland. England fan disorder at the Euro 2020 final against Italy almost led to deaths, according to an independent report. Lady Louise Casey: “The Euro 2020 final was a potentially glorious national occasion that turned into a day of national shame. Our team of role models were in our first major final for 55 years. However they were let down by a horde of ticketless, drunken and drugged-up thugs who chose to abuse innocent, vulnerable and disabled people, as well as police officers, volunteers and Wembley staff, creating an appalling scene of disorder and coming perilously close to putting lives at risk.” Let’s widen the lens and look at some talking points on all this weekend’s Premier League fixtures. Having said Rangnick’s December fixture list looks welcoming, Crystal Palace could prove a tricky first opponent. Palace took four points off United last season and have won their last two Premier League games at Old Trafford so won’t lack for confidence. There’s also that pesky stat that Rangnick will want to eradicate sooner rather than later: United have conceded in 15 consecutive home games in all competitions. That’s their worst streak since 1959. Ralf Rangnick starts his Manchester United mission with the team sat seventh in the Premier League table on 21 points. That’s just three behind what we presume is the target of fourth place. United are currently 10 back from third-placed Liverpool. Here’s United’s fixture list for the rest of December: Dec 05: Man Utd v Crystal Palace (Premier League) Dec 08: Man Utd v Young Boys (Champions League) Dec 11: Norwich v Man Utd (Premier League) Dec 14: Brentford v Man Utd (Premier League) Dec 18: Man Utd v Brighton (Premier League) Dec 27: Newcastle v Man Utd (Premier League) Dec 30: Man Utd v Burnley (Premier League) Not a bad time to take the helm, it seems. United’s next six Premier League games are against teams who currently sit 11th, 19th, 12th, 9th, 20th and 18th in the table. Thanks Rob. A bit more on Michael Carrick. Rangnick says he wanted him to stay. “I had a conversation with Michael for more than an hour and tried to convince him, but he needed a break and I understand his decision,” said Rangnick. “I am more than happy to work with the current staff because I need their expertise on the current squad.” And that’s it from me. I’ll pass the baton smoothly over to Dave Tindall for more Rangnick reaction and the countdown to the weekend’s games. Until next time. Cristiano Ronaldo doesn’t seem to be too worried about Ralf Rangnick’s arrival. He’s still the main man at Old Trafford, and he’s already looking ahead to Sunday … Rangnick’s first appearance obviously went down well with United fans, who are all over social media rejoicing at his arrival. He may only be interim manager for this season, but with the two-year consultancy role to follow his commitment to the club is obvious. And he has obviously researched the club deeply. “I know about the disaster in Munich,” he said today. “The legacy of this club is unique. We have to follow this legacy and make sure the DNA will also be respected.” So what about new signings for United? The transfer window opens next month, but Rangnick seems more concerned with long-term rather than quick-fix solutions. As we all focus on him as interim manager, the German already has one eye on the position as consultant that he will move into at the end of this season. “The club has had no continuity in signing new players and sticking to the DNA of the club,” he said. “In the future, the board members and myself have the same opinion. It’s important not to have many changes in management.” Rangnick’s discussion of Ronaldo was particularly interesting, given he chose to focus in on the 36-year-old’s incredible fitness. It is clearly something United’s interim manager puts front and centre of his coaching ethos. “Modern football in the last 10 years, it has completely changed into a more physical, more athletic, more vertical game,” Rangnick explained at one point. “In order to develop teams, you need to train the bodies and the brains.” One thing that was notable from Rangnick’s words was his desire to bring order and control to the team. “It’s obvious the squad has talent and experience,” he said. “The challenge is to bring more balance into the team. Even yesterday we needed three goals to win the game. It’s almost two goals on average conceded per game and this is too much. “Yesterday’s game was exciting for the fans but as the coach they are not the games you need every day. For me it is to minimise the coincidence factor and have control of the game.” And that’s it. Ralf Rangnick has left the building. I will try to unpick the bigggest lines for you over the next few minutes but there is no doubt he cuts an impressive figure. He talks intelligently, offers great insight and has clearly come to Old Trafford to instigate change. Rivals be warned. Prepare to see United kicked into shape, and quickly. Rangick talks about living in Brighton when he was younger, and learning to love British football by going to matches here. “You will find very few football clubs with this much support. This is football in the purest sense. It’s more than exciting to be part of that atmosphere. This will help any team, especially our players, to get on a higher level.” On Cristiano Ronaldo, Rangnick is diplomatic. “Having watched him last night, especially in the second half he made the difference. At his age I have never seen a player who is that physically fit. What I saw from Cristiano yesterday he is more than willing to put himself out there for the team. It’s not only the players who have to adapt, The team has to adapt to the players too.” He says he met Carrick a couple of days ago and he had already made his decision to leave. “I will try to get one, two or three people to join my coaching staff soon but it is not that easy with Brexit visa issues,” he explains. Rangnick praises the fans inside Old Trafford last night, but says Manchester United need to control games better. Rangnick is optimistic about the talent in United’s squad: “I think when Jürgen Klopp came to Liverpool it was definitely not a better squad than the one I inherited here at Manchester United.” Rangnick talks about Sir Alex Ferguson. “Having had the same manager for 27 years it’s not that unusual after such a long successful spell you need to find a new pathway. You need continuity. I think for the future it’s important that there will be not that many changes in management.” The Guardian’s Jamie Jackson asks how easy will it be to turn round Manchester United? “It’s about getting to know the players, speaking to them and letting them know what the approach will be. I am very ambitious and want the best. We have to be realistic, the distance between us and the top three is big. It’s about developing performances and letting the team get the felling of how we can control the game.” Rangnick says he wants to change things, but he is realistic. “The aim is to win the next game but I have maybe one training session before Sunday I will introduce myself to the players this afternoon. There are many things that you can change on the training pitch but it will not be easy in the middle of the season. You cannot change everything in one or two weeks.” Ragnick speaks. “If a club like Man United contacts you for such a role, you cannot possibly turn it down.” Michael Carrick announced he was leaving Manchester United immediately after the final whistle last night. He says he had made the decision himself, partly due to “loyalty” to Ole Gunnar Solskjær, after 15 years at the club as a player and coach … “It is 100% my decision. I respect a new manager coming in. I made the decision before speaking to him. It wasn’t an easy one but [it is the] right decision for the club. The loyalty to Ole is a little bit of a factor but there were a lot of things that came into my decision. Read Jamie Jackson’s full story here … Michael Carrick has gone. Manchester United are winning again. And Ralf Rangnick is here to rescue this great club from freefall. Everything is rosy again in the Old Trafford garden. Or is it? Rangnick is due to do his first United press conference at 9am this morning and it will be very interesting to see what he made of last night’s rollercoaster win over Arsenal. Cristiano Ronaldo, the man who supposedly cannot press, and therefore will not fit into his new interim manager’s system, passed 800 goals and was the biggest reason United prevailed over Mikel Arteta’s side. A season that promises a title race to saviour may now have a top-four battle to match. Rafael Benítez is under serious pressure, Newcastle face another must-win game at home to Burnley, West Ham host Chelsea in the early game on Saturday and, of course, Rangnick takes charge of his first game against Crystal Palace on Sunday. We’ll have all the early team news, previews, and hear what the managers think right here.The format of European qualification for the Women’s World Cup and Women’s Euros will change from 2023, Uefa’s head of women’s football, Nadine Kessler, has confirmed, after 29 games with margins of seven goals or more between September and November drew heavy criticism. “We acknowledge that we absolutely don’t want to see that,” Kessler said of scorelines such as England’s 20-0 defeat of Latvia and Belgium’s 19-0 win over Armenia, which prompted widespread calls for change. “It’s not good for the development of women’s football, not for smaller or big associations, and it will change as of 2023.” Kessler said a Nations League-style competition was being explored as a part of discussions. “We’re looking at all of the formats that we’ve used before,” she said. “We’re looking at what was good and what wasn’t good to then draw up what hopefully will be the best format to improve the competitiveness … We are considering lots of different options, like a Nations League but not only a Nations League, to see how we can close this gap.” Kessler warned that changes to qualification alone would not be enough. Referencing the impact of the pandemic she said: “There are huge inactivity levels across the world, in leagues, in national team football, and if you don’t play regularly, at an elite level, for a national team, if your league is not up and running and has to be cancelled, then these are all factors as to why, right now, we see results like we’ve never seen before. “The format will help address it for sure but what creates success and what creates competitiveness? It’s regular investments, the right structures on the ground, domestic leagues that are up and running regularly, with good standards, and regular participation in our qualifiers for the World Cup or Euros. “It’s also the overall pool of players that will allow you to professionalise your structures. It’s very important that we start thinking of women’s football more with a long-term, strategic view.” A big stumbling block to Uefa progressing discussions and developing that long-term plan is the lack of a match calendar beyond the 2023 World Cup. Kessler heavily criticised Fifa’s plans for biennial World Cups and blamed it for the delay. “You asked me about our qualifying formats,” said the 2013 Euros winner with Germany. “I can’t even tell you because I don’t know what the international match calendar will be like after summer 2023. We are one and a half years away from a new cycle. That calendar is there to regulate not just international football but also domestic football, it regulates the load for international players, and we don’t know what it is. “I don’t even know how many match days there will be for qualification campaigns, because we are stuck discussing a biennial World Cup that I don’t see as being able to address any developmental issues or competitive issues we have because it’s a tournament for the elitist.”Floods and landslides that battered the Canadian province of British Columbia last month killed hundreds of thousands of farm animals and forced nearly 15,000 people from their homes, new figures revealed, as officials described the scope of the devastation – and the challenges of recovery. As many as 628,000 chickens, 420 dairy cattle and 12,000 pigs were killed by the floods. An estimated 3 million bees in 110 hives were also submerged. “The work by farmers and volunteers and companies to clean out barns, and to remove those animals, continues to be extremely heartbreaking,” said the agricultural minister, Lana Popham, late on Thursday, adding that with drier conditions forecast, the work of removing dead animals from farms could begin. But the process of draining the Sumas Prairie – a former lakebed where most of the farms are located – could take another another two to three weeks, warned the Abbotsford mayor, Henry Braun. More than 800 farms in the area remained under evacuation order and 700 acres of blueberry crops remain under water. The public safety minister, Mike Farnworth, said the province was “now on the other end” of three consecutive atmospheric rivers, but confirmed nearly 15,000 people were forced to flee during the floods. More than 4,000 properties remain under evacuation orders. Numerous highways remain closed and some major routes are still restricted to essential travel only. Repair crews are also likely to face new challenges as freezing temperatures and snow blankets hard-hit areas. The province has extended its state of emergency until 14 December and fuel rationing is in effect. Trans Mountain, which transports most of the province’s fuel needs, shut down its pipeline in mid-November due to heavy rainfall and flooding. As the province takes stock of the damage, mounting evidence suggests more could have been done to prevent the catastrophic levels of damage. A provincial report from 2015 that found the dike that protects the agricultural area of Sumas Prairie from floodwaters was “substandard” and needed maintenance. The report also determined none of the 74 dikes examined in the south-western region of British Columbia fully met the province’s benchmark, in part because of more rigorous construction standards, but also because of cost. A separate report found the province had been warned more than a decade ago that its flood forecasting centre needed to double its staffing in order to effectively warn residents of impending flood waters – a warning that one thinktank says still has not been acted upon. Earlier this week, the chair of British Columbia’s Fraser Valley regional district said that despite pleas for help, aid to communities often came too late. “Throughout this event, we have experienced delays in getting funding approvals, and roads, water systems, diking infrastructure, sewer systems and bridges are at serious risk of either washing away or suffering catastrophic damage,” said Jason Lum. There is no price tag yet attached to the damage, but the floods and landslides severed highways, destroyed communities and halted oil and rail shipments. “Easily the costliest natural disaster in Canadian history. Won’t even be close,” tweeted Blake Shaffer, an economics professor at the university of Calgary. The wildfires that struck the city of Fort McMurray in 2016 is widely considered to be the costliest natural disaster in Canada, with an insurance loss of nearly C$3.58bn (US$2.8bn). Abbotsford’s Mayor Braun has suggested the damage to his city alone from the floods will be close to C$1bn.A record-breaking heatwave has swept large parts of the US, with much of the country experiencing balmy conditions even as Americans move into what is supposed to be meteorological winter. Much of the western half of the US has seen temperatures 35F (19C) above average for this time of year in the past days, with Wednesday bringing the hottest December weather on record for Montana, Wyoming, Washington state and North Dakota. Parts of British Columbia in western Canada hit 72.5F (22.5C), tying the national record for the highest temperature ever recorded during December. A series of state records have been tied or broken, with Jordan, Montana, hitting 78F, Hettinger, North Dakota, reaching 71F and Buffalo, Wyoming, getting to 78F. Denver, Colorado, where temperatures have been about 30F above average, has not had any snowfall this season – the latest any measurable snow has settled on the city. In some places the unusually warm temperatures have helped spur abnormally late wildfires, with flames roaring across the prairies of Montana, razing dozens of homes and incinerating farming equipment. “It’s definitely not a good sign that it is this dry in December and this warm,” Brock Linker, a farmer and volunteer firefighter in Denton, Montana, told the New York Times. “We’ve had zero moisture since May and no sign of any in the future.” The National Weather Service said that a “potent ridge of high pressure” has driven heat, forecasting that “record-breaking warmth” will continue across much of the southern plains and Rocky Mountain regions on Friday, before cooling this weekend. The climate crisis is causing longer, and more severe, heatwaves to reach all corners of the US, with this summer being the hottest ever recorded nationally. It is winters, however, that are heating up more rapidly than summer, with researchers finding that winter is the fastest-warming season in 38 US states. While warmer winters reduce cold-related deaths, they also prolong allergy seasons, help wildfires become more common and affect skiing and snowboarding through reduced snow. Shrinking snowpacks also have a profound ecological impact, affecting wildlife that relies upon them and reducing the snow melt that forms much of the water carried by streams and rivers, contributing to what scientists say is the worst drought in the US west in the past 1,200 years. Warmer temperatures also fails to kill off pests, such as the pine beetle, that decimate trees.Ministers have given GPs in England the green light to provide less care to millions of patients for the next four months so they can join the “national mission” to urgently deliver Covid booster jabs. Family doctors will spend less time monitoring people with conditions such as diabetes and heart problems, do fewer health checks on the over-75s and stop performing minor surgery until April. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, and NHS bosses have approved the controversial changes so that GPs and practice nurses can join the drive to administer top-up shots as quickly as possible. Doctors’ leaders sought to reassure the public that anyone falling ill or worried about their health would still be seen and assessed. However, the Patients Association immediately warned that the reduction in routine checks will lead to signs of illness being missed and disrupt the relationship between patients and GPs. Family doctors will experience a substantial lifting of the requirements set out in the Quality Outcomes Framework (QOF) to monitor patients and help tackle public health problems such as smoking and obesity – lifting their workloads so they can help administer booster shots. Javid and NHS England have given them permission to undertake far fewer checks on people with a wide range of serious ailments, including high blood pressure, asthma, chronic kidney disease and obesity. GPs will also undertake fewer medication reviews with people who are taking drugs on a long-term basis to help manage their condition and reduce the danger of their health deteriorating, for example blood pressure tablets to reduce the risk of a heart attack or stroke. For the next four months family doctors will continue to carry out only a limited amount of these checks. Javid and NHS England have agreed to leave it to GPs’ clinical judgment which patients still need to be monitored. “This is a necessary temporary emergency measure because the booster rollout is now the NHS’s top priority,” a source said. “National GP bodies have assured the government and NHS leadership that most of the services should still go ahead, but based on clinical need.” However, GPs will still have to comply as usual with a few QOF duties, including administering non-Covid vaccinations, especially in children, and undertaking cervical cancer screening. The NHS has to ramp up the daily total of boosters delivered from 350,000 to 500,000 as soon as it can to help deliver Boris Johnson’s pledge on Tuesday that every adult in England will have been offered one by the end of January. The deal was hammered out during several days of complicated and protracted talks this week involving GP leaders, NHS England and the Department of Health and Social Care. The Guardian revealed on Wednesday that moves to set aside QOF obligations on GPs were under way after the emergence of the new Omicron variant of coronavirus left ministers, NHS leaders and scientists worried about a potential new surge in infections. Rachel Power, chief executive of the Patients Association, welcomed the fact that “the NHS is undoubtedly mobilising resources on an impressive scale for the booster programme.” But, in a sign that NHS England will have difficulty explaining the rationale behind the move, Power added: “Withdrawing some regular GP services will further disrupt the relationship between patients and the NHS. The decision also risks building up future ill-health that would have been picked up in routine health checks, which will have to be dealt with at some point.” The changes were outlined in a letter which NHS England chief executive Amanda Pritchard and three senior colleagues sent on Friday to local leaders across England outlining how the health service will push forward with the booster programme. The suspension of so many of the QOF duties is a major victory for the British Medical Association (BMA). Javid has ignored the doctors’ union’s pleas in recent months to relax or scrap QOF altogether as a way of reducing their “unsustainable and impossible” workloads and angered them when he did not include it in his “GP support package” in October. That plan caused fury and consternation in the profession by insisting that GPs see any patient who wants it face to face, despite the threat posed by persistently high levels of Covid infection. The BMA GP committee chair, Dr Farah Jameel, said the nationwide shortage of family doctors meant that, while GPs intend to aid the boosters push as much as they can, “there must be a recognition that they cannot do everything for everyone all of the time. “Today’s changes begin to recognise this, and we hope that, by removing some of the more bureaucratic and target-based requirements within practices’ contracts, that staff’s time can be freed up to get more jabs into arms, while allowing practices to focus on patients who need their attention the most.” She added: “Patients need to know that if they are unwell or have concerning symptoms and need to receive care from their practice they will continue to be prioritised and GP teams will continue doing their very best to keep their sickest patients safe in every way they can and know how.” Ruth Rankine, director of primary care at the NHS Confederation, said: “Hopefully this guidance will free up much-needed time for primary care teams to vaccinate at speed and to prioritise patients with the greatest clinical need.”If there is a #MeToo moment in Shakespeare’s oeuvre, Blanche McIntyre’s production shows it to be inside this problem play’s exploration of sex, power, morality and double standards in leadership. “To whom should I complain?” says the novice nun, Isabella, after Angelo presents his monstrous bargain – her virginity in exchange for her imprisoned brother’s life. And when she threatens to tell the world what kind of governor he is, he throws back: “Who will believe thee?” Her words – and his – chime with current conversations on male sexual predation, the price of calling it out and questions around consent. McIntyre transposes the drama to a seedy 1970s London which rages with sex, corrupt governance and puritanical hypocrisies. A power cut early on gestures towards the three-day week, but little on James Cotterill’s minimal set builds a portrait of the city. Georgia Landers is clear-eyed and heroic as Isabella; the bargain with Angelo is a strong scene in which she appears horrified yet defiant. But as a play with several sharp plot-turns and tricky balances between darkness and light, the comedy feels too drawn out here. Some scenes have flashes of Benny Hill and Carry On, with half-clad men tumbling out of Mistress Overdone’s brothel in psychedelic underpants. Mistress Overdone herself (Ishia Bennison) has more than a touch of Barbara Windsor. There is a rogue dildo, too, and amid the nuns and friars, it all steers close to looking like a retro gathering of “tarts and vicars.” The period detail is delightful nonetheless, from Burt Bacharach style muzak to Angelo’s once-betrothed, Mariana, who in an empire-line dress looks like one of David Hockney’s swimming pool figures. The production as a whole feels static, its pacing a little flabby, but the cast give strong performances: Ashley Zhangazha’s severe, unbending Angelo shows how quickly power corrupts. Eloise Secker, who plays several characters including Pompey and Mariana, delivers deadpan wit sublimely. It is the women who hold the moral rectitude here, and the ultimate power: Escalus (Bennison, doubling up brilliantly) and Vincentio are gender-switched. Hattie Ladbury, as the Duke, is both stately and mischievous in her disguise as the friar. This latter reversal also makes her wedding proposal to Isabella more progressive, with its lesbian overtones, and the nun’s final pause is all the more pregnant. • At the Sam Wanamaker Playhouse, London, until 15 January.Responsible investing can feel a lot more daunting than responsible shopping. After all, when you decide to swap your weekly grocery shop with a basket of more eco-friendly substitutes, you already know the difference between, say, laundry detergent and fabric conditioner. Likewise, if you decide to buy an electric car, you’ll already know the difference between a hatchback and an SUV. But the same might not apply to investing – particularly if you’re a novice. So here are some basic nuts and bolts of investing to help you get started. Equities In essence, equity is ownership. When you buy shares in a company, you are buying a stake in that company. Most people will buy into public equities, which are shares publicly traded on a stock market. But it is possible to purchase private equity – a stake in a company that isn’t publicly traded. If you’re not a high-net-worth individual or seasoned investor, however, you’re more likely to stick to shares in companies listed on a stock market. Indeed, most of us will have investments in equities already: “If you [invest] in an Isa or pension fund,” says Lee Coates, an independent consultant, “they’re almost certainly going to be in equities.” Bonds Whereas buying shares means you effectively become a co-owner or shareholder of that company, purchasing bonds doesn’t give you such a privilege. Bonds are a type of loan, where a company or public body, such as the UK government, sets out to raise a certain amount of capital, and investors lend them the money for a set period of time. “So Facebook could say OK, we’re issuing a bond – we wish to raise £100m. And that bond will last three years, at the end of which we’ll pay the investors back their money, with an interest rate of x,” says Coates. UK government-issued bonds (called gilts, a reference to the gold-rimmed paper they were once printed on), are typically considered to be very low-risk. A company may go bust, but it’s fairly unlikely that a government will, says Coates. Rates of return on government bonds do tend to be relatively low, however, because they are considered less risky than company bonds. “The most famous government bonds were probably war bonds, to fund the first and second world wars,” Coates adds. “It was a way of supporting the war effort.” Funds A fund is a group of investments pooled into one product. A pension fund, for instance, could consist of several components, or “securities”: equities (shares), government or corporate bonds, or even property investments. It’s useful to think of funds as baskets of investments pooled together as one – with a common purpose of making you money. The managing of funds – deciding what stocks or bonds the fund should be composed of – can be done passively or actively. Passive funds track a stock market index or a sector of the market and are “run by a computer, essentially”, says Coates. They’re curated and then continuously tweaked by an algorithm. Active funds, on the other hand, are run by people – they have an appointed asset manager who is responsible for making decisions about what that fund invests in. They essentially act as a steward for investors’ money. For example, the governed range of funds at the UK’s largest mutual life, pensions and investment company, Royal London, are fine-tuned on an ongoing basis by their investment experts. Green going mainstream? One difference between bonds and equities is that bonds can sometimes be earmarked for specific projects – as in the case of the government bonds that were used to finance the war effort. As such, those types of bonds can give investors a clear idea about how their investment will be used. But whereas during wartime, investors in government bonds knew that their money was funding a specific government cause, today, people can put their cash towards another battle. As of 22 October, savers were able to purchase a green savings bond, issued by the UK government through NS&amp;I, which will go towards funding renewable energy projects, sustainable transport infrastructure and programmes to combat pollution. “It’s exactly the same [as war bonds],” says Coates. “The government is saying, we have a war on here. It’s called climate change. And we need to raise money.” But that purpose-led approach to investments is also evident when it comes to equities, thanks to the growth of so-called responsible investment funds. These funds target investments that meet environmental, social and governance (ESG) criteria as well as more traditional financial criteria. For instance, they might comprise shares in companies that meet high standards in terms of environmental and social sustainability – with progressive policies towards greenhouse gas emissions and renewable energy, employee welfare and corporate inclusivity. Those interested in prioritising these concerns could choose to invest in specific ESG funds – though be mindful to check that such funds do indeed match your own criteria and concerns. Another option is to choose an investment company that incorporates ESG criteria into all products, for instance by using its investment clout to pressure companies to abide by ESG principles. Royal London is one such firm, having committed to halving the carbon emissions of all its investments by 2030 and achieving net zero emissions by 2050. Its Royal London Asset Management arm, which manages more than 90% of Royal London’s assets, stresses that when it comes to the companies it invests in, engagement on strategic, governance and environmental and social risk management issues forms a core part of its stewardship responsibilities. “It is an activity that many of our clients have come to expect from us as a long-term asset manager,” it states in a recent report. “Our ultimate goal is to have a positive influence on behaviour and assist the company in improving internal practices, governance and oversight, and their impact on society and the environment.” Additionally, across the board, asset managers and companies that manage investment funds, including pensions, will in the next few years be required by law to disclose how they take sustainability into account. As per the government’s recently released Roadmap to Sustainable Investing, new disclosure rules along with sustainability reporting requirements, should help to empower investors and consumers alike to make decisions that align with their own values. The power of your pension According to research from the Make My Money Matter campaign, ensuring your pension is suitably green could be the single most impactful action to reduce your carbon footprint. It’s therefore worth finding a pension provider that places mitigation of the climate crisis at the heart of its investment decisions. And if you have a workplace pension, do enquire about the provider’s stance or rally your employer to choose a sustainability oriented firm. However, one other thing to be mindful of when it comes to investing is risk. Everyone has a slightly different attitude towards risk, so it’s important that you and your financial adviser, if you have one, assess your appetite for it, before you make any financial decisions. Harness your pension power at Royallondon.comOne problem faced by anyone seeking to invest their money in companies or funds that factor in environmental, social and governance (ESG) measures, is navigating the complex jargon and impenetrable acronyms. This is partly due to the number of different organisations that are attempting to measure emissions and oversee corporate disclosures. “I explain it by saying that ESG is in its teenage years,” says Ashley Hamilton Claxton, head of responsible investment at Royal London Asset Management. “It’s that period of rapid growth, rapid change, a proliferation of activity, experimenting and boundary testing. And I think you can see that play out in the kind of alphabet soup of ESG. Now we’re seeing the standard setters and the regulators come in to set house rules. It won’t settle the debate or eradicate confusion immediately, but it’s going to help.” Luckily, it doesn’t need to be daunting, thanks to this handy guide to some common terms and acronyms. Net zero/carbon neutral These are two similar but by no means interchangeable goals. Net zero involves reducing greenhouse gas emissions and then balancing any remaining emissions with an appropriate amount of carbon removal – for instance, through tree planting. However, there are differing measures of net zero criteria and attempts are currently being made to standardise them. Carbon neutral is a much less exacting standard. It allows the purchasing of carbon-reduction credits equivalent to emissions released, without the need for a reduction in emissions to have taken place. The Carbon Trust and other similar bodies help set international standards on what it takes to claim you are carbon neutral. Scope 1, scope 2 and scope 3 emissions The three scopes are the basis for mandatory greenhouse gas reporting in the UK. There are three categories of emissions. Scope 1 These represent a company’s direct greenhouse gas emissions from assets that it owns – for example, heating its premises and running vehicles. Scope 2 These are the indirect emissions generated elsewhere for the energy or power that a company uses. Scope 3 These are all the other indirect emissions that occur up and down a company’s value chain that are created by other companies – including the emissions from its raw material suppliers and also from the use of its end products by consumers. For example, the emissions coming out of the tailpipe of cars would be considered the scope 3 emissions of the UK’s major oil producers – Shell and BP. Scope 3 emissions can account for more than 70% of a business’s carbon footprint. TCFD The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) was set up in 2015 by the Financial Stability Board (FSB) of the G20 countries to develop voluntary guidelines for companies, banks and investors to use when disclosing climate-related financial risks and opportunities to their stakeholders. It was designed to help financial markets, including lenders, insurers and investors, better assess and price those risks and opportunities. PRI Launched in 2006, the Principles for Responsible Investment is a UN-supported, independent network aimed at promoting sustainable investment through the incorporation of six key principles relating to environmental, social and governance issues. Its mission statement says: “We believe that an economically efficient, sustainable global financial system is a necessity for long-term value creation.” IIGCC The Institutional Investors Group on Climate Change is a European membership body set up to enable the investment community to achieve net zero goals. It provides investors with a collaborative platform to encourage public policies, investment practices and corporate behaviour that address long-term risks and opportunities associated with climate change. Sustainable development goals (SDGs) At the 1992 Earth Summit in Brazil, hundreds of countries agreed a plan to improve people’s lives and protect the environment. The ultimate product of this was the UN’s sustainable development goals, a collection of 17 interlinked global goals designed to “achieve a better and more sustainable future for all” that were set up in 2015 and since adopted by 193 countries. The goals intend to end poverty and other hardships by improving global health and education systems, which in turn will reduce inequality and encourage economic growth. Tackling the climate emergency and working to protect the natural environment are also key aspects of the goals. Transition Pathway Initiative (TPI) Conceived in 2017 by various major asset owners, including the Church of England Pensions Board and the Environment Agency Pension Fund, the TPI provides open access data assessing companies’ preparedness for a low-carbon economy in line with international climate goals. This enables investors to make informed decisions. To date, more than 108 global investors, with about $39tn (£29tn) in assets under management or advice officially support the TPI. The big five A term used to describe the five key global corporate sustainability disclosure and reporting frameworks and standards organisations – the Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB), the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI), the International Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC), the Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP), and the Carbon Disclosure Standards Board (CDSB). SASB/VRF Founded in 2011, the Sustainability Accounting Standards Board is a non-profit organisation designed to develop sustainability accounting standards. It provides a set of industry-specific standards to help measure and communicate performance on ESG topics. This year it merged with the IIRC to become the Value Reporting Foundation (VRF), in order to work towards a comprehensive reporting framework for investors. GRI One of the pioneers, established in 1997, the Global Reporting Initiative is a non-profit organisation that promotes transparent disclosure through comprehensive sustainability reporting. The most widely used voluntary reporting protocol in the world, it consists of universally accepted standards that measure a business’s “triple bottom line” – its environmental and social impact in addition to its financial performance. CDP The Carbon Disclosure Project is a UK-based non-profit charity that runs a global disclosure system for investors, companies, cities, states and regions to help manage their environmental impacts. Each year, the CDP uses the information obtained through its annual reporting process to score companies and cities on their environmental performance. More than 13,000 companies and 1,100 cities, states and regions have so far reported to it on climate change, water security and deforestation. CDSB The Climate Disclosure Standards Board is an international consortium of business and environmental NGOs that sets out a framework for businesses to report information related to environmental and climate change in their corporate financial reporting. The aim is to enable companies to report environmental information with the same rigour as with their financial data, so investors can make accurate decisions, ensuring the resilience of capital markets. ISSB One last abbreviation, and possibly the most important. Announced at COP26, the International Sustainability Standards Board replaces a patchwork of voluntary guidance with a single set of global norms for firms reporting the impact of climate change on their business. The ISSB has been developed by the International Financial Reporting Standards Foundation (IFRSF), the body that promotes international accounting standards, and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), the umbrella group for global markets watchdogs. With the volume of investment in companies touting their green credentials increasing, it should mean greater transparency. Royal London and its asset management company, RLAM, offers a wide variety of investment funds to suit investors preferences around sustainability, responsible investing, and ESG considerations. RLAM is a signatory to the PRI, a member of IIGCC, and has published a TCFD report and Stewardship and responsible investment 2021 report. Learn more about responsible investing by heading to Royal London – The Invested GenerationIt has become a key debate for responsible investors. Should shareholders sell their stake in companies that fall short on ethical or environmental issues, or should they instead retain their holding and use their position as stakeholders to put pressure on companies to do better? The debate is often couched as the “divestment versus engagement” dilemma. Unlike ethical consumerism, responsible investing isn’t as simple as conscientiously substituting items in your shopping basket for more sustainable or ethical alternatives. For a start, there will likely be less scrupulous investors out there happy to take your place. “Ditching and switching” can therefore all too often entail offloading polluting assets to less accountable or responsible owners. Second, divesting in heavily polluting companies can make it harder for them to raise funds to finance the transition to cleaner ways of operating. So, although divestment might seem like the ultimate sanction for punishing badly behaving companies, it may not always produce the most effective results. Engagement is more nuanced. It’s a broader approach that can range from directly discussing concerns with a company to more high-profile and confrontational measures, such as tabling shareholder votes on environmental, social and governance (ESG) issues at annual company meetings. When shareholders publicly criticise companies, it can make media headlines and increase pressure on a company to act. Whichever form the engagement takes, by retaining a seat at the table and agitating for change, investors can wield not just formidable financial power, but also an influential voice. Shareholder engagement is usually done by asset managers who invest and manage investment funds on behalf of individual investors and pension holders. It often involves compromise and detailed discussions, and it can require time and perseverance. “It’s almost like a [dance] choreography with the investor coming from one corner of the room and the management in the other,” says Carlota Garcia-Manas, head of engagement within the responsible investing team at Royal London Asset Management, which is part of Royal London Group. “Both sides work to improve the long-term performance of the company. Both almost always compromise.” There are strong opinions on both sides of the engagement versus divestment debate. Many climate activists have been urging shareholders to fully divest from fossil fuel companies, for instance. Others feel it’s important to be able to influence them. “To really move the needle [on ESG matters] you need to be more forward-thinking and see the bigger picture, which is about making the world a better place,” says Matthew Burgess, head of quantitative equities at Royal London Asset Management. “If you can’t hold investments in [certain companies], how can you engage and make them better?” Some experts suggest that framing it as an either-or dilemma is an oversimplification – pointing out that the two approaches can often work better if they are used together. Divestment can be employed as a last resort that strengthens the position of shareholders during discussions. Nonetheless, the debate can be helpful for understanding why engagement can often be an effective way of investing responsibly. Research published earlier this year by the Harvard Law School Forum on Corporate Governance suggests that shareholder engagement can improve companies’ ESG ratings and bring better financial returns for shareholders when different shareholders co-ordinate their engagement – especially if a lead investor heads the dialogue. Likewise, a study published in 2020 by professors at the universities of Trento, Harvard and Chicago, found that “exit is less effective than voice in pushing firms to act in a socially responsible manner”. John Fleetwood, director of responsible and sustainable investing at Square Mile, an investment research and consulting company, says that it can be difficult to prove “cause and effect” between shareholder engagement and companies behaving more ethically due to the limited information that is published about discussions. “A lot of engagement is behind closed doors,” he says. However, more and more information on shareholder engagement is becoming publicly available – which can help investors choose which asset managers to entrust with their money. Many asset managers publish regular updates on their engagement with the companies their funds invest in and their ESG ratings. In addition, not-for-profit shareholder activist groups, such as the UK’s ShareAction, provide a valuable service ranking the world’s largest investors, banks and insurers based on their ESG performance, such as the that they vote on ESG resolutions at annual meetings. These activist groups often combine with individual and institutional shareholders and fund managers to lobby companies and table votes or resolutions at annual company meetings. This kind of co-ordinated action can amplify the power that comes with retaining a stake and engaging. Climate Action 100+, for instance, is a group representing investors who collectively manage assets worth about $60tn (£44.5tn) and it is in discussions with some of the world’s largest corporate greenhouse gas emitters to encourage them to take necessary action on climate change. Such groups also lobby policy makers and regulators to encourage responsible investment. “Often the collective [shareholder] engagement has more impact than the individual [engagement],” says Fleetwood. Earlier this year, Follow This, a Dutch shareholder campaign group, tabled a resolution at Shell’s AGM, calling on the oil company to set more ambitious targets for cutting emissions. Although the resolution didn’t pass, about one third of shareholders supported it, and it got widespread media attention. More dramatically, a group of shareholders teamed up with the activist hedge fund Engine No 1 earlier this year to oust three board members at ExxonMobil over the oil group’s slow progress on climate issues. The three positions were instead filled by Engine No 1 nominees. Of course, had they taken the seemingly drastic step of divesting, they would not have been able to engage so effectively. Learn more about responsible investing by heading to Royal London – The Invested GenerationThere is an aura of calm around Max Verstappen that, intriguingly, completely belies the intensity of his Formula One world championship title fight with Lewis Hamilton. It is this composed ability to deal with pressure, to recover from setbacks and find peak performance time after time, that has put him within striking distance of his first title, one which he could claim at Sunday’s debut Saudi Arabian Grand Prix. Yet alongside this maturity, this mental fortitude, there is also a boyish, eager thrill at simply being in the fight and it has been an infectious joy. A combination that he also clearly takes pleasure in as he summed up his attitude earlier this year. “I knew if I had a car capable of fighting for the title I would be up there and that is showing,” he says. “It’s a natural thing. I know what I have to do to be quick on a track. I don’t need to overthink or stress out about a lot of things to be quick.” Still only 24, Verstappen is now in his seventh season in F1. A feat in itself, somewhat hard to comprehend, achieved because he became the sport’s youngest driver at 17, in 2015. He has since amassed a huge amount of experience while still young and that too has been vital in his title challenge. Two races remain this season and having delivered a series of commanding and compelling victories, Verstappen leads Hamilton by eight points. He can take the title this weekend if he wins and takes the fastest lap and Hamilton finishes sixth or lower, if he wins without the fastest lap and Hamilton finishes seventh or lower, or if he outscores Hamilton by 18 points. With so little to choose between the two protagonists, the most likely result is their fight will go to wire at the final round next weekend in Abu Dhabi and Verstappen plays down any such thoughts of claiming the title in Jeddah, instead focusing on the here and now. “You have to perform and do well every weekend,” he says. “I always try to win the race, but the most important thing is that we are still on top after Abu Dhabi.” This is an approach that has served him well through a season that has been a rollercoaster ride between the two drivers, with the lead changing hands five times but during which Verstappen has maintained admirable equilibrium. Speaking to him in July before the Austrian GP, his focus was clear and it was a world away from the overenthusiastic, and sometimes dangerous attitude that had earned him the “Mad Max” moniker early in his career. “You cannot have retirements or make mistakes where you lose a lot of points, it can kill a championship,” he said. “I know that. Lewis has been like this for a long time, he has been very consistent and that is how you win championships.” Hamilton in turn has acknowledged that beating Verstappen this year would be his greatest championship victory. The world champion had opened strongly taking an early lead with three wins in four races but Verstappen hit back and left Austria at the start of July with his third win in a row and his fourth in five races. He had taken a 32-point lead over Hamilton and his Red Bull car appeared to have an edge on every type of track. Yet there was a long way to go. At the next round in Silverstone Hamilton collided with him, causing Verstappen to crash out and for which Hamilton was penalised. Then in Hungary Verstappen was not at fault when he took damage after being hit in a first-corner incident. As they went into the mid-season break, Hamilton had retaken the lead by eight points. A lesser challenger might have crumbled. Adrian Newey, Red Bull’s car designer and chief technical officer, recognised however that Verstappen had the right mentality. “He has the same steely grit that any world champion needs to dig in and keep going in the face of adversity,” he said. “If things go wrong he can put that behind him and look forward to the next one. He’s matured into a great racer.” He showed this clearly when coming back to take four wins and two second places in the next seven races. The blip in that run was of course Monza where he was found at fault when, uncompromising in trying to pass Hamilton, he crashed into him. It was the Verstappen who still insists he will go for a gap and is unafraid to put his elbows out to do it. Hamilton’s refusal to give way was a significant statement in that the Dutchman would have to think hard when going up against the world champion in future. Once more Verstappen reset, once more he delivered, the incident consigned to history although with the lesson learned, and the points kept coming. His relentless effectiveness at scoring even when Hamilton has been on top has been crucial. In the six races since Monza in early September, he has not finished lower than second, including in Russia where he started at the back after a grid penalty. Seven second places across the season have helped put him in this position but he knows that if Hamilton wins these last two grand prix, second will not be enough. The stakes are high then, the tension ramping up across every session but in Jeddah a clearly relaxed Verstappen was ready to go racing with an ease that has taken him this far and may yet help him finish the job. Hamilton had the edge when the drivers took to the street circuit for the first time this weekend in practice. He was five-hundredths up on Verstappen in FP1, with the Briton’s Mercedes teammate Valtteri Bottas in third. Hamilton and Bottas then completed a strong Mercedes one-two in second practice, run in race conditions under the lights at Jeddah. Verstappen was fourth, two-tenths down after a session that ended slightly early after Ferrari’s Charles Leclerc had a high-speed shunt into the wall at turn 22 but emerged unharmed.What have I sacrificed for my art? Peace of mind. All the creative arts involve struggle, and I do three of them – as I also write and paint. You don’t often find yourself feeling calm. February 2013 Performing a playwright’s work for the first time is an experience quite unlike reading it, or seeing it staged. Now you’re on the inside, feeling the author’s emotions and tasting his language in a very personal way. With Arthur Miller, I have been astonished by the rawness of his writing, by his anger and humour. His play Broken Glass, which I have been performing for almost a year now, has the fearlessness of a young man’s response to the world – yet Miller wrote it when he was 78. September 2011 Torch Song Trilogy is a remarkable piece of work: Fierstein takes the most exotic of creatures, a New York drag queen, and turns him into Everyman. It begins as a very gay play, but then the second act talks about straight relationships, and the third talks about parent-child relationships, so that by the end, the play has wrapped its arms around every single person in the audience. May 2012 Iago doesn’t explain himself, not even at the end. I’m not sure he can. The man’s a psychopath. I think there’s something very wrong with him, sexually. He can’t open his mouth without sexual imagery pouring out – and it’s ugly, filthy language, as sensationalist and shocking as [that of] a tabloid journalist. People having intercourse is “making the beast with two backs” – that’s a very, very savage image. We never pinned down exactly what was wrong, whether he’s impotent or sterile, but there’s a medical condition called morbid jealousy, where you become falsely convinced that your partner has been unfaithful. My instinct is that Iago suffers from the same thing. July 2015 If you’re Jewish, you can’t avoid being interested in Shylock: it’s a terrific part in a very difficult play. Shakespeare writes him in three dimensions: the great “Hath not a Jew eyes?” speech is a wonderful cry of pain from an oppressed man, but when he flips, and becomes unreasonable in the trial scene, the man who has been persecuted becomes the persecutor. That is a syndrome that has fascinated me all my life because of my South African upbringing. May 2011 Confession time: I have always harboured a prejudice against Ibsen. I have thought he was too solemn for my taste, too sober, too glum. I believe that comedy must live alongside tragedy, as my two favourite playwrights – Shakespeare and Chekhov – prove. But when I was offered the part of Dr Stockmann in Ibsen’s An Enemy of the People, and read the play, I found I couldn’t put it down. Never mind the comedy/tragedy issue, this was like a thriller. In fact, Peter Benchley borrowed the plot for his bestseller, Jaws: a small coastal town is threatened with closure, except in Ibsen’s version it’s a health spa and the danger in the water is not a shark, but poisonous contamination. February 2010 The impact of Pinter’s The Caretaker was felt around the world and even reached me, a teenager in Cape Town. It transformed my way of thinking about drama and obsessed me. His world was threatening yet funny; in his dialogue, cliches suddenly become dangerous little bombs. It has a fascinating setup: the old homeless man, the spivvy East End boy, Mick, and his older brother. Pinter weaves threads between these three completely unalike characters and creates drama out of an undramatic situation – and comedy, too. When I came to London to audition for drama school, I did one of Mick’s speeches from The Caretaker. I’m not sure it was a good idea as I got turned down by the top schools. September 2018 You have simply got to be honest. As an actor, I thought: if I am not going to be truthful about myself, how can I be truthful about playing other characters? If you don’t come out, you are going to have a very miserable life of secrecy. In Wilde’s England, homosexuality was the love that dare not speak its name. In the South Africa I grew up in, it was a love that did not even have a name. May 2017 On the first day of rehearsals for The Winter’s Tale – a play fuelled by jealousy – the director, Greg Doran, puts this question to the company: ‘How jealous are you?’ It’s meant as a light-hearted ice-breaker, but since Greg is my partner I have to be careful how I answer. In fact, as we jot down responses to the Cosmopolitan-type questionnaire which he reads out – viz ‘If you found your lover in bed with someone else, would you a) kill them, b) kill yourself, c) join in? – I score quite low. I’m not a particularly jealous man, apparently. Greg seems rather disappointed. Mind you, the questionnaire concerns sexual jealousy. Were it about professional jealousy my score might shoot off the Richter scale – particularly as a younger actor. January 1999 When you’re young, it seems so straightforward: you learn the lines and that’s that. But when you’re older, you’re aware of a series of tests and obstacles ahead, each of which will put pressure on you, and the lines will often be the first casualty. So… You have to know them alone in your room. You have to know them when you speak them aloud with the other actors. You have to know them when the ante is upped in the rehearsal room (such as a run-through). You have to know them in front of the first audience at the first preview. You have to know them in front of the critics. You have to know them on a wet Wednesday matinee three months later, when the house is thin and you’re thinking about the shopping … May 2015 I, like many other actors who have joined the RSC, used to believe that there is a prescribed way of playing Shakespeare. There isn’t. Each generation devises their own way dependent on how audiences want to receive Shakespeare. Earlier generations were happy to hear him almost sung or performed in a very grand operatic manner. Modern audiences want him to be done more realistically, they want to recognise the characters on stage as people they know. So it will keep changing. December 2014 Arriving in England in 1968 as a weedy, bespectacled little nebbish from Sea Point, Cape Town, I never imagined myself as a classical actor. Surely you had to have Gielgud’s voice, Redgrave’s profile, Olivier’s physicality? When I joined the RSC in 1982, I harboured a profound sense of inadequacy. It was to do with the taste of Shakespeare in my mouth. I couldn’t quite get it. I had some of the best teachers in the world: the voice coaches Cicely Berry and Patsy Rodenburg, the directors Terry Hands and Adrian Noble, and one of the great Shakespeareans of our time, John Barton. I heard what they were saying, but it just didn’t feel within my reach: the combination of colossal technique and absolute spontaneity that makes for good Shakespeare acting. July 2002Downing Street has come under pressure after allegations were made that a staff party was held at No 10 on 18 December last year. At the time, London was under tier 3 restrictions – the top level – meaning the only permitted indoor social mixing outside your own household was with a support bubble. Downing Street has denied any rule breaking. While many people were working or staying at home, only meeting those in their support bubble indoors, it seems that not everyone was following the rules. Five people talk about what they were doing on the evening of 18 December 2020 and what they think about the allegations. ‘It’s infuriating to see this as a healthcare professional’ On the morning of 18 December 2020, I had finished a 13-hour night shift as a paediatric registrar working on a neonatal unit, looking after sick and preterm babies. Then I went home and spent much of the rest of the day asleep. Restrictions didn’t affect my own work on the unit at the time, but it did massively affect the parents and families as their visits were restricted – especially those whose babies were on the ward for many weeks and months. I wasn’t at all surprised by the allegations; it’s beginning to follow a pattern now. You can understand why it’s making people angry. It seems they’re choosing to follow whatever rules they want and ignore the ones they don’t. It’s infuriating to see this as a healthcare professional, when you see relatives unable to see their children in difficult times. Hannah McFarland, 34, Aberdeen ‘It’s been 91 weeks since I started shielding’ As of today it’s been 91 weeks since I started shielding at home and I have only made 11 trips outside for medical appointments. I have three incurable hereditary conditions which make me clinically extremely vulnerable. They’re not in themselves a problem but if I got coronavirus it would most likely be a one way trip to ICU. At the time of 18 December 2020 I was on my 41st week of shielding. As a single person, my time is my own and prior to the pandemic I would go out most nights to the theatre, opera and art galleries. That evening, I would have been eating alone, bored, tired and lonely. It’s appalling to hear what might have happened in No 10. I imagine these allegations may well be true because it’s part of a pattern of these people and they couldn’t care less. Andrew, 50s, analytics manager, London ‘It’s a bit of a slap in the face’ The evening of 18 December 2020 was like most of my evenings in the run-up to Christmas. I was a student but working as a seasonal worker for Asda unloading multiple lorries for the store. I remember being so cold I felt like my fingers were going to fall off. I knew I needed to work though as I was a key worker and people were relying on the store having stock. Demand was so high that most nights I would finish shifts and feel completely exhausted. You look back on it and everyone was going through such a difficult time. The restrictions were framed as a group effort where everyone was suffering for the greater good so that fewer people would die. It’s quite insulting. At the same time I was stressing about catching Covid and passing it on to family, it sounds like No 10 was doing something completely different. It’s a bit of a slap in the face. Aaron, 21, works in media, Chelmsford ‘My mum had just started chemotherapy’ I was playing Call of Cthulhu (a role playing game comparable to Dungeons and Dragons) with my friends remotely via Zoom. We had played in person before the pandemic but switched when we could no longer meet up. I remember a fun and spooky time was had by all. I’m disappointed but not really surprised any more by the allegations. I can’t really trust any of those politicians to abide by their words. My mum had just started chemotherapy at the time so I was really trying not to go out at all. I wore latex gloves to wrap my mum’s presents and at Christmas I just dropped them off outside. At the end of the day we have to make our own decisions. I empathise with people who were doing what they wanted because I think my mum would’ve been one of them. Emily, 25, software developer, Manchester ‘I wasn’t allowed to see my family’ I was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer on 5 November 2020 and it went quickly south over the next few weeks. Between 10 December until 4 January, I was on a Covid and cancer ward, which had been reconfigured from a children’s ward. You can imagine how bleak it was, lying there overnight with children’s stencils on the walls, with men coughing and dying. I was lying there thinking about this rumour that Covid could get into your lungs if you breathed too deeply, so I’d be up all night, taking shallow breaths. It was the worst place in the world. I wasn’t allowed to see my family. I got to see my wife for 10 minutes just before I had my surgery, and that was the only contact I had with my loved ones during this time. Mercifully, the surgeon saved me, and I’ve made a pretty good recovery. I’m not out of the woods, but I’m still here. These allegations are of the conduct that has characterised this government: we don’t care about the laws we make, we’ll do as we please. James Rose, 54, copywriter, LondonShell’s decision to back out of plans to develop the Cambo oilfield could sound the “death knell” for new large-scale North Sea projects, industry figures say, as the UK’s tougher climate agenda prompts oil companies to retreat from the ageing oil basin. Sources said Shell’s project partner, the private equity-backed Siccar Point, would struggle to find another partner to take on Shell’s 30% stake in the new oilfield, which has provoked outrage among green campaigners. Shell’s retreat has cast doubt over the future of a project that could yield hundreds of millions of barrels of oil, and sources say it raises fresh doubts over the North Sea’s future large-scale oil projects too. “This is a turning point,” said one industry source, who asked not to be named. “Companies will be thinking: if Shell can’t do it, can we? I just don’t see any truly large-scale projects being sanctioned in the North Sea any more. There will still be small developments around existing fields. But this is a death knell for major new projects in the UK.” The Guardian understands that Shell scrapped the Cambo project after the government made clear it would need to meet certain “climate concessions” to win its approval. The company said publicly that the “economic case for investment” was not strong. Shell’s withdrawal comes weeks after the company was left disappointed by a UK regulator’s “unexpected” decision to decline its application to develop a separate North Sea project at the Jackdaw field. “It’s a bit embarrassing for Shell so soon after announcing it would relocate its headquarters to London from the Netherlands,” the source added. Most big listed oil companies have reduced their presence in the North Sea in recent years by selling off assets, and the companies that remain are relative minnows that would balk at the scale of the Cambo project or lack the experience to develop the field. “There are no listed oil companies which would look seriously at this project, and the private companies don’t typically have the track record in project development which Shell brought to the table,” said the source. There was also “a huge amount of uncertainty” around the government’s support for new oil and gas development in the North Sea, according to the source, which could put off smaller companies which require tighter project timelines than larger ones. Caroline Rance, a campaigner with Friends of the Earth Scotland, said Shell’s exit from the Cambo field “marks the beginning of the end for all new oil and gas projects” in the North Sea. Green campaigners have called on the government to take a clear stance against new fossil fuel developments after findings from the International Energy Agency, the global energy watchdog, that no new fossil fuel projects are compatible with the world’s climate targets. “Both the UK and Scottish governments must now officially reject Cambo, say no to any future oil and gas developments in UK waters and get on with planning a fair and fast transition for people working in this industry,” Rance said. The questions around the North Sea are likely to reignite tensions between the Treasury, which is understood to be concerned over the flight of investment from the UK post-Brexit, and the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, which leads the UK’s climate strategy. Jonathan Roger, the chief executive of Siccar Point, said the company was in consultation with the regulator and stakeholders “on taking Cambo forward and the next steps required to do that”. He said: “Norway continues to invest in both new oil and gas and renewable developments to deliver a fair and managed transition, but the UK is at risk of damaging its economy and increasing imports with a higher carbon impact if new developments are not brought forward during this time.”What treasures might the “1%” pull out of their Christmas stockings on 25 December? This year, there’s likely to be a cashmere baseball cap in the mix. This accessory – distinguished by its lack of logo – is poised to become a sought-after gift for the super-rich, with menswear retailers, including Mr Porter and Matchesfashion.com, counting the hats among their bestsellers this winter. The surge in popularity can be traced directly back to the HBO drama Succession. The fashion platform Lyst reports a 45% lift in sales and searches related to baseball caps since October, as the third season of the award-winning show hit our screens. Unbranded styles designed by Italian labels including Brunello Cucinelli and Loro Piana are among the most popular styles. Roy family members may well be the hat’s most high-profile fans. Undoubtedly, they are its richest; and the unmarked caps – which they wear in grey, black or blue are available to buy for prices up to an eye-watering £2,400 – have been enjoying plenty of airtime during the latest chapter of infighting among this billionaire family. Indeed, in Succession, it seems you can’t step off a private jet without a sublimely expensive baseball cap lodged firmly on your wealthy – but deeply troubled – little head. Compassion and family values are null and void in Roy Land and so, too, are logos. In stylistic terms, wealth is implied but never stated. It’s the mark of the costume designer Michelle Matland that the clothes in the show are as deeply emblematic as they are completely unremarkable. Fans of the show will know the baseball cap as a cast regular – the hat played a leading role in Logan’s early scenes and stole the show during the final episode of season two when the Roy family took to a super yacht to divulge how much they detested one another. In season three, with deserter Kendall on a disastrous quest to find cultural relevance, the baseball cap enjoys even more screen time. Kendall’s signature look – a sharp suit, trainers and a plain black baseball cap – is the stylistic embodiment of his character, which is both cocky and broken-hearted, shy and dangerously narcissistic. For his father, Logan, who wears his in times of crisis, the cap acts as a shield. It also serves to assimilate him with the real-life billionaires of this world for whom the baseball cap has become a style calling card. With and without a logo, the baseball cap has endured a complicated relationship with American culture. Once a symbol of sports and the working classes who enjoyed watching it, the hat has become a staple for everyone, from movie directors shielding from the sun to celebrities protecting themselves from the paparazzi. In less photogenic terms, it also played a crucial role in Donald Trump’s campaign to appeal to everyday Americans with baseball caps among the bestselling items of Maga merchandise. However, as a reputable fashion item, the baseball cap has overcome such obstacles. It has even evolved into a luxury item, with fashion houses such as Celine and Balenciaga among those to put caps on the catwalk. While unbranded styles are clearly popular with the super-rich – Loro Piana’s £325 cashmere number is a favourite – logos have not yet had their day. It is the logo-splayed hats by Balenciaga and Gucci that are still the holy grail for fashion fans.