South Korea’s disgraced former president Park Geun-hye has been pardoned by her successor, Moon Jae-in, in a special amnesty that could influence voters in a presidential election that is just three months away. Park has been serving a 22-year sentence following her impeachment in 2017 and conviction for corruption and abuse of power, after a scandal that exposed webs of double-dealing between political leaders and conglomerates. “We must overcome the pain of the past and move forward into the new era,” said Moon, who was propelled into power in 2017 following public backlash against Park and her conservative party. “Considering the many challenges we face, national unity and humble inclusiveness are more urgent than anything else,” he said, adding that Park’s deteriorating health had also been a factor. Park has been hospitalised three times with chronic shoulder and back pain and has undergone surgery once, the Yonhap news agency said. Park, who will be freed on New Year’s Eve, thanked Moon through an aide. “I express my deep gratitude to president Moon Jae-in and the government authorities who decided to grant amnesty despite many difficulties,” she said. Her freedom could have a bearing on the 9 March presidential election, given her influence among conservative voters who are expected to back the candidate for the conservative People Power party. While her release from prison could cause a backlash among liberal voters, it could also divide conservatives, some of whom lost faith in Park during the corruption scandal. A poll by Gallup Korea in November showed 48% of respondents opposed pardoning Park and another former president, Lee Myung-bak, but the numbers have dropped from around 60% early this year. Yoon Suk-yeol, the main People Power party candidate in the presidential election, welcomed the pardon while his rival, Lee Jae-myung from the ruling Democratic party, said he understood “Moon’s anguish for national unity”. But, he added: “A sincere apology from former president Park is needed for the Korean people.” Moon, who can only serve a single term as president due to term limits, lost to Park in the race for the presidential Blue House in 2012. Park, the daughter of former South Korean dictator Park Chung-hee, is the country’s first female president, and its first democratically elected leader to be thrown out of office after the constitutional court upheld a parliament vote to impeach her in 2017. She was brought down after being found guilty of colluding with a longtime friend, Choi Soon-sil, to secure tens of millions of dollars of funding from Samsung and other major South Korean companies, and allowing her to influence policy. The money went to foundations run by Choi. The revelations provoked a wave of anger across the country, sending Park’s approval rating to a record low of 4%.Australia and England have rung the changes for the Boxing Day Test, with Scott Boland set to become just the second Indigenous men’s cricketer to wear the Baggy Green cap and Jonny Bairstow one of four changes for the tourists. As expected, Pat Cummins returns as Australia captain after his close contact with a positive Covid case saw him miss the 275-run victory in Adelaide. But the hosts, sitting 2-0 up and looking to wrap up a series win at the earliest opportunity, have added further fresh legs to their seam attack in the shape of Victoria’s Boland. The 32-year-old, who discovered a family link to the Gulidjan tribe in his 20s through his maternal grandfather, follows in the footsteps of fellow seamer Jason Gillespie, the first Indigenous men’s Test cricketer, and Faith Thomas and Ash Gardner, who have both represented the women’s Test team. Speaking about the decision, Cummins said: “It is huge for him to become the second Indigenous [men’s] Test cricketer. Dizzy [Gillespie] was the first. In Australia we have a rich history going back 50-60,000 years and it is great that it is starting to be reflected in our team.” Boland, a right-arm fast-medium bowler who has previously won 19 caps for Australia in limited overs cricket, also brings specialist local knowledge at the MCG and claimed eight wickets when Victoria beat New South Wales during the ground’s most recent first-class match back in November. Jhye Richardson reported soreness in his leg after claiming a maiden Test five-wicket haul in Adelaide, while Michael Neser similarly steps down for rest. Josh Hazlewood is yet to recover from a side strain suffered at the Gabba. “It is a luxury to have someone like Scotty ready to go, he’s fresh and excited to get his chance,” Cummins added. “We think he’s really well suited on his home ground to come in and perform. It is a dream for him to get his Baggy Green.” England meanwhile are hoping four changes can apply the defibrillator to what has been a flatlining campaign, with Bairstow back at No6, Zak Crawley returning as opener, Mark Wood injecting pace into the seam attack and Jack Leach offering captain Joe Root a frontline spin option once more. Ollie Pope had edged out Bairstow on the eve of the series but the 23-year-old right-hander struggled to repay the faith. His initial 34 in Brisbane was followed by scores of four, five and four that, along with a struggle against Nathan Lyon, prompted head coach Chris Silverwood to make the switch. As expected, Rory Burns makes it a second Surrey batsman to be dropped, the opener’s first-baller at the Gabba having set the tone for a disappointing series. Stuart Broad and Chris Woakes are the seamers to step down to the bench, with the absence of the latter at No8 – tellingly England’s third-highest run-scorer – lengthening the tail. Jos Buttler, speaking before England trained on Christmas morning, said: “It’s a massive game for us, and a brilliant venue to come and play cricket at. Everyone is excited to be here and I’m sure it will be a hostile environment but it’s to be embraced and enjoyed. We know we need to bring our best cricket because we haven’t done that so far and that is disappointing. With the situation we’re in we need to get there fast.” Australia (confirmed) David Warner, Marcus Harris, Marnus Labuschagne, Steve Smith, Travis Head, Cameron Green, Alex Carey (wk), Pat Cummins (c), Mitchell Starc, Nathan Lyon, Scott Boland. England (confirmed) Zak Crawley, Haseeb Hameed, Dawid Malan, Joe Root (c), Ben Stokes, Jonny Bairstow, Jos Buttler (wk), Ollie Robinson, Mark Wood, Jack Leach, Jimmy Anderson.Passengers travelling over the Christmas holiday have been hit with disruption worldwide after airline companies cancelled more than 4,500 flights, according to a flight tracking website. A surge of cancellations on Christmas Eve and Christmas Day came as the rapidly spreading Omicron coronavirus variant meant carriers were unable to staff their flights. The website of the flight tracking firm FlightAware showed that 2,175 flights around the world had been scrapped on Christmas Eve, a typically heavy day for travel. Around a quarter of those were in the US. Another 1,779 flights were scrapped worldwide on Christmas Day, along with 402 more that had been scheduled for Sunday. The bulk of the cancellations came from five firms, with China Eastern cancelling 474 journeys, while Air China scrapped 188. United cancelled 177 flights, Air India 160 and Delta called off 150. United said: “The nationwide spike in Omicron cases this week has had a direct impact on our flight crews and the people who run our operation. As a result, we’ve unfortunately had to cancel some flights and are notifying impacted customers in advance of them coming to the airport.” Meanwhile, Delta said it had “exhausted all options and resources – including rerouting and substitutions of aircraft and crews to cover scheduled flying – before cancelling around 90 flights for Friday”. The airline blamed the impact of the Omicron variant and weather conditions for the cancellations. In response to the pre-holiday chaos, airlines have called for the relaxation of quarantine rules for vaccinated staff. Delta’s chief executive, Ed Bastian, has asked the head of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) to reduce the self-isolation period for vaccinated people experiencing breakthrough infections from 10 to five days. Airlines for America and JetBlue seconded the request. Airlines’ social media feeds have been filled with frustrated passengers asking for assistance after a spate of cancellations on Christmas Eve owing to the rapidly spreading Omicron variant. “@Delta really?! You cancel my Christmas Eve flight at 12:30am?? I got up at 2am to get to the airport with my baby and husband and don’t see the cancellation till I’m at the airport to get my bags checked,” one passenger tweeted at the airline on Friday – one of several similar messages directed at carriers that have had to call off flights. Despite the uncertainties and grim news around the world, millions of Americans carried on with travel plans through a second pandemic-clouded holiday season. Moses Jimenez, an accountant from Long Beach, Mississippi, flew to New York with his wife and three children, even though the latest torrent of coronavirus cases dashed their hopes of catching a Broadway performance of Hamilton or visit some museums. Hamilton was one of a dozen productions to cancel shows this week as cast and crew members tested positive for Covid-19. Museums were scratched from the family’s itinerary because many now require proof of vaccination and the two younger children are ineligible for the shot. Jimenez, 33, said his family would make the best of roaming the city’s streets and parks, while also seeing relatives and friends. “We just wanted to get out of the house, really, get the kids out to the city for Christmas,” Jimenez told Reuters on Thursday at New York’s LaGuardia Airport. New York planned to sharply limit the number of people it allows in Times Square for its annual outdoor New Year’s Eve celebration, in response to the surge of new coronavirus cases, capping the number of attendees 15,000.A record 9,993 Covid cases were reported across Australia on Christmas Day as overwhelmed testing clinics were forced to close and tens of thousands of people spent the holiday in isolation. The daily case total is expected to pass 10,000 on Sunday as Covid-19 infections surge across the country. New South Wales has recorded its highest ever Covid daily caseload, with 6,288 new infections announced on Saturday. Covid transmission also continued to surge in Victoria, where authorities announced 2,108 new Covid-19 infections and six deaths from the virus. Queensland announced a daily record of 765 new cases, with the state’s health minister, Yvette D’Ath, declaring “this virus is everywhere now”. D’Ath confirmed 151 of those cases had the Omicron strain. South Australia recorded 634 new cases on Saturday, down slightly from the 688 reported the previous day. So far, sampling of the state’s current outbreak indicates 81% of cases are the Omicron variant. The Australian Capital Territory also set a new daily infection record, with 142 Covid cases. It was the fourth consecutive day that the ACT broke its daily infection rate. Tasmania recorded 33 new Covid cases, while health authorities in the Northern Territory announced 19 new cases, 10 of which were travellers from interstate. Western Australia reported two new cases, following the five cases that were announced on Friday. Both of the new cases were linked to a French backpacker who arrived in the state from Queensland on Sunday. Genomic sequencing confirmed the backpacker had the Delta variant, with WA health authorities on Saturday saying “all cases related to this outbreak can be assumed to also be Delta”. There are now more than 30,000 active Covid cases in NSW and more than 17,000 in Victoria, with isolation orders wreaking havoc on Christmas gathering plans, while testing delays and Covid exposure among airline staff have stymied travel plans of thousands of travellers. In NSW, the record 6,288 new cases were detected from 149,261 tests conducted in the reporting period to 24 hours to 8pm on Friday. Hospitalisations remained relatively steady in the state, with 388 Covid patients in hospital on Saturday, up from 382 on Friday. On Saturday there were 52 patients in intensive care in the state, down from 53 on Friday. Of those in ICU, 14 were on ventilators. There were no new deaths in NSW, and the state’s first-dose vaccine rate ticked over to 95% after slowing in recent weeks. In Victoria, 2,208 cases were detected from 83,456 tests. Hospitalisations remained steady at 361, with 71 cases in ICU in Victoria. At least six testing sites in Melbourne became so overwhelmed they had to close by 9.30am. Among the closed sites were the Alfred’s walk-through, as well as Monash University and Royal Children’s hospital drive-through sites. Other sites had long wait times, including a three-hour wait at the Melbourne Showgrounds drive-through. A number of other testing locations closed for Christmas Day. Meanwhile in NSW, testing queues grew throughout the day. As Sydneysiders flocked to Bondi Beach to enjoy the warm weather, the queue of cars at the local drive-through testing clinic snaked around to the northern tip of the beach by late morning. There were 123,500 Covid-19 vaccine doses administered across Australia on Christmas Eve, 94,072 of which were boosters. With Australian Associated PressWhen you’re a kid, Christmas is about the presents. Now middle age has made me maudlin, it still is about the presents – but in a different way. It’s about people’s presence as much as the gifts they give. Cue the eye roll, sure. But I’m serious. Even if Christmas is stripped of religious significance for many Australians, our relationship with treasured gifts gives us away. If we get sentimental about our things, it’s because we treat them sacramentally – as bearers of the presence of another. So even the biggest agnostic may be kind of religious without realising it. Each Christmas, for instance, I find myself haunted by the ghosts of presents past: by friends and family who over the years have given me, variously, a novelty Batman mug, a crocheted Anne of Green Gables doll, a now-tattered origami lantern and an unruly orchid with no two flowers facing the same direction. I’ll be honest: I didn’t exactly go gaga over these random gifts that now, inevitably, clutter my apartment. But even if they don’t “spark joy”, I can’t toss them. Every time I see these gifts, I think of the people who gave them to me. There’s a link here with the more “official” sacraments of Christian tradition, like the bread and wine of the Eucharist that represent, in some mysterious way, Jesus’s body and blood. Through religious rite, ordinary objects gesture beyond themselves to a different order of reality. But plenty of us are closet sacramentalists: people who may not identify with any faith who, nonetheless, have a sacramental approach to everyday life. The journalist Nadine von Cohen writes movingly about her kettle that leaks everywhere and turns off mid-boil. Yet she can’t part with it because it once belonged to her cherished mum. “When someone you love dies, everything they owned, everything they ever touched seems sacred,” she writes. “Whether or not you ever saw your loved one use or wear an item is inconsequential. It was theirs and so you vow to treasure it forever.” Everything they ever touched seems sacred. When material objects are invested with the presence of others, we find ourselves straying into spiritual territory rather quickly. The kettle isn’t just a kettle, but a talisman charged with love and grief. You drink your wrenching loss and wild hopes – of someday, somehow seeing her again – along with that tea. Not every time, of course – that would be creepy. But these everyday hauntings suggest that ordinary life is no less a sacred space than within the walls of a church. “We leave memories in everything we touch,” observes the novelist Sandra Newman. “If I pick up a pebble, I put it down haunted.” Not just stones, either. Souvenirs, heirlooms, homes, stories and, of course, gifts: each bears the trace of people and their imprint on the world. If that goes for everything within the world, perhaps it’s also true of the world itself. There isn’t much difference between the kettle-keepers and religious believers for whom all things bear a trace of the love of God. As Pope Francis writes in his papal letter on care for the Earth: “The entire material universe speaks of God’s love, his boundless affection for us. Soil, water, mountains: everything is, as it were, a caress of God.” According to this way of thinking, the whole world and every good thing in it is infinitely more than what it appears to be: it is also a relationship marked by divine love. . Everything that exists is, in the end, a gift. And gifts evoke gift-givers. Perhaps contrary to their reputation, the religious among us are following the logic: they believe that everywhere and in everything we are haunted by the God who made and gave us all things. (Admittedly, things get confused when believers dodge their responsibility to steward the Earth and its resources – but that’s a rant for another time.) But God does not remain an absent presence. At Christmas, Christians believe the giver behind all gifts shows up in the flesh: in the birth of Jesus Christ called Emmanuel, which means “God with us”. That’s the haunting and mysterious claim at the heart of Christmas. • Justine Toh is senior research fellow at the Centre for Public Christianity and the author of Achievement AddictionThe first weekend away. An auspicious landmark in any relationship, but especially with the new boyfriend still living at home with his parents and me 200 miles away in thin-walled student digs with seven sharp-eared housemates. Such was the allure of privacy, I didn’t ask any questions. “My mate’s got a place in north Wales we can have for the weekend,” he said. “No one will bother us.” I thought it sweet and funny to call him Danno, and told him to book it. It was February 1988. Our relationship was just days old. In the sharp slant of a winter setting sun, we headed off in my Mini, him (6ft 3in) in concertina folds. We were too young, too hooked up on the promise of adventure and what I will euphemistically call romance to bother with boring old weather forecasts. The “place in north Wales” was on the outskirts of Pwllheli on the gorgeous Llŷn peninsula, wild beyond belief if you’d grown up in Catford, south London, as we both had. It was also the sort of accommodation Alastair Sawday, he of those Special Places guides, had missed: this one was more of the Withnail and I Special Places variety. A decrepit, squalid, mouldering caravan, it was unencumbered with snazzy luxuries such as heat, lighting or a chemical toilet, but complete with a neighbouring rotting steel barn that creaked all night as it swayed in the gales. Then it started snowing. It went from flurry to blizzard in seconds as we carried our bags of entirely inappropriate clothes from the car. It was snowing diagonally, upwards, sideways, into my eyes, ears and mouth. I bitterly regretted packing a LBD and heels instead of thermals, fleeces, hot-water bottles, Ready Brek (I still believed adverts at this point) and knee-high mountaineering socks. This was, of course, years before torches on phones: using the new boyfriend’s lighter, we rummaged through cupboards, disturbing very cold Welsh spiders but falling with glee upon one woolly hat (I put my feet in that), an oddly elegant tall pink candle, two half-used tealights, a jigsaw puzzle and about 1,000 protein bars. Apparently the mate had invested heavily in these, way ahead of anyone knowing quite what a protein bar was. I set the table with two of them where plates would normally go; we hadn’t brought any food with us, thinking we’d go out to a pub for dinner. By this point, in one of the more exposed positions on the Llŷn, we couldn’t see the car through the snow, let alone the road to town. I’d like to say that childlike excitement at the snow meant flirty snowball fights and making a snowman with a protein bar for a nose. It didn’t. The only time we went out was to pee. At one point, the door wedged shut under the weight of snow and I thought for a terrifying moment that we would have to go to the loo indoors in front of one another. We put on all the clothes we’d brought – in my case, this included a couple of racy bras on top of each other – climbed into bed with a protein bar and tackled the jigsaw by candlelight. It was of the Isle of Man, and only at the end did we realise three pieces were missing. We had just half of Douglas, and absolutely nothing in the way of romance. Early the following morning, a moment of true winter joy. The view from the caravan door at dawn, all patchwork fields blanketed in deep, crisp and even snow, remains a favourite memory, largely because we were checking out. We grabbed what we needed – including a couple of protein bars, just in case – left the car until the snow melted and booked into a local B&amp;B. The lovely owner, whom I actually hugged despite my double-bra ensemble over a sweatshirt, insisted on cooking us a fry-up even though we hadn’t stayed the night before, and gave us a flask of tomato soup to take out for our walk. There were radiators, lights, a bathroom. There may even have been some winter romance during our stay there. And that relationship? Reader, I married him. Thirty-three years later, he is still banned from booking any holiday accommodation, whatever the season. But especially, especially in winter.Terry Pratchett’s The Abominable Snow Baby Christmas Day, 7.30pm, Channel 4 Julie Walters and a big friendly snow baby? It’s the Christmas telly we deserve. Terry Pratchett’s short story is animated in a half-hour adaptation, following Granny (Walters) and her grandson Albert (Hugh Dancy) as they rescue a 14ft furry creature. Not everyone in their town is happy about it – is a lesson in Christmas spirit in order? Hollie Richardson Superworm 2.30pm, BBC One While we lay in a Quality Street-induced coma, Superworm and Butterfly were busy helping their friends all day – until the wicked Wizard Lizard comes along. Olivia Colman and Matt Smith lend their voices for some easy-going fun for the young ’uns. HR The Queen’s Christmas Broadcast 3pm, BBC One In times of royal upheaval the Queen has tended to rise above it. But this was the year she lost Prince Philip, her husband and royal consort of 73 years, so there may well be a more personal dimension to the address. Graeme Virtue Quentin Blake: The Drawing of My Life 4.10pm, BBC Two The illustrator who has brought so many of our beloved characters to life gets the documentary he deserves. As he fills a 30ft-long canvas, fans such as actor Peter Capaldi and comedian Josie Long celebrate his legacy. HR Call the Midwife 8pm, BBC One It’s Christmas 1966 and there’s no room at the Nonnatus inn as 20 extra expectant mothers make sure the annual tearjerking staple is packed full of drama. Luckily, Mother Mildred (Miriam Margolyes) comes to help as the babies start popping out all over the place. Meanwhile, Lucille (Leonie Elliott) is preparing for her wedding, with a couple of hiccups. Hannah Verdier The Larkins at Christmas 9pm, ITV Following its first season run, here’s the festive special of the Darling Buds of May spin-off. An experimental nativity, a spate of burglaries blamed reflexively on the local ex-con, and the visit of Charley’s austere parents are the three threads tied in a neat bow by writer Simon Nye for a toasty, undemanding episode. Ideal turkey-stupor telly. Jack Seale Film choices Mary Poppins Returns, 3.10pm, BBC One Emily Blunt (pictured below) was perfectly cast in this sparkling 2018 sequel to the Julie Andrews classic. Her magical nanny reappears to supervise the children of her former charge, Michael (Ben Whishaw), now a widower with a cashflow problem. With a twinkle in her eye and a fine singing voice, Blunt doesn’t stray far from the original – and neither does the film, even featuring a hand-drawn animation/live-action scene. Lamplighter Lin-Manuel Miranda (who else?) is a slightly better cockney than Dick Van Dyke, and Marc Shaiman’s songs stand up well to their forebears. Simone Wardell Their Finest, 9.35pm, BBC Four Like TV’s Call the Midwife, Lone Scherfig’s 2016 drama delivers hard historical incident alongside comforting light entertainment. Gemma Arterton shines as Catrin, a secretary from Wales who finds herself part of the film script team at the Ministry of Information in London during the second world war. As the group plan a propaganda fiction based on the Dunkirk evacuation, she proves her ability to head writer Tom (Sam Claflin). Bill Nighy, as is his wont, dominates most of his scenes as an ageing thespian involved in the shoot. SW Love Actually, 10.40pm, ITV After Four Weddings and Notting Hill, Richard Curtis decided to expand his romcom remit with this 2003 film, featuring at least eight variations on the theme. Its overlapping stories include the prime minister (Hugh Grant, naturally) and a No 10 staff member (Martine McCutcheon); widower Liam Neeson’s young son and a classmate; and Martin Freeman and Joanna Page as film body doubles. There’s adultery and unrequited love, too, to add tartness to a mostly sweet experience. SWEveryone in society, from Cabinet ministers to rough sleepers, has faced “uncertainty, uncontrollability and unpredictability” during the Covid pandemic, the archbishop of Canterbury has said in his Christmas sermon. Justin Welby, who led the Christmas Day service at Canterbury Cathedral, added that the past 22 months has also shown people’s capacity for compassion and generosity. In particular, he praised those who have rescued refugees crossing the Channel to reach the UK, and volunteers who have welcomed and cared for people seeking a new life. He told the congregation: “As a nation we have been … faced collectively as never before with our limits – our fragility, the contingency of life and our mortality. Millions have faced suffering and loss. “We all face uncertainty, uncontrollability and unpredictability, from Sage and Cabinet to each one of us, from huge companies to those sleeping rough. But, added: “There is no doubting our human capacity to solve problems and show great kindness. I’m sure the deputy lord lieutenant going around Kent has been inspired over the last year with what volunteers do. “There have been the volunteers who have been on my mind, welcoming and caring for refugees arriving on the beaches so close to this cathedral. Those volunteers are extraordinary people, especially the crews of the RNLI. I saw them the other day, just getting on with it – five times as many callouts as they’ve ever had in the history of the Dover lifeboat, and they do one thing – save life at sea. “It’s not politics, it’s simply humanity. “And volunteers today in food banks and other places of comfort and help show this country as it should be, at its best, as we dream of it to be: a beautiful sign of compassion, of generosity, of living out that saying ‘it’s not about me’.” The Christmas story, he said, “shows us how we must treat those who are unlike us, who have far less than us, who have lived with the devastating limits of war and national tragedy – those who risk everything to arrive on the beaches, who suffer want and poor housing, little food, endless worry, health injustice, all over this, our country”. People had been wondering for months whether Christmas would be “saved” amid the continuing pandemic and the Omicron variant of Covid, he said. “But let’s get this straight – it’s not we who save Christmas, it’s Christmas that saves us. We cannot save ourselves. But God can – the gift of salvation is not just offered to some people, but to all,” the archbishop said. Some churches cancelled Christmas Eve and carol services this year amid worries about Covid infections, despite there being no government restrictions on indoor gatherings. The Church of England launched its first virtual reality carol service aimed at people unable or unwilling to attend a service in person.Despite surging Omicron cases of the coronavirus in the US, Joe and Jill Biden made an unannounced joint visit to a children’s hospital in Washington DC on Christmas Eve. The US president’s visit to Children’s National Hospital was a surprise for patients and staff, the White House reported, and was believed to be the first visit to the institution by a sitting president. Barack Obama made a holiday visit to the hospital in 2018, almost two years after he’d left office. Pictures on Friday showed the first couple with young patients, everyone wearing face masks to help prevent the spread of Covid-19. Children at the hospital were making paper lanterns and some read the Bidens their Christmas wish lists. “You’re bringing us some joy,” Biden told the patients, and he also thanked medical staff. First ladies traditionally visit the hospital around the Christmas holiday, dating back to first lady Bess Truman during the post-second world war presidency of Harry Truman, and they often read a book to patients, the White House reported. Jill Biden, a community college educator, sat by the Christmas tree and also read aloud to children at the hospital. The book was Olaf’s Night Before Christmas, based on the Disney musical Frozen. Joe Biden joked that he reads the story at bedtime, along with his presidential briefing papers. The president also knelt to speak to a young boy sitting in a wheelchair and one girl told the Bidens that she has been a patient at the hospital for a month and a half. Both Joe and Jill Biden gave accounts to children of the new “first puppy” who has come to live at the White House – Commander, a German shepherd dog, following the death of the Bidens’ old dog, Champ, and the removal of their younger dog, Major, after biting incidents. Joe Biden showed a child a picture of the dog on his phone and Jill Biden told a patient the puppy had eaten one of her slippers that morning. The White House reporting pool had earlier reported observing Commander being exercised on the south lawn in Christmas Eve sunshine.It is likely that in the “before times”, few Americans knew that independent experts advised the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) on the safety and efficacy of vaccines, and that the FDA usually took their advice. Less than a year into the Covid-19 pandemic, that quickly changed. The Vaccines and Related Biological Products Advisory Committee became arguably the most closely watched group of experts in the US federal government. The media followed hearings, and thousands of Americans tuned in live to see whether these scientists considered Covid vaccines safe and effective. For the chair of that advisory group, Dr Arnold Monto, a professor at the University of Michigan’s school of public health, the last year has been a revelation. “It’s really difficult, given the fact we never thought this [pandemic] was going to happen in this way … it’s all been a revelation,” said Monto. “And the revelation is also how societal beliefs would affect what we are seeing in terms of the continuation of severe disease.” Ultimately, experts and Monto did say vaccines were safe and effective, and the FDA authorized Covid-19 vaccines for emergency use shortly thereafter. More than 237 million Americans have since received a vaccine. Through several more hearings, VRPAC has recommended vaccines to everyone older than five and booster doses to everyone older than 18. Now, Monto is the author of a recent article in the New England Journal of Medicine, in which he considers the long-term future of the pandemic, and whether scientists can learn from another disease that was once pandemic – influenza. In an interview with the Guardian, Monto considered both this possible future – in which Covid-19 “is not going away, in spite of how well our vaccines perform” – and an incredible and perplexing year of vaccine distribution. “The first thing is [that] we never expected our vaccines to be so good, so effective,” said Monto. “This was a very happy surprise to everybody – and it was a surprise.” He and other scientists watched as a vaccine against Covid-19 was developed faster and more effectively than any dared to hope. Then Monto watched in astonishment as tens of millions of Americans refused to take them. “Those of us who are on the front lines here, in terms of development or evaluation, are so incredulous about people not wanting to get vaccinated,” he said. Perhaps the most frequent question people now ask Monto is whether people will need a Covid vaccine “every six months”, especially in light of the recently discovered Omicron variant. Pfizer recently announced that a third shot of its mRNA vaccine appears to protect as well against Omicron as other variants. “The question is: is this going to be like influenza” – against which an annual vaccine is recommended – “or is it going to be like measles?” – which requires only two doses for lifelong protection. “That’s where many of us disagree.” Data has shown immunity wanes over time. VRPAC has approved booster shots for all three vaccines, in part to prevent Covid-19 infection, even as mRNA vaccines have shown very good, stable protection against hospitalisation and death. Nevertheless, it remains unclear whether three shots will provide lasting immunity against infection. “We really don’t know how well our vaccines will be holding up,” he said. Monto said he now believes waning immunity and the continued emergence of new variants, termed “antigen drift”, make influenza a useful model for Covid-19 response. Each year, scientists create a vaccine based on seasonal, circulating variants of the flu virus. Monto said “permanent protection from our current vaccines” is unlikely, making this model a useful basis for future Covid-19 response. And, he said, this is a future we’ve been apprehensive to consider. “This is unprecedented, because it’s lasted so long,” said Monto. By comparison, the jolt of the 1918 influenza pandemic was more acute on a population level, but lasted a shorter period of time. “It’s been difficult to get people to focus on long-term consequences because people have been so wrong already in predictions,” said Monto. The virus “continues to create problems”. “Whenever you think things are going to be getting better – because they have already – and are they going to continue to get better, we’ve had a new surprise,” said Monto. “And that’s why many people have tried not to think long-term for any extent, because the question then, which is difficult to answer, is: are we going to be back to normal?” And that question implies a larger one about what the future may look like with masks and social distancing. Those “non-pharmaceutical” interventions, as scientists call them, are not addressed in Monto’s recent article, but he does give us a peek into the meaningful data of the future. Hospitalizations and deaths among people who are vaccinated could become more important metrics than cases alone, as vaccines become a long-term tool to mitigate the worst effects of Covid-19. The development of drugs to treat those infected with Covid-19 will also remain important, particularly if variants affect the efficacy of those already developed, as is the case with monoclonal antibodies. However, right now, Covid-19 remains a “pandemic of the unvaccinated”. At the time FDA advisers voted in favor of approving the first vaccine, around 285,000 Americans and 1.5 million people globally had died. Today, more than 791,000 Americans and 5.2 million people globally have died. In the US, many of those deaths immediately post-dated the authorization of vaccines, when they were in short supply. Now, they are widely available, but only 60.4% of the population is fully vaccinated. “The data are clear: this is a safe vaccine,” said Monto. “The data are clear that Covid is a dangerous infection to get, even if you’re not older or having underlying conditions, because the outcomes are unpredictable. “And you may be one of the unlucky ones that gets a severe infection.”I’ve always had a fairly complicated relationship with Christmas. My father left when I was two. He always promised we’d spend Christmas together, but he never came. There were fun and loving Christmases with my mum and brother, David. We had very little money, but my mother would manage to fill pillowcases with presents, and we’d have a tin of Quality Street and a little tree. My mother would cook a roast dinner and we’d watch movies together. Christmases with Corky Ballas, my second husband and dance partner, and his family were a big deal – the tree, opening gifts, playing games and singing songs. Those were quite thrilling Christmases, but not what I was used to. Later, when I had our son Mark, and Corky and I were working as professional dancers and competing, we missed about five Christmases because we were away for months at a time. Mark would stay with my mother, and I felt huge guilt about it. As Mark got older, I realised that you can’t replace that time with a child – the time when Christmas is at its most magical. They’re times I’ll never get back and I regret that. Then for many years, I barely celebrated Christmas at all. In 2003, my brother took his own life. David, who was 44, had been depressed for a few weeks, but we didn’t know how unwell he really was – and we didn’t know much about mental health. It happened on 5 December. Most people spend the month getting into the festive spirit, but after that I dreaded the anniversary of his death, and the idea of celebrating Christmas without him was too painful. Because we had grown up without our dad, David was more than a big brother. He was very much the protector of the family, the one who stood fast behind me, and then suddenly he wasn’t there. There was no way my mother or I could enjoy Christmas without him. That first year, I couldn’t believe he wasn’t there, eating treble helpings of Christmas dinner and working his way through a box of chocolates. After that, my mum threw away all her Christmas decorations. In the years afterwards, Christmas felt like something we just had to get through. We always set a place for David at the table, but it felt indescribably sad. The turning point came in 2018. I was in a pantomime for the first time, in Liverpool. Instead of dreading December, it felt exciting. Mark and his wife flew over from the US to watch the show, and we had an early Christmas dinner at my mother’s house – lots of guitar-playing, games, and Mark singing and dancing with my mum. We raised a toast to David, who had helped my mum raise Mark while I was away all those Christmases. It was during that December that I got to know Daniel Taylor, another cast member. We would go out and Liverpool would be glittering with lights and people celebrating. I liked Danny, and for the first time I felt I wanted to get into the festive mood, although it still felt painful. David and I grew up in Merseyside, and Liverpool was a place that my brother loved – everywhere I went was a reminder of him. But the city was such a beautiful place to be at Christmas, and I was falling in love with Danny. On the day itself, he joined me, my family and friends for lunch at a hotel in Liverpool and it was the happiest Christmas I’d had in many years. It felt like a switch was turned on – I realised that life moves so fast, and we should embrace the time we have. Since then, my mum and I have celebrated Christmas properly – we put a tree up, and decorations, and my whole aim is to make sure that we have a special day together. Danny is joining us this year, but even when it is just my mum and me, there is a feeling of warmth and Christmas spirit that we haven’t had since David died. We still always set a place for David at the table and although it’s always emotional, it feels less sombre. Christmas is a celebratory time, but that can heighten people’s feelings of loneliness and sadness. It’s important to check in on people who are alone at Christmas, because it can be an incredibly difficult time. The loss of my brother never goes away and things remind me of him daily. It’s not as if that special Christmas changed everything – life doesn’t go from feeling all that sadness to suddenly being all great. But it gave me permission to feel that it’s OK to celebrate Christmas, even if David is not here. As told to Emine Saner Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org. Shirley Ballas’s autobiography Behind the Sequins is out in paperback nowIn 2015, Saturday Night Live spoofed the rancorous political arguments besieging American social life. Cast members seated around a dining table to celebrate Thanksgiving passed the side dishes and threw invective. The verbal heat rose and rose until a young girl pressed play on a cassette player and the Adele song Hello washed over the room. The combatants instantly ceased fire and began lip-synching the lyrics. Their rapture escalated until they physically entered a re-creation of the music video. A Thanksgiving Miracle aired before the Trump presidency and its violent subversive conclusion. This holiday season, it’s hard to think of a song capable of transporting Americans into a state of blissful unity. Masks and vaccines have become a divisive issue and assault weapons have cropped up as accessories on congressional Christmas cards. But there is an alternative to mutually assured bad-mouthing. Americans can meet clandestinely among the like-minded, not just to commiserate but also to plan and participate in election campaigns. Emily Van Duyn, a political communications scholar, embedded with one such group in Texas in 2017. Her book chronicles the journey of 136 liberal women living in a rural and thus predominantly conservative Texas town who, determined to resist Trump, organized themselves into what Van Duyn anonymizes as the Community Women’s Group (CWG). They were middle-aged and senior white women (save one who was Black), afraid to speak their minds and put up yard signs. The author interviewed 24 of them multiple times, attended their monthly meetings on a dozen occasions, and examined meeting minutes from November 2016, when they were in tears and shock, until December 2020, at which point their politicking had yielded higher vote totals for Democrats in the previous month’s election, though not enough to prevail anywhere on the ballot. Van Duyn also conducted a national and statewide survey in 2018, from which she concluded that more than one in five American adults felt the need to hide their politics, and just under one in 10 operated in similarly self-obscured conversational settings. The study explains how social, geographic and political causes shaped the communication practices of the CWG. “[T]he growing animosity between and within parties, the uncertainty about truth, the growing intersectional animosity around ideology, race, class, and gender, made for a political context that was not only unpleasant but risky.” Trump palpably threatened their sense of security as women. Locally, they feared ostracization, loss of business (especially the real estate agents), defacement of property and being run off the road by men in trucks with guns who noticed liberal bumper-stickers, as happened at least once and was talked about often. Van Duyn excels at detailing the evolution of CWG’s communications practices, a mix of private and public facing activities conducted through physical as well as digital channels. Many members had grown up deferring to men about matters political. But a week after Trump’s victory one of them sent an email to eight neighbors: “I would like to suggest that we get together for support and see where that takes us.” That got forwarded, and 50 showed up at the first meeting. In a remote location, with the blinds closed, they wrote a mission statement and formed committees by issue to educate themselves. That super-structure soon fell by the wayside. Their formalized confidentiality agreement held, however. Between meetings they relied on a listserv to communicate among themselves with a brief detour into a secret Facebook group. In their darkened space (the book title inverts the slogan of the Washington Post) they opened each meeting with talk about their fears. A few started sending letters to the editor of the local newspaper using their individual identity, often to register dissent with and fact-check other letter writers. Over the two years of the study, about half emerged as open Democrats. They worked on mobilizing other Democrats (even though not all were registered or comfortable with the party), leaving the heavy labor of persuasion to formal campaigns. Their work shored up the party in their county: they ran phone banks, filled district chairs, updated voter files and raised money. The group had served as a safe harbor to develop political skills and confidence. CWG falls into several political traditions, including the voluntary associations that De Tocqueville valorized, the hidden minorities who have suffered the weights of oppression and, for that matter, the collectives of oppressors and cultists. Women are a demographic majority in America, and the political positions of CWG would fit in the national mainstream. But these women were neither in the contexts of their lives. Even so, by the end of the period Van Duyn examines, their politicking mirrored that of more open demographic counterparts such as the Liberal Women of Chesterfield County, a group that helped first-time candidate Abigail Spanberger turn a central Virginia seat Democratic in 2018 – one that she now has to decamp for a newly re-drawn district. Some Republicans at holiday gatherings this year will continue to relish the opportunity to bait liberals (a practice that goes both ways). They may emulate Trump’s style of discourse, centered on a barrage of lies, exaggerations, accusations and taunts. Or they may not do any of these things; as Trump said about southern border-crossers in 2015 “some, I assume, are good people”. Indeed, some Republicans may feel intimidated by progressive majorities in workplaces and on campuses. All told, the risks of escalated, energy draining crossfire between America’s political tribes have risen and intensified. So this holiday season is no time for engaging others in political matters, for disputing the veracity of their claims and integrity of their motives. Far better to smile wanly, deflect provocations, change the subject, and then join or form a political support group. As Van Duyn’s book shows, good things can follow from going underground. Democracy Lives in Darkness: How and Why People Keep Their Politics a Secret is published in the US by Oxford University PressDonato Bramante’s Tempietto in Rome. The Parthenon in Athens. Angkor Wat in Cambodia. The Barcelona pavilion in Spain. The Guggenheim museum in New York. And the White House in Washington. All have been turned into architectural birthday cakes by Kaywin Feldman, director of the National Gallery of Art, as gifts for her architect husband. “I’m not a cook so they’re not pastry masterpieces,” says the 55-year-old, who used carrots for the minarets of the Hagia Sophia mosque in Turkey. “They sort of amuse me.” It seems just that the custodian of some 156,000 works of art, from Rembrandt to Rothko, not to mention a constant cycle of temporary exhibitions, should be allowed a creative outlet of her own, albeit an unusual one (she also engraves fresh jars of peanut butter). Feldman became the fifth director of the National Gallery – and first woman to lead it – in March 2019. A year later she initiated an unprecedented shutdown because of the coronavirus pandemic and, like other cultural leaders, confronted historic racial injustices in the wake of the police murder of George Floyd in Minneapolis. Now the gallery has a clutch of new shows that include African American photographer James Van Der Zee’s chronicle of life in Harlem, New York, in the 1920s and 1930s, and The New Woman Behind the Camera, a radical reassessment of the impact women had on the history of modern photography. Sitting in a beige seventh-floor office with one of the best views in Washington – her window is dominated by the west front of the US Capitol, scene of presidential inaugurations and the 6 January insurrection. The National Gallery, which receives two thirds of its budget from Congress, is a national treasure that offers free admission and received around 5 million visitors a year before the pandemic. Feldman says: “I feel like I was hired with one clear mandate from the board which, they like to say, is to put the ‘national’ back in the National Gallery and think about how we serve the American people, because our funding in large part comes from the American taxpayers.” Among the first steps was boosting the gallery’s digital strategy and answering the pleas of many visitors for better signage around its maze-like buildings. She discovered that there was no simple, unifying brand identity so she had a new logo, combining a conservative typeface with a bright color palette, crafted by the top design firm Pentagram. Then just over a year into her tenure, Covid-19 hit. The institution has weathered the storm better than most. It did not have to make drastic cuts to staff and was forced to cancel only one exhibition, though dates of others were juggled. Like other museums it endured stops and starts, with its longest spell of closure running from November to May. Even then Feldman came to work almost every day along with a skeleton staff of between 60 and 80 security and maintenance workers. Free from tourist crowds, she had the privilege of being able to walk the corridors and savor personal favorites such as a portrait of Napoleon by Jacques-Louis David and The Feast of the Gods by Giovanni Bellini and Titian. But the novelty soon wore off. “In the first couple of weeks, I thought, ‘Ah! I’ve got the gallery to myself, I can go in all of the galleries and enjoy the collection,’” she says. “I did for a while and then it became depressing. As fantastic as the works of art are, they need people to just bring them to life and I didn’t like the total quiet and still atmosphere.” Then came the Black Lives Matter uprising. Having lived in Minneapolis for 11 years before taking this job, Feldman was well aware of the local context surrounding the death of Floyd, an African American man, under the knee of police officer Derek Chauvin. Museums, theatres and other organisations that had long paid lip service to racial diversity, equity and inclusion faced a new reckoning. Feldman says: “Most organisations, but certainly museums, are all about people and so issues like that resonate. Since I arrived it’s a topic that we’d been talking about but the murder of George Floyd just added more urgency to doing the work and the realisation of how much more that we had to do.” Notably the gallery postponed an exhibition by Philip Guston, a white artist whose work depicts cartoon-like, hooded figures that allude to the Ku Klux Klan in attempt to critique white supremacy. Feldman was condemned, including by some Black artists, for seemingly trying to dodge a potential controversy. She defended the decision in an article for international art magazine Apollo earlier this year: “Guston used these figures to explore the seeds of racism and the capacity for evil in all humans. His intentions were good, as are those of the National Gallery in presenting the exhibition. But those good intentions do not negate the trauma we may cause in a public display of imagery that makes reference to slavery, lynching and racial terror.” She added: “It is imperative that the National Gallery slow down and really listen, not only to the curators and art critics but also to members of our staff and the wider community who have something to say about how these works affect them. To ignore or dismiss their very real emotions would be to deny their value and their agency. We will gain new understandings of Guston’s work and the important issues the artist raised by listening to people whom museum directors don’t always hear.” Her position has not changed. “It’s a very important show for us and one that we are committed to and we’re hosting in 2023,” she says. “But between the pandemic and the inability to have in-person conversations and the moment of of Floyd’s killing, which caused us all to think more about diversity and inclusion within the institutions, the pause was really important for us.” Before then Afro-Atlantic Histories, a show looking at the historical experiences and cultural formations of Black and African people since the 17th century, will open in April. “It’s another one that’s causing us to stretch in new ways and I always say that to successfully embrace exhibitions that deal with particularly America’s complicated and painful past, museums have to come from a place of authenticity, legitimacy, generosity and curiosity.” Feldman estimates that about 90% of the National Gallery’s permanent collection is by white male artists, but notes that in recent years it has gained significant works by artists of color, including Native Americans. In October the museum announced the acquisition of The American People Series #18: The Flag is Bleeding (1967), its first painting by Faith Ringgold, one of America’s most important Black female artists. The gallery has also diversified its leadership team, Feldman notes, including hiring Kanitra Fletcher as its first ever curator of African American and Afro-Diasporic art. Feldman brings a transatlantic perspective. She was born in Boston but lived in Britain from age six to 11 when her father, who served in the US Coast Guard, had a stint at the American embassy in London. She reflects: “I have such a nostalgia for my childhood and growing up. We lived in Gerrards Cross in Buckinghamshire and I went to a very small English school just up the street that I could walk to. It was a very idyllic place.” Feldman later worked in the education department at the British Museum (“that’s sort of my home museum”) and also carried out a work project at the National Gallery in London, which was a model for the Washington version conceived in the 1930s by Andrew Mellon, a financier, US treasury secretary, art collector and Anglophile. “It was never his intention that we would have a representative showing the entire school of American art or Spanish painting,” Feldman explains. “It was the idea that it would just be jewels in the crown, much like the National Gallery in London, and they really are a sister institution to us. We work together constantly. We’re both very generous in lending works of art and are in close touch. It’s a friendship and collegiality that all of us here really enjoy.” London, New York and other major art cities became famous for “blockbuster exhibitions”, hot ticket shows built around signature artists that drew long queues. But Feldman, a past president of the Association of Art Museum Directors and past chair of the American Alliance of Museums, suspects the phenomenon may be drawing to a close. “I think the museum extravaganza blockbuster era is going to decline partly because of the wear and tear on works of art and then because of climate change. The environmental impact of these big exhibitions is extraordinary. “You can have an exhibition with 60 or 80 different lenders. Those are all airplanes and crates that, if you’re really lucky, get recycled for another two uses but otherwise they’re thrown away. The installations and sets are often thrown away. It is a topic that the field has to start stepping up to.” She adds: “The part that I find so exciting about that is thinking about how we might think differently about the permanent collection. I don’t just mean doing exhibitions out of the permanent collection, while that is certainly legitimate, but we have an extraordinary collection of masterpieces here. We have the best so why not think about new kinds of installations and galleries and projects to animate the collection that we have?” The upheaval of recent years has evidently offered an opportunity to pause and rethink a museum as a place of people as well as objects, a place with responsibilities to the nation and even the planet. In 2016 Philando Castile, an African American man, was shot and killed by police during a traffic stop in Minnesota. Then director of the Minneapolis Institute of Art, Feldman mounted a small exhibition in response, an expression of connection with its community. The impact remains profound for her. She recalls: “One of my trustees in Minneapolis in exasperation once said to me, ‘Why does everybody expect museums to solve so many of the issues in society today?’ I said it’s because museums are about people. We’re not just things because the objects we have on the walls were all created by people in particular circumstances, often for people, and we welcome people in to experience it.”I keep a list of words that are strange to me. Any time I find one I half-know or do not recognise, it goes in the list. I find its existence reassuring, as if having more words at my disposal will make it easier to decode whatever confusing things happen to me each day. The best word on my list is velleity. I found it in Don DeLillo’s Underworld (1997), in a section where a Jesuit priest is explaining to the main character, Nick Shay, the value of knowing the names for those things in danger of being lost to eternity. The priest teaches the word “velleity” to Nick. “Volition at its lowest ebb,” he calls it. “A small thing, a wish, a tendency.” He uses it in relation to his own life, to express regret at how it has passed. He has prayed a lot, sure, but what tangible things has he done in this world? This year I’ve spent more time in Anglican churches than I have in the rest of my life combined. I haven’t converted, I don’t think. But I have been researching people in their 20s who have done, and it quickly became clear that without going to church I would miss crucial aspects of what it meant to become a Christian. And so, despite my initial wariness about structured religion, I started accompanying those I was interviewing not just to Sunday services, but the daily offices: morning prayers, evening prayers and compline (the night prayer). The first few services I was bored. I believed prayer to be a waste of thought. I spent the duration worrying, or feeling hungry, or both. I stared at the faded scars and burns across my hands and tried to remember how I got them. Gradually, though, I found myself taking an interest. I started to look forward to the prayers of penitence, recited in chorus by the congregation. I liked to say, “We confess we have sinned.” To say, “We have not loved our neighbours as ourselves”, admitting (half out-loud, half in private) to all the minor acts of unkindness we had inevitably carried out that week. I enjoyed the intercessions, too – the structured sequence of prayers, written by members of the congregation each week, which follow the pattern of prayers for the Church, then for society at large, for the local community, for any who suffer, and finally, for the communion of saints. The intercessions kept up with the news – prayers for the England team during the Euros, for NHS staff, for the families of refugees lost crossing seas. It was a grand picture that moved me: in the 16,000 Church of England buildings across the UK, which were reopened in July 2020 after the first period in 800 years without public worship in England, all these groups of people were closing their eyes and pressing their hands together in contemplation of those they did not know. Prayer did not stop during the pandemic, however. Between March 2020 and March this year, the Church of England’s various prayer apps were accessed 8m times, a 50% increase on the previous year. My Christian friend likes to phrase it in counterfactuals: what if prayer doesn’t do nothing? I posed this to someone else, whose apostasy came in his early 20s. “Yeah, what if,” he said, his voice empty of anything. “What if?” Having prayed each night of his childhood, he now finds the complacency necessary to trust you are “doing really valuable things by praying for the rest of the world” – at best deluded, and at worst dangerous. But most of the Christians I spoke with do not see prayer as efficacious. Instead, it is a response to the paralysis they feel when confronted with sickness, death or violence. “I’ll pray for you,” they say, and find it has more weight than “I’m sorry”. One of my close friends practises the metta bhavana, the Buddhist “loving-kindness” meditation. Like the intercessions, there are five stages. First, you meditate on yourself. Then on someone you love platonically, someone you feel neutral towards, someone you dislike, and then finally, the whole world. At each stage, you chant the following in your head: “May you be well, may you be happy, may you progress upon your path.” My friend knows their meditating cannot ensure the happiness of others, or of themselves. But it is a way of releasing hard emotions, and feeling momentarily connected to the disparate lives external to their immediate circumstances. I don’t think the Jesuit priest in Underworld was right. I don’t believe dealing in small things such as wishes makes you “low-willed”, as he expressed it. Velleity means desiring things you cannot hope to get. There is something in that impracticability I find serious, strengthening. Velleity is the closest word I have for the approximation of prayer I find myself moving towards: not a replacement for action, but a distinct act in itself. Sending out thoughts to people I miss or have hurt or will never meet. Knowing it has no power, but doing it anyway. Lamorna Ash is the author of Dark, Salt, Clear: Life in a Cornish Fishing TownAcross three Sunday nights last summer, Sean Bean was remarkable. BBC One’s Time saw him play a teacher jailed for killing someone while drunk-driving. With Jimmy McGovern’s script often leaving him silent and alone in his cell, he painted an astonishingly affecting portrait of the regret and terror of a previously respected professional banged up with veteran criminals – and he frequently did so using expressions alone. How is it to try to grab the audience entirely through looks? “As you get older, it’s sometimes a bit easier!” says Bean, 62, with a laugh. “When I started out, I used to count up how many lines I had and want some more. Now, it’s: ‘Oh, fuck, do I have to remember all that?’ So I don’t mind silence.” Is it not technically harder to convey everything facially, though? “Yeah, it is,” says Bean. “But if the character is alone, it’s about trying to think what they are thinking. You can draw on situations in which you have felt alone, or sad, or nervous. That can be uncomfortable, but it gets you to the truth.” As well as fewer lines to learn, Time also allowed Bean to reach the makeup trailer later. As a leading man, his time before shooting is usually spent trying to look as good as possible. Here, he needed to look rough. “It’s not as if I didn’t have to do anything. I shaved each day but aimed to get the effect of someone using a cheap razor in a little cracked mirror in their cell,” he says. “You do have to wear some makeup or you look a different texture from everyone else. But I put on the bare minimum, nothing too flattering. You want to look like someone who’s exhausted and in shock. That wasn’t too difficult some mornings!” Bean deliberately chose not to speak to any prisoners as part of his preparation for playing Mark Cobden – who is often the only person on his wing experiencing incarceration for the first time. “I wanted the locations – the cells, corridors, exercise yard – to be new and shocking to me, as they are to him. I wanted just to react to what was around me,” he says. The drama intercuts the experiences of Cobden and Eric McNally, his supervising prison officer, played by Stephen Graham. Their scenes together are acting as grand slam final tennis, each participant judging whether to match the pace of the other player or change it. Watching Time called to mind theatrical experiments in which actors have swapped the main parts in a play on alternate nights – the king and Bolingbroke in Shakespeare’s Richard II, the brothers in Sam Shepard’s True West – and I fantasised about seeing the drama with Bean as the prison officer and Graham as the inmate. Was the casting ever up for discussion? “It was always me for Mark and him for Eric. But it would be really interesting. You should ask Jimmy about remaking it that way.” Four years ago, in another McGovern drama, Broken, Bean played Father Michael Kerrigan, a Merseyside Catholic priest forced to double as a sort of social worker because of state and council cuts. Time and Broken are linked by Mark and Michael having been baptised into the same faith: Michael is a Catholic believer who struggles with doubts, while Mark has lost his faith but is tempted by a prison chaplain to lapse from atheism. Bean, who grew up in a practising Catholic family in Sheffield but was deemed “too out there” as a child to be encouraged towards the priesthood (as McGovern was), says: “The church offers Mark a lifeline. Jimmy McGovern claims not to believe in religion, but Catholicism is a thread in his work. In Time and Broken, there’s a tension between what the characters say they believe or don’t believe and what they actually think.” Where Father Michael is seen by society as a good guy and Mark Cobden as a bad man, the truth is far more complex. “They’re both very self-critical, and a mix of fallibilities and good qualities,” says Bean. “That ambiguity is what makes Jimmy’s characters so rich. And we’re all like that, aren’t we? We all like to think we have mostly good bits with a few bad bits – but others may think we have more downs than ups.” Time was his third primetime BBC collaboration with McGovern. Before Broken, there was 2012’s Tracie’s Story, which gave Bean his boldest screen role. Known as an action actor – the titular 19th-century soldier in ITV’s Sharpe, Ned Stark in Game of Thrones – he played, in blond wig and false breasts, Tracie, the trans alter ego of an English teacher. There are increasing calls for authentic casting, in which the identities of actor and character match. But for McGovern alone, Bean has played a priest, a prisoner and a transexual, none of which he has been. Would he defend pretence? “I think so. I come from a generation that started in repertory theatre, playing a different role each week. The aim was to play as many parts as possible. Whereas there’s a tendency now to argue that characters can only be played by someone like them,” says Bean. “I think that is restrictive and counterproductive. We risk getting into a situation where drama is dictated more by which boxes are ticked than the story being told. I often think that, if I did Tracie’s Story today, there’d be an uproar. I have a feeling it would be questioned and wouldn’t even be made, but it’s one of the roles I’m proudest of. It seems such a shame if actors can’t play a range of parts.” While in Time, Broken and Tracie’s Story, Bean was unable to draw on personal experience, the four-part BBC drama he is shooting with Nicola Walker – written and directed by Stefan Golaszewski, who made the BBC Two hit Mum – is called Marriage. Is it painful or useful that Bean is currently on his fifth? “Well,” he laughs, “the show is about a longterm, 27-year marriage, which isn’t something I know about.” His lengthiest stretch of matrimony so far is seven years. “It’s about the small things that happen in a marriage, how you stay together. There are really few words in this. It’s all in the silences and pauses. So it’s another very different shift for me, which is what I like.”An incredible £500,000 has been raised for climate justice good causes by generous Guardian and Observer readers, in the space of just over a fortnight since the launch of the 2021 charity appeal. Nearly 6,000 people have so far donated to the appeal, which will be shared between four charities: Practical Action, Global Greengrants Fund UK, Royal Botanic Gardens Kew, and Environmental Justice Foundation. The theme this year is climate justice, inspired by stories of people and communities uprooted by climate volatility, whether flooding, wildfire, melting ice or drought, and supporting charities working with those most affected by environmental loss. “On behalf of all Practical Action’s staff and the communities we work with, I’d like to say a huge thank you to Guardian and Observer readers for their support,” said Sarah Roberts, chief executive of Practical Action. “The money will help the world’s most vulnerable people living at the sharp end of the climate crisis gain vital new skills to adapt their lives to their new environmental reality.” Dr Paul Wilkin, head of ecosystem stewardship at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, also paid tribute to readers: “We are blown away by people’s generosity for this year’s appeal. We know that our planet is under immense strain from biodiversity loss and climate change so these funds will help us to hit the accelerator on our work in Madagascar and for that we are incredibly grateful,” Introducing the appeal earlier this month the Guardian’s editor-in-chief, Katharine Viner, wrote: “The stark truth is that the world’s developing countries have seen the vast majority of the death and destruction caused by climate-induced disasters, and yet they are responsible for a tiny fraction of global emissions.” She added: “The richest countries pollute most but it is in the poorest where climate change is most harshly felt, through extreme poverty, food and water insecurity and the displacement of millions of people from their homes.” The appeal continues until early January.I like to think I have an adventurous palate. I eat many things that commonly upset people – shellfish, snails, coriander – without complaint. I don’t have any allergies and I am highly lactose tolerant. As an American who has lived in the UK for 30 years, I can only think of a few British foodstuffs I won’t touch, among them baked beans, Marmite and prawn cocktail crisps. But can I really consider myself adventurous if I’m not willing to give these three a go? Most of the online advice on overcoming food aversions is aimed at toddlers, and what’s left is for people who dislike certain tastes. That doesn’t apply here, because I’ve never actually tried any of these things. I’m averse to what I imagine they must taste like. When it comes to Marmite, my imagination runs wild; I don’t even like being in the same room as an open jar of it. Anyway, I’m not ready for Marmite; I’m starting with the crisps, as a warmup. I have tasted many horrible crisp flavours in my time, but when I first came to London in 1990, prawn cocktail was a line I chose not to cross. This time round, after sourcing a bag, I spend a few minutes staring into an open packet and wrinkling my nose. Reluctantly, I put one in my mouth. A little shudder goes through my frame. The taste is nothing like what I had imagined all these years. There’s nothing fishy about it; the flavour is just a synthetic approximation of prawn cocktail sauce, and if that still doesn’t taste right to me it’s because cocktail sauce is generally different in the US – a combination of ketchup and horseradish, rather than ketchup, mayo and tabasco. Even so, the crisps are off-putting in a mildly addictive way – I pull a face every time I eat one, but still I finish the packet. To be honest, I think I would choose them over salt and vinegar, but it would be a dark day if those were the only two options. My aversion to baked beans may seem odd – they’re originally American, after all. The canned variety were first imported to Britain in 1886, when they were sold exclusively by Fortnum &amp; Mason. It may be this perverse association with luxury that drives British people to persist with them. When I was growing up, we always had a can of baked beans in the cupboard, where it remained unopened. I don’t even really know how to cook them. I have seen my wife prepare beans on toast hundreds of times, without ever observing the process closely. “Does this look legit?” I say, showing her a white plate with two artfully arranged slices of white toast despoiled by a puddle of cold baked beans. “Stop making a fuss and just try them,” she says. “I’m not eating these,” I say. “These are just for the photograph.” An hour’s proximity to the beans while my picture is taken does nothing to whet my appetite, but it does take the edge off my phobia. That afternoon, I heat up a new batch and serve them to myself on much nicer bread. Then I try to convince myself I’m really, really hungry. Although I have never had them before, there is something wholly familiar about baked beans: that sickly sweetness, that sour note of regret. They taste of old oilcloth and indelible stains. They taste like the clocks going back. I eat about half of them before I am overcome by melancholy. Later my wife finishes the rest of the tin, with joy. A week goes by, then another. Every morning I wake up thinking: today is the day you eat Marmite. And every day I find some excuse for putting it off. Time runs out. On the appointed day I rise early and go down to the kitchen at dawn so I can be alone with this challenge. I am not hoping for the best; Marmite’s own marketing campaign is based on the idea that it divides opinion. How surprisingly good could it be? Eventually, I sit down, open a brand new jar and spread the stuff in a thin layer – as thinly as possible, my wife has instructed – on buttered toast. There is something alarming about the brown gunk’s refusal to part from the knife. I look away, like you do when you’re having an injection. Then I pick up a piece of toast and bite down on it. The shock of it causes me to stand up. It’s unbelievably salty – saltier than salt. Underneath that is what I can only describe as a taste of concern: brown and faintly automotive. I walk around the table in circles while trying to swallow the stuff away. How it clings! On my third circuit of the table it occurs to me that I need to eat more than one bite; maybe it gets easier with repeated exposure, like cigarettes. But the second time is exactly the same; the skin around my temples tightens. My brain can’t believe I have repeated this experience voluntarily. After 30 years of unquestioning avoidance, I have experienced three new tastes I can now never untaste. I can’t claim it has enhanced my appreciation of the British palate, although regular consumers of Marmite have acquired my profound respect: you people really fear nothing.The first proposals for a spate of developments designed to meet new green measures in London include a biodiverse training complex at the All England Lawn Tennis Club in Wimbledon, a green-walled skyscraper in the City of London and a densely planted mini forest in Chelsea. Skyscrapers, historic estates and suburban parks across the capital are counting up scores for greenery under new planning metrics set out in Mayor Sadiq Khan’s London Plan, which are intended to enhance developments’ contribution to the environment. The Urban Greening Factor (UGF) formula, inspired by the Swedish city of Malmö’s “green points” system, scores each part of a development’s plan – including street-level areas, balconies and roofs – from 0 to 1, with trees, planters and green roofs earning high scores, while paving slabs and barren rooftops receive no score. Central government has also set out plans in the Environment Act 2021 to make developments deliver an uplift to biodiversity, which will require a 10% “biodiversity net gain”. “The Urban Greening Factor is a complete step-change in how much green stuff we’re putting on buildings,” said Craig Robertson, head of sustainability at AHMM architects. Even city centre sites will be tasked with achieving a UGF score of 0.4, equivalent to turning 40% of their footprints over to nature. Biodiversity net gain will mark another big shift, Robertson added, pushing developers to consider vegetation and ecological benefits to their surroundings. “It’s really difficult – in a positive way. It’s a really positive challenge to have.” Biodiversity net gain, which will be required in planning law from 2023, uses a complex algorithm to account for nature losses and gains – although critics have called for urgent revisions to the current formula. Although some London boroughs are yet to formally adopt UGF measures, the Greater London Authority (GLA) began requiring it in March, meaning all large developments across the capital must now calculate their score. Draft guidance to help boroughs and developers deliver UGF effectively has been put out for public consultation and will formally be adopted next year. Residential developments are typically set a target of 0.4 and commercial developments 0.3, giving landscape architects and designers “authority and opportunity” to reach these scores in creative ways, said Peter Massini, an ecologist who helped write the UGF policy at the GLA. London was already spattered with green roofs, with 700 in central London alone, but the UGF makes them all but essential in dense urban plots with little street-level space. Green walls offer another way of lifting UGF on crowded sites, but Robertson said many designers are doubtful of their benefits amid a rash of high-profile die-offs. The “cascading” green terraces of The Ray, his practice’s redevelopment of the Guardian’s former headquarters in Farringdon, are one indicator of where the city could be heading under UGF, said Robertson, alongside biosolar roofs, which combine plants growing around photovoltaic panels. The City of London approved a 33-storey “green tower” at 70 Gracechurch Street in February, which exceeded a UGF target of 0.3 with a collection of living roofs, planted terraces and a green wall. Cadogan, the main landlord in Chelsea and Knightsbridge, is targeting a 25% increase in its UGF across its 36-hectare (90-acre) Chelsea estate, including designing a densely planted Miyawaki forest. The UGF incentivises developers to not settle for bland green space, said City Hall. Wild grassland or dense tree planting score more than double typical lawns, meaning lawns can be upgraded to help reach targets in historic areas where buildings are protected. Plans for an extension to the home of the Wimbledon Championships has reached the near-perfect UGF of 0.97, almost totally green space. The All England Lawn Tennis Club (AELTC) bought a former private golf club in 2018 neighbouring the tournament’s courts, on site that been a parkland estate designed by Capability Brown. By 2030, it will provide 39 tennis courts, designed to sit within a “mosaic of habitats”, with much open to the public, said Andrew Wayro, senior landscape design manager at AELTC. While its UGF was already far above the 0.4 requirement at the outset of the project, it aims to push it higher while achieving a 10% biodiversity increase by switching rolling fairways for “priority habitats for the area, like reedbeds and acid grassland” and specialist habitats for hedgehogs and Daubenton’s bats, said Wayro. But the Wimbledon plan has met with objections by some residents, who argue that the development will “cause substantial harm” to the park. Vanessa Ross, founder of Arc Landscape Design and Planning, said it remains up to developers, designers and ecologists whether the new metrics will truly make a difference to lives and ecosystems in London, or simply push architects into “designing by numbers”. For example, private gardens can score highly for green space but offer little benefit to people unless accessible, Ross added. Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresAmerican actor Richard Jenkins, 74, has been a screen regular since the 70s, but his big breakthrough came in 2001 playing deceased funeral director Nathaniel Fisher in the TV series Six Feet Under. He went on to receive an Oscar nomination for best actor in The Visitor (2007) and won an Emmy in 2015 for his role in the drama series Olive Kitteridge. Jenkins has worked with directors including Woody Allen, Kathryn Bigelow, the Coens and Mike Nichols, and next month can be seen in Guillermo del Toro’s Nightmare Alley. His latest project is playwright Stephen Karam’s film of his own one-act play The Humans – set in a newly rented, unfurnished apartment in New York’s Chinatown – in which Jenkins plays a man contemplating the state of his life at a family Thanksgiving. You live in Providence, Rhode Island, where you’ve worked a lot in theatre, right? I’m from Illinois, but I’ve been out here for 50-some years. I was a member of the acting company here for 14 seasons, and later I ran it for four seasons. My wife [Sharon R Friedrick] is a choreographer, and we still direct and choreograph some stuff there. We rethink musicals, like Oliver! and Oklahoma!. We love working together. When I directed alone, it was in your own head, but when you’re doing it with someone else, you talk about it for months before you even start rehearsals. It’s really wonderful. And did your wife get you into dancing? That’s where we met, dancing in college. We were doing the Garden of Eden Ballet in Can-Can – I was the snake and she was Eve. The Humans is deeply unsettling, with an incredibly claustrophobic labyrinth of a set. I think the world is closing in on my character, Erik. There’s a fear of losing his family – the one thing that he could count on his whole life, the one thing that sustained him. Because of what he did [in his past], he could lose all that. It’s more terrifying than any supernatural being or ghost or horror film. You’re part of an extraordinary ensemble cast: Amy Schumer, Beanie Feldstein, Steven Yeun and, a less familiar name to cinemagoers, Jayne Houdyshell. She’s incredible, isn’t she? She did the play of Humans 600 times but she accepted us as her family immediately. Being in that apartment for a month, you either became friends or enemies; we became a group of six friends, really close. What is it about Thanksgiving that makes it come across in films as the most traumatic experience possible? Well, it forces you to be there with one another. Some people refuse to go. I’ve been fortunate, I always look forward to them. There are no gifts, you just go and sometimes you see someone you haven’t seen in a while. It is brutal if the relationships are strange and there are differences. You all go your separate ways and say: “Oh my God – but next year we’re going to go back and try to do it again.” In that sense, it’s hopeful to me. In Nightmare Alley you play a man named Ezra Grindle. He’s extremely wealthy, dangerous, haunted by the past – and has a fearsome beard. Yeah, that was a beard. That was me – the hair wasn’t, but the beard was. It was longer because of Covid, because we stopped shooting. I had one more scene to do and they pulled the plug in March. Nine months later I went back, so I had to trim the beard, it was loooooong. This is your second film with Guillermo del Toro, following 2017’s The Shape of Water. He’s eternally fascinating. I remember when I walked into The Shape of Water, into my character’s apartment, for the first time. Sally [Hawkins]’s was next to mine, hers was in blues and greens, mine was in browns and reds, everything was natural in it, paints and books and televisions, but nothing was real – it was a piece of art. I thought: “Is this what it was like to work with the great masters in the 40s?” I hear Michael Caine was one of your influences when you started out… Sometimes movies come along when you need them. I wasn’t sure of acting, if I had any talent, I just didn’t know. I was in college at the time and I saw Alfie. I was mesmerised. I thought: “Yes, I want to be an actor, that’s who I am.” Michael Caine came along when I needed and said: “Go ahead.” I’ve never met him but I think he’s amazing. People must have really started to recognise you as the dead undertaker in Six Feet Under. I was at a real funeral once, and somebody tapped me on the shoulder and said: “Are they filming this?” I met a woman at an airport and she was crying. She said: “Why did you stop that series? Why is this over?” People were passionate about it. After that show, you must have been offered a lot of roles as careworn fathers. Even though I’ve played a father a few times, it’s not the same father. My father was a real worrier, and my mother didn’t worry about anything. I’m a bit of a doom-and-gloomer myself. When I read The Humans, I thought, I just want to play Erik, I understand this man. And next we’ll see you in a TV series as the serial killer Jeffrey Dahmer’s father. It’s a Ryan Murphy project for Netflix. Ryan used to be a journalist and it’s really thorough: an investigation not just of Dahmer, but the damage that he caused, to the victims and their families – and to his parents. It was emotionally hard. The question for me was: if Jeffrey Dahmer is your son, do you stop loving him? And the answer’s no, you just don’t. How was 2021 for you? It’s been… interesting. Like everybody, I feel like I’m still wrapped in a big ball that I can’t get out of – but it’s been good, I’ve been spending time with my family and that’s always great. And your hopes for 2022? That I make it to 2023! One of the things I love about what I do is that you just don’t know what’s around the corner. It could be nothing, it could be pain and agony – or it could be something really cool. I hope we can get out of this pandemic. I worry about the arts. How about this: I hope it’s better. • The Humans is released on 31 December • Nightmare Alley is in cinemas on 21 JanuaryRemarkably, the website is still live. Eight months after the European Super League disintegrated in an embarrassing fireball, you might think its founders would be minded to erase all trace of their hubris and humiliation. But perhaps that would be to credit them with too much competence. And so there it remains to this day: “The Super League is a new European competition between 20 top clubs comprised of 15 founders and five annual qualifiers.” Well, good luck with that. There is, of course, an alternative theory. After all, the Super League is still not quite dead in a legislative sense; certainly not if you believe the loud and persistent avowals of Andrea Agnelli at Juventus, Joan Laporta at Barcelona and Florentino Pérez at Real Madrid, the three remaining hoarse men of the apocalypse. Meanwhile the impulses that generated the Super League – greed, inequality, shifting financial models, Covid – have not disappeared. Perhaps on reflection, that the Super League website is still up is not an oversight, but a warning. The junking of the Super League may have been a rare moment of harmony in a toxically clannish game – and really, it takes some effort to unite the commentariat, the players, the coaches, the broadcasters, the vast majority of the clubs and the vast majority of fans in revulsion at your product. But in the days and weeks afterwards fans talked openly of a new compact in football, a renegotiated and more equitable power settlement that placed supporters and communities at its heart. As we near the end of one of the most tumultuous and rancourous years in the history of football, how’s that going? In order to answer that question let’s start at Oldham, who banned three of their own fans from Boundary Park for “promoting dislike” against the club’s owner, Abdallah Lemsagam, before reversing their decision amid a widespread backlash. In his three years in charge, Lemsagam has overseen nine managerial changes and a drop to 23rd in League Two. Explaining his original decision (taken from his home in Dubai), Lemsagam offered this reasoning: “If they are not behaving like every person just watching the game, they deserve to be banned. If you want to protest, nobody can stop you. But why can’t I also ban you?” In a way, this is the basic ideological faultline of modern football: what is a club and who does it belong to? The romantic will tell you a club is the sum total of its people and its history, that players and coaches pass through but fans remain true, that owners are no more than custodians preserving the institution for the next generation. The three briefly banned fans may feel that Oldham are more their club than Lemsagam’s. But the Companies House filings will tell a very different story. This is why any attempt to frame the power imbalance in football as one of bigger clubs against smaller clubs, or even bigger leagues and smaller leagues, often obscures as much as it illuminates. Part of the ideological opposition to the Super League was based on the idea of football as a pyramid: a linked whole driving not just investment but aspiration and hope. But within this structure all sorts of complex smaller battles are being fought: between fans and owners, fans and other fans, players and governing bodies, clubs and agents, clubs and broadcasters, broadcasters and fans. The economist Paul Mason argues that football is not so much a pyramid as a “class struggle”: between fans and players on one side, and the massed ranks of owners, broadcasters, the financial sector and big tech on the other. If one side possesses most of the fervour, the talent and the human emotion, the other side owns pretty much everything else. To modern capitalism, football is essentially a product to be sold, generated, grown, disseminated. Anything that distracts from this fundamental goal – player welfare, fan sentiment, 3pm kick-offs – must by extension be suppressed. The Super League crystallised this vision perfectly. Too perfectly: in explicitly stating its intention to convert 65 years of European football history into a sort of fungible on-demand content stream, an enclosed circus, a Vegas residency, it horrified not just long-standing “legacy” fans but also advocates of the status quo. The snap-back has been modest but not inconsequential. Manchester United’s first ever fan advisory board will meet in January with Joel Glazer in attendance. Liverpool and Chelsea have announced similar plans. None of this would have happened without the Super League. So is this a defining moment? Have the owners of the biggest clubs undergone a Damascene conversion to democracy? Or was it merely an attempt to stave off the more far-reaching reforms proposed by the government’s fan-led review, which was unveiled last month with proposals for an independent regulator and a levy on Premier League transfer fees? The fierce backlash to the latter proposals from some owners – the Leeds chief executive, Angus Kinnear, derided them as “Maoist” – suggests any meaningful change in the game will have to be won over the stiffest resistance. And besides, what are the available vehicles for change? Fifa? National governments? Fan boycotts? Good luck with any of that. What is certainly true is that the appetite for change is there. Breaking with football’s traditional model of saturation and endless growth is no longer a niche opinion but a mainstream opinion. “Football must change quickly,” the Real Madrid manager, Carlo Ancelotti, said in a recent interview. “The quality of the show has dropped a lot. The players cannot take it any more. Fatigue, injuries, games that end 10-0. Enough is enough.” This is not a conversation we were having 20 years or even five years ago. But of course, everyone agrees on the need for change. It is the direction that is contested. For people such as Pérez, Ancelotti’s boss, the answer to competitive imbalance is simply for Madrid to stop playing teams such as Elche and Leganés (“I do not think it’s more attractive to watch unfamiliar teams,” he said during the infamous El Chiringuito interview in April). The answer to player fatigue is to reduce games to 45 or 60 minutes with plenty of ad breaks for the broadcasters. The Super League itself may have been defeated but its ideas continue to triumph everywhere. In April, Uefa quietly pushed through its new 36-team Champions League format that provides an even bigger safety net to the biggest clubs. Juventus and Paris Saint-Germain may have been toppled in Italy and France, but elsewhere established giants firmly laid to rest any notion that Covid might offer a temporary levelling of the playing field. Sheriff Tiraspol made it six titles in a row in Moldova, Red Bull Salzburg eight in a row in Austria, Bayern Munich nine in a row in Germany, Ludogorets 10 in a row in Bulgaria. Across Europe, clubs are partnering with cryptocurrency companies with the sole intention of further milking their fanbases for cash. In England, virus-emaciated squads are being forced to play three games in a week because nobody is brave or foolish enough to slow down the gravy train. And yet even in these grim days of midwinter, it remains possible to glimpse something better. The Super League protests showed us that when fans and players and genuine football lovers speak with a single voice, not even the most powerful men in the game can thwart them. Eight months on, much of that initial energy may have diffused and dissipated, but the will to change football for the better has not subsided. In time, we may come back to look on 2021 as the year when football’s silent majority finally, tentatively, discovered its voice.However incompatible they superficially appear, the link between English cricket and Christmas has blossomed since the moment their first travelling team docked in Melbourne on 24 December 1861. But the visitors’ yuletide experience has changed considerably from the days when WG Grace visited in 1873 and spent Christmas Day hunting, unsuccessfully, for kangaroo before enjoying “a good, long, late night”. Or the apparently less enjoyable trip 24 years later when Ted Wainwright, the Yorkshire all-rounder, mournfully informed his teammates over lunch: “I wish I was back in the little cottage turning the meat.” On the Bodyline tour of 1932-33, Douglas Jardine spent the big day fishing in Tasmania, a turn of events the local tourist board considered so exciting they issued a commemorative postcard. In 1936 the tourists, already away from home for more than three months, celebrated with particular gusto – although “some confessed they would rather be among the snow and sleet of England” than at the team’s Christmas dinner in a private room at Usher’s hotel in Sydney, where “all formality was dropped, and there was much good-natured banter and singing” – being as they were 2-0 up in a five-Test series. They lost the next three. The Boxing Day Test has become, in the words of Mark Butcher, “a major part of cricketing folklore”, but it was a surprisingly recent addition to the calendar. England and Australia first met on that date in 1950, when the second Test resumed on 26 December after two days off. The following year, West Indies played Test cricket on Christmas Day itself, which one tourist declared “sacrilegious” and was not much more popular with the home side. “I have never played on Christmas Day before in my life and don’t like having to do so now,” an unnamed Australian said. The first Test to start on Boxing Day followed 18 years later, and the first time England had a go was 1974. Since 1980 only four Australian summers have been without one – 1984, 1988 and 1994 – when Tests started before Christmas and resumed afterwards, and the fallow year of 1989, when Australia played an ODI against Sri Lanka instead. Between 1980 and 1985 there were four draws in six years and in this period the MCG was heavily criticised for everything from the quality of pitches to their toilet facilities. Thankfully, as the Guardian reported in 1981, “the Melbourne public are said to be willing to watch anything”, and in 1982 the nascent tradition was boosted by “one of the most consistently thrilling Tests of all time”. It was the first to feature four innings that all ended within 10 runs of each other, was on a knife-edge from the start and never left, and remains the joint third closest in history. It ended with Australia needing 292 to win but after Norman Cowans, playing his third Test and having taken a total of one wicket in his first two, had snaffled his sixth of the second innings to dismiss Rodney Hogg they were 74 away as their last batter, Jeff Thomson, came out to join Allan Border. “The rest of the blokes in our dressing room thought I would have a slog and get out. But it didn’t happen that way,” Thomson said. “I can still picture the England side’s growing anxiety. They had stupid fields, bowled badly and everything was in the batsmen’s favour.” After a couple of rain delays they were still 37 away at the end of day four, and 18,000 people turned up to see them edge towards their target the following morning. Australia were just four away when Ian Botham bowled to Thomson. “It was a half-tracker and a bit of an away swinger. A bad ball, really,” Thomson said. “I just tried to push it for a single rather than smash it. All I did was get an edge.” The ball flew straight to Chris Tavaré at second slip, who caught it with his left hand but couldn’t hold it; Geoff Miller at first slip grabbed it before it fell to earth. “I couldn’t talk about it for years,” said Thomson. “It was one of the all-time low moments in my life.” In the crowd, attending his first Test, a 13-year-old Shane Warne sat transfixed; he went on to play 10 Boxing Day Tests, took a hat-trick as England were beaten in 1994, and now has a statue outside the ground. Of the 10 MCG Boxing Day Tests England have won four, lost four and drawn two, making it a particularly fertile fixture. The other Ashes classic came in 1998. An Australia side already 2-0 up in the series and apparently coasting to victory, set just 175 to win and at one point 103 for two, were derailed by “their own complacency and an astounding effort from the England pace attack”, in the words of the Guardian’s Mike Selvey. It ended with a mammoth four-hour session which ended after Mark Taylor decided, with seven wickets down and just 13 needed, to claim a discretionary half-hour to complete Australia’s victory. England promptly took three in five balls to win by 12. Where once visiting English cricketers were hunters, this year’s tourists seem to have spent most of their trip being hunted. However their Christmas ends, though, it will have looked very different to the one the players experienced in 1903, when before going to the theatre on Christmas Eve they were taken on a tour of Sydney’s opium and gambling dens. “Interesting to see,” Sussex’s Bert Relf wrote. “Would not go again.”Liverpool It’s going pretty much how most Liverpool fans expected: we’re up at the top and we cruised through the Champions League group stage to the knockouts. We’re playing some brilliant football and we’re a joy to watch. We’ve had our big names back from injury, which has boosted confidence, and, when we do go behind, the belief is there that we’ll score and score again, and usually go on to win. 9/10 Stars/flops Mo Salah is the obvious standout performer and remains on another level to anyone else in the league. It’s a thrill and privilege to watch him play every week. We’re finally seeing how brilliant Thiago is and new signing Konaté is already proving he’ll go on to be a major player. A word, too, for young Tyler Morton who has been eased into the team and really shown his potential. As for flops? I seem to have been saying this for some time but we really don’t have any. Happy with the manager? He has elevated us to Europe’s most revered and feared team. He makes us smile in our play and his actions. We could have no better boss. 10/10 We will finish … 1st. Funniest moment in 2021? During the games against Atlético Madrid, seeing Diego Simeone reduced from touchline hard case to panto villain. Oh, and Fred lunging at a laughing Konaté at Old Trafford, sending himself viral. • Steph Jones Manchester City I don’t think it could have gone much better. We’re top of the tree at Christmas, three points clear of Liverpool, topped our Champions League group (ahead of PSG) and have managed our squad really well. The only real disappointment so far was getting knocked out of our beloved Carabao. 9.5/10 Stars/flops Plenty of stars. But the standout, without doubt, has been Bernardo Silva. He and Salah are comfortably the best players in the league this season. He’s always been a one-man pressing machine, a mesmeric dribbler, and capable of dictating the pace of a game on his own, but this season he’s added goals and assists. He can literally do everything. Cancelo and Rodri definitely deserve mentions too. Both have taken their games to another level. Happy with the manager? Of course. Pep has proven yet again that he’s the best in the business. Klopp is a close second and Liverpool’s resurgence is mightily impressive, but Pep’s consistency and relentlessness is unrivalled. I thought the lack of a striker would hamper us – Pep really wanted a No 9 and I thought he’d struggle to keep the striker-less system fresh – but he’s done it. He has us perfectly positioned going into 2022. 10/10. We will finish … 1st. Funniest moment in 2021? Ole being at the wheel. I think I speak on behalf of all City fans when I say I’m gutted that era is over. It was a great laugh. Oh, and people seriously tipping United for the title in August. • Lloyd Scragg ninetythreetwenty.com; @lloyd_scragg Manchester United It’s been awful. Many of us expected to be legitimate title challengers after finishing second last season and adding Varane, Sancho and Ronaldo. Going top after Ronaldo’s second debut against Newcastle added to that sense. So what followed beggared belief. The 5-0 defeat to Liverpool was the worst, most humiliating loss in living memory. It was clear for a while that the players had stopped playing for the manager: Ole should have walked then rather than wait for further defeats to City and, embarrassingly, Watford. 2/10 Stars/flops We’ve become over-reliant on Ronaldo but Greenwood and a rejuvenated De Gea have been the best out of a poor bunch. Varane’s injury was a blow: he steadied a flapping defence bereft of any confidence. Flops? Bruno has been way below his usual standard but his mediocre performances are nothing compared with the pathetic fare served up by Wan Bissaka and captain Maguire. Both consistently woeful. Happy with the manager? It’s too early to rate him but he talks a good game. I admired his comments about players not wanting to be at the club, and him saying: “I don’t communicate with agents via the media and press.” I hope he clears the decks of the wage thieves and will address the lack of quality in the midfield. We will finish … 4th. Funniest moment in 2021? The reaction of rivals when we re-signed Ronaldo on that Friday afternoon in August. It really lifted our spirits in what seems otherwise like a really drab 12 months of football. • Shaun O’Donnell Newcastle One win in 18, calamitous defending, rotten luck and some troubling refereeing … it’s been a nightmare, even by our standards. But Ashley’s departure and Eddie Howe’s appointment lifted the mood. Home matches no longer reek of toxicity and, at times, the atmosphere has been electric. Yes, the short-term prognosis is dire and it’ll take a long time to emerge from Ashley’s shadow, but the future looks brighter than it has in years – whether we are relegated or not. There is hope. 2/10 Stars/flops Callum Wilson is a true Newcastle No 9: vital to the cause. But our error-prone defenders – especially Jamaal Lascelles and Ciaran Clark – are threatening our Premier League status and, sadly, Joe Willock hasn’t lived up to his promise. In truth, after years of neglect, we’re lacking in real quality all over the pitch. There are too many Championship level players in the current squad. Happy with the manager? Howe “gets” Newcastle and has the respect of our fans. The team look fitter and more positive going forward … and he seems to have turned the much-maligned Joelinton into a world beater… At 4-0 down against Man City, we were singing “Eddie Howe’s black and white army”, which says it all. 7/10. As for Steve Bruce, we’re surprised he didn’t get the Manchester United job, given the esteem the football intelligentsia seem to hold him in… 2/10 We will finish … 17th. That’s with huge investment in January, and a miraculous turnaround. Funniest moment in 2021? Local lad Sam Fender’s hungover appearance on BBC Breakfast the morning after the takeover was completed. Fair play, he did well to get through it. • David and Richard Holmes Norwich We’re bottom, we’ve been there for most of the season, we’ve scored eight goals and have been ridiculed by everyone from the MotD crew to that bloke on Twitter who reckons we should declare and hand back our Premier League cash. It’s been grim, basically. As is invariably the case when we breathe in this refined air, we’ve struggled to compete. It seems our “self-funding” model, however worthy, is incompatible with being competitive at this level. 3/10 Stars/flops Mathias Normann – a summer loan signing from Rostov – has been the pick of the bunch but in typical Norwich fashion managed to pick up a pelvic injury just when he’d really started to make a difference. Ditto Milot Rashica who, after a slow start, found a rich vein of form before, you guessed it, picking up an injury that ruled him out for all of December. Happy with the manager? Dean Smith has an unenviable task but, armed with a squad that is simply not good enough, has made a decent enough start. 6/10. Daniel Farke was brilliant at getting us promoted but unable to work his magic in the Premier League. We will finish … 20th. Funniest moment in 2021? Laughs have been limited in Norfolk, so my thanks to Leeds fans who, while watching their team getting pumped by Arsenal, found it in their hearts to speak for the nation with a song about Boris Johnson. Not repeatable but it was both amusing and spot-on. • Gary Gowers myfootballwriter.com; @Gary_Gowers; @MFW_NCFC Southampton Performances have largely been fine but instinctively it feels that results haven’t quite matched them – despite taking seven more points compared with the corresponding games last season. That’s probably a result of the ever-growing but ever-tedious “points dropped from winning positions” statistic. If we could hold on to a lead we’d be comfortably in the top half and very happy with life. 6/10 Stars/flops Mohammed Salisu and Tino Livramento have stood out in a defence that has often struggled as a collective. Armando Broja has scored some important goals at the other end in a relatively unproductive attack, while Che Adams’ displays have been better than his goal return would suggest. On the flipside, Jan Bednarek has regressed and captain James Ward-Prowse – following a bumper new contract in September – hasn’t been up to his usual high standards. Happy with the manager? Reasonably. He still makes some baffling selections and can still be too slow to react to opposition changes, but we are pretty well-drilled. He’s also now the longest-serving Saints manager since Chris Nichol in the 80s, which says quite a lot – not much of it positive – about the club over the last 30 years or so. 6.5/10 We will finish … 12th. Funniest moment in 2021? I was a big fan of the whole England setup winding up the Conservative party during the Euros, and the government flailing desperately to row back on the criticism as we progressed further in the tournament. Funny in many aspects but also a sad indictment on modern life and governance, I guess. • Steve Grant SaintsWeb.co.uk; @SteveGrant1983 Tottenham The Tottenham rollercoaster. You have no choice but to get on it and no way of getting off it. From Kane in Disneyland to the misguided appointment of “nice guy” Nuno to then finally getting our man. No, not Mauricio; Antonio. Conte is the jolt Spurs have been desperate for. With games in hand we’re in contention for the top four – even in crisis, we still find a way to potentially gatecrash. Conte will fix us but it will take time. 8/10 for Spursyness, 6/10 for the mess we’ve allowed Antonio to inherit. Stars/flops Eric Dier, Ben Davies and Oliver Skipp have excelled: proof that Conte can reboot players. Tanguy Ndombele continues to be benched, not because he lacks talent, but because, like Dele Alli, he doesn’t quite fit. Unless they too are rebooted. Future acquisitions need to blend into the blueprint. Happy with the manager? Nuno was a cursed placeholder. 4/10 is the most diplomatic score I can offer him. Conte? We are blessed. His obsessive mentality is what we need: a culture-defining appointment. 9/10 for simply getting him in our colours. We will finish … 4th, because I wear my heart on my sleeve. I’m a romantic fool. Covid, postponements and the impact on training make it improbable that we’ll find the momentum, but … well, this is THFC. We often do the opposite of what everyone expects. Funniest moment in 2021? Getting beaten by Zagreb, whose manager was in prison, was a glorious moment of dark comedy. A very special moment indeed, would you agree, José? • Spooky dearmrlevy.com; thefightingcock.co.uk; @spooky23 Watford Some things haven’t gone well, some things haven’t worked and perspective is always shaped by the most recent events … So, overall “could have been a lot better, could have been worse” sums it up. 5/10 Stars/flops Emmanuel Dennis has grown from being an occasionally effective irritant to consistently top class. Also Moussa Sissoko, more captainy with every game, is dominant in a reworked midfield. Less successful have been Danny Rose, who has been very decent sometimes but less than decent too often, and William Troost-Ekong, who has suffered a crisis of confidence in our volatile defence. Happy with the manager? Results haven’t really improved but that disguises the stark contrast between the relatively gentle opening to the season and a daunting run more recently, at just the point when a rejuvenated side under Ranieri might have picked up some momentum. We recorded our first win at Everton, thrashed United, scared Chelsea and limited a rampant Man City to 3-1. We now have a presentable, credible side with a couple of things that aren’t quite working. Progress. 7/10 We will finish … 14th. Funniest moment in 2021? Bournemouth’s collapse was enjoyed and celebrated far and wide. And Tyrone Mings’ own goal on the opening day – via a perversely unlucky deflection – also had a touch of karma about it. Two years ago he somehow escaped a red card against us at Villa Park before unwittingly scoring a last-minute winner when Ezri Konsa’s shot deflected in off his backside. • Matt Rowson bhappy.wordpress.com; @mattrowson West Ham There’s been a slight slump recently but we’ve progressed with surprising ease in the Europa League and been challenging for the top four. With fans back, the London Stadium has finally started to feel more like home and West Ham have at times been massive (everywhere we go), beating Spurs, Man United, Man City, Liverpool and Chelsea, which is unprecedented. The only downside is that the squad is now looking stretched. 8/10 Stars/flops Declan Rice has looked the league’s best defensive midfielder, gliding through matches and adding a great turn of pace. He’s also had a social media hit with Rice Baby. Credit also to Jarrod Bowen, who’s on fire and, erm, dating Dani Dyer, Antonio, Fornals, Benrahma, Johnson and the unsung Craig Dawson. Relative flops have been Soucek, who looks very tired, and new signings Vlasic and Kral, though it’s early days. Happy with the manager? He has transformed the club, taking us from relegation fodder to contenders for a Champions League place. We very rarely have two good seasons in a row, but so far Moyes has bucked that trend. Should he get us to a cup final the party could rival one of Boris’s. But as he says, having set high standards, the players have to keep them up. The only gripe is Moyes’ failure to secure a back-up striker in the summer. 8/10 We will finish … 7th. The pressure on our small squad is likely to tell with Zouma and Ogbonna out, and having Antonio as our only striker. Funniest moment in 2021? Arthur Masuaku proving that he really is better than Lukaku with that late winner against Chelsea. Don’t be fooled by Arthur’s false modesty – he definitely saw Mendy off his line and scored with a sublime Messi-like chip. • Pete May Author, Goodbye to Boleyn; hammersintheheart.blogspot.co.uk Wolves Better than expected. I was worried about Nuno being replaced by a new coach with little reputation, and by only minor surgery to a squad that limped home last season. But Lage has proved an astute tactician, the new players have done well and we’ve been a highly competitive outfit. Not too shabby at all. 8/10 Stars/flops Max Kilman has graduated from squad filler to first-team regular and looks like a top Premier League defender. Behind him José Sá had big boots to fill replacing Rui Patrício but has been an upgrade in almost every respect. It’s harsh to call them flops but Traoré, Trincão and Podence haven’t managed a single league goal between them and our attacking output has been poor. Happy with the manager? 9/10. You just have to look at the group of players he’s working with and the level of competition. He’s done about as well as anyone could expect. He wants to be progressive in possession but is also wise enough to know he has to play to the team’s strengths. We will finish … 9th. I’ve seen enough to believe we can hold our own in the mid-table scrap but Europe will probably be out of reach unless we make some decent additions in January. Historically, we don’t do much so I’m not holding my breath. Funniest moment in 2021? Raúl’s viral failed Rabona gave me a chuckle. His comeback has been one of football’s feelgood stories this year and he’s looked like he’s really enjoying his football – maybe a bit too much on that occasion… • Thomas Baugh wolvesblog.com; @wolvesblog • Part one: Arsenal to LeicesterAs Simone Biles entered the Ariake Gymnastics Centre for the women’s team final at the Tokyo Olympics, the eyes of the sporting world slowly fixated on her. She was, to many, the most dominant athlete in the world and the greatest gymnast in history, undefeated in the all-around, team and floor competitions since 2013. She had pushed the boundaries of the sport even further throughout the summer and after winning four gold medals and a bronze in Rio, it was the start of what could have been the final, crowning moment of her career. Instead, what unfolded that evening was astonishing. On her first event in the team final, the vault, Biles completely lost track of herself in the air as she attempted her 2.5 twisting Yurchenko vault, one of her most trusted skills. After aborting the skill and somehow avoiding injury, Biles disappeared from the competition floor with her national team staff. When Biles eventually returned, she huddled with her teammates, and then she was done. After the competition, Biles could have avoided speaking in depth or even walked straight past the journalists in the mixed zone. Instead, numerous reporters departed in awe of what they had heard after she openly explained her mental health struggles. Asked exactly why she decided not to compete, her response was clear: “To focus on my wellbeing,” she said. “There is more to life than just gymnastics.” Later that evening, during the official press conference, her teammates rallied around her and offered their unending support. Biles had followed in the footsteps of Naomi Osaka, whom she referenced, by placing discussions about mental health in the centre of sports. As with Osaka, another prominent black woman, it immediately led to predictable backlash and scorn across social media. But Biles remained resolute and in the following days her issues became clearer. She had developed the twisties, which occurs when a gymnast’s mind and body are out of sync, rendering them unable to complete certain skills safely. Biles had completely lost her air-awareness during her twisting skills so continuing to compete meant there was an extremely high chance of her falling and injuring herself, possibly seriously. Each day brought news of Biles withdrawing from another event, but she would still travel to the arena for each final and cheer louder than anyone else for her compatriots and rivals from other countries alike. Behind the scenes, Biles was secretly doing everything in her power to return. She located a private gym outside of the Olympic Village and each day she would safely attempt her skills into its foam pits. At no point in Tokyo did she regain her twisting ability, but Biles decided to remove all of the twists from her balance beam routine and attempt to compete on the very final day of competition. After days of hearing her mental strength questioned, Biles returned to competition and threw down an extremely clean routine to earn a bronze medal despite the diminished difficulty level. Over the past few years, so much has happened to Biles that led to the events in Tokyo. She has competed at the highest level since 2013, an eternity in women’s gymnastics. Even though she has avoided any lengthy injury layoffs, which are common in gymnastics, so many years of pounding her muscles and joints in training has left a painful mark on her body. After nearing what finally seemed an appropriate finish line for her career, she was distraught when the pandemic pushed the Olympics back by a year. Meanwhile, Biles continued to compete and cement her greatness while coming to terms with being a very public survivor of sexual abuse by the former US team doctor Larry Nassar, who also abused many of her former teammates. She wrestled with the reality that she could only continue to chase her personal goals in her sport by representing USA Gymnastics, the organisation that had failed to protect her. That she was the last remaining survivor on the team only increased the pressure she felt to continue to compete and hold the governing body to account. As Biles collected her medal on 3 August and digested her thoughts, she was not yet prepared to fully embrace the narrative that she had ended her week triumphantly. Speaking afterwards, she finished most comments by noting that despite her pride at bouncing back, it “sucked” she had to withdraw from so many events. Beyond the medals and golds, after all of her efforts to make it to Tokyo, it was crushing that she simply could not perform as she wished. But in the months since she returned home, with time and space, Biles has come to fully understand the impact of her decisions. She cherishes the bronze medal and the fortitude it took to gain it. She has said that she often felt in recent years she was competing for other people, and here she decided for herself. In a sport known for creating a toxic culture of overtraining and competing with injuries, she has shown a generation of new gymnasts the importance of prioritising safety and wellbeing. After spending so many years changing her sport within the confines of the competition floor, she did so again by stepping away from it.It was a year of promises and postponements, of dodgy mask-wearing in the stalls – and of sudden soarings. It was no surprise that Rebecca Frecknall’s spectacular production of Cabaret, with Jessie Buckley and Eddie Redmayne, should prove one of the big excitements of the year – and one of the most expensive. But who in the Pre-Puppet Era (before The Sultan’s Elephant and War Horse) would have thought that a three-and-a-half-metre-tall creature made of wicker and fabric would prove such a powerful reminder of how the theatre can stir hearts and stretch eyes? Little Amal, the child-refugee puppet who walked from the Syrian-Turkish border to Manchester, was pelted with stones in Greece, danced in Trafalgar Square, became an ambassador for political change – and for the imagination. She was a reminder of how theatrical truth does not depend on naturalism: as were the small white daemon puppets that lit up the stage like Chinese lanterns in Bryony Lavery’s adaptation of Philip Pullman’s La Belle Sauvage, and the marvellous driftwood creations that scuttled and sashayed through Lolita Chakrabarti’s version of Life of Pi. Ingenious adaptations of prose and verse provided some of the best theatrical nights. Often with a feminist twist. Zadie Smith brilliantly reworked Chaucer in The Wife of Willesden – showing there is no new lewdness under the sun and allowing Clare Perkins to display her tremendous acting gifts. Emma Rice brought swagger and musicality to her version of Wuthering Heights, with Nandi Bhebhe gusting and gutsy as the spirit of the moor. And in Pride and Prejudice* (*sort of), Isobel McArthur reworked Jane Austen from the viewpoint of her unnamed servants, rocking the plots karaoke-style, with Lizzie Bennet crooning You’re So Vain to Darcy. In further female claiming of the stage, Cush Jumbo triumphed when she became Hamlet in Greg Hersov’s jumbled production: thrillingly intertwining derangement and pretended madness, she was a perfect prince. After a surfeit of lockdown Zoom drama, I met no one who was much looking forward to a big Covid play. We were spared that – and treated to much longed-for buoyancy – but directors did not flinch from examining harsh times. Nicolas Kent and Richard Norton-Taylor’s staging of the Grenfell Tower inquiry was a revelation: verbatim, detailed testimony; functional design; acting so transparent that the word performance seemed out of place; an evening that made you long for similar treatments of some of our current disgraces. The Lyric Hammersmith staked a claim to be at the forefront of new writing. Under the overarching title Out West, three short plays by Tanika Gupta, Simon Stephens and Roy Williams, directed by Rachel O’Riordan and Diane Page on a bare wood set, had a long reach, speaking strongly of past and present prejudice. Modern dilemmas also glinted in surprising places. In Blanche McIntyre’s production of Measure for Measure, a ruler was shown holding himself and his citizens to entirely different standards. Carousel at Regent’s Park Open Air theatre and, at Chichester, South Pacific were rethought musically and visually; the lushness of their scores was shown to fly against the bitter depiction of violent men and racism. At the end of the year, James Graham again proved why he has become so vital for the theatre. In Best of Enemies he produced a marvel of a play – which looked back to the 60s and forward to the future, examining the point at which debate turns to poisonous rant. It was a buoyant example of what he has been advocating during the pandemic: work that bowls over boundaries – financial, geographical, racial, psychological. Will we ever have an arts minister who minds so much and speaks so cogently? The top 10 theatre shows of 2021 1. The Walk Throughout Europe, London, Manchester Magnificent Little Amal, the child refugee puppet who evoked wonder and sorrow on her 5,000-mile walk. 2. Best of Enemies Young Vic, London (until 22 January) Charles Edwards and David Harewood shone in James Graham’s dynamic culture-clash drama. 3. Cabaret The Kit Kat Club at the Playhouse theatre, London (until 1 October) Rebecca Frecknall’s explosive production starring Jessie Buckley, Eddie Redmayne and Tom Scutt’s immersive design. 4. Wuthering Heights Bristol Old Vic/York Theatre Royal Emma Rice’s fiery remaking of Brontë. 5. Value Engineering Tabernacle, London Revelatory reconstruction of the Grenfell Tower hearing. 6. Hymn Almeida, London Adrian Lester and Danny Sapani both magnetic in Lolita Chakrabarti’s play. 7. Wife of Willesden Kiln, London (until 15 January) Zadie Smith’s centuries-leaping translation of Chaucer, with blazing Clare Perkins. 8. South Pacific Chichester Festival theatre Daniel Evans directed an enchanted, threatening evening. 9. Pride and Prejudice* (*sort of) Criterion, London (until 17 April) Deliciously frisky karaoke Austen. 10. The Book of Dust: La Belle Sauvage Bridge, London Witty and whirling staging with new star Samuel Creasey. Turkey Manor Lyttelton, London It creaked.Arsenal Going into Boxing Day in fourth is more than we could have hoped after our worst start ever. The recovery has definitely been helped by the inconsistency of others but, in the chaos of the pandemic, most of us are just grateful to be able to witness some genuinely scintillating football. There’s enough appetite, intensity and resolve on show to inspire even the most fickle among the Arsenal faithful. 7/10 Stars/flops Tomiyasu, Tavares, White and Lokonga have settled well, and Aaron Ramsdale’s exuberant personality has made him an instant favourite. But above all it’s the chemistry between Martinelli, Saka and Smith Rowe which has us full of optimism. As for negatives: Pépé is increasingly looking like a £72m write-off, and it’s sad to see Auba’s time here come to such an ignominious end. Happy with the manager? He’s treading that gossamer fine line, only ever a couple of poor performances away from losing credibility. His uncompromising nature can be a positive but, with Auba joining the ranks of Torreira, Guendouzi and Saliba, it’s worrying that there’s no way back for players who fall foul of him, especially when resources aren’t as big as those of some rivals. 7/10 We will finish … Top six. Anything else would be a huge let-down. Funniest moment in 2021? Hearing the year’s best song – “Tottenham getting battered everywhere they go” – really catch on. • Bernard Azulay goonersdiary.co.uk @GoonerN5 Aston Villa Given we’ve lost the best player in a generation and the best manager in 10 years, it’s surprising to be calling this a 7/10 start. Gerrard has just begun so well. We’re a work in progress – tactically we have to evolve and new blood is needed – but, with some players standing two inches taller under the new regime, there’s plenty of room for optimism. This was always a crucial season: keeping Konsa and Watkins is only likely if we carry on making progress – but I’m mildly confident that this first Gerrard month hasn’t just been a honeymoon. Stars/flops Konsa is a rock and Cash is our best full-back since Mark Delaney. I’m gutted for Marvelous Nakamba, who was outstanding before getting crocked. Jacob Ramsey is on the sharpest upwards curve of all, though, a thrusting midfielder who could be really special. The new arrivals have all taken a while to settle in but Buendía has turned the corner. Less sure about Bailey and Ings. Happy with the manager? It was sad Dean Smith was given such a short rope – he’ll never want for a pint in north Birmingham again. But Gerrard has wowed most Villa fans, both on and off the pitch. We’ve improved, won where we’d have lost earlier in the season, and he’s really impressed me with the way he shrugs off the tedious journalistic obsession with his Liverpool past. And when he talks, he seems to have watched the same game I’ve just watched, which can’t be said for all managers. 8/10 We will finish … 9th. Funniest moment in 2021? Not sidesplitting, maybe, but bang on for fan sentiment against the Super League: the “we want our cold nights in Stoke” banner made by Chelsea fans. • Jonathan Pritchard Brentford So far, I’m very pleased with how it’s gone, especially as we have no barometer to measure against. Exciting wins against Arsenal and West Ham and nail-biters against Liverpool and Chelsea have set the entertainment bar very high. Injuries have floored us but we’re still chiselling points out. If you told me a year ago that Brentford would be 12th going into our first Christmas in the Premier League with games in hand, I would have laughed in your face. 8/10 Stars/flops Ivan Toney is a machine. He puts in a shift every match all over the pitch. Nørgaard has been class and Janelt is incredible – he never gives up. Also a shout to Rico Henry, who has taken his game to another level recently. It’s been harder for sixth-in-line centre-back Charlie Goode and back-up keeper Fernández, who were parachuted in due to injuries. Both have had tricky starts to their Premier League careers, but are learning fast. Happy with the manager? He’s done a fantastic job with a paper-thin squad and the league’s smallest budget. He’s comfortable going toe-to-toe with top coaches, switching it up if needed and isn’t afraid to take a risk. And he gets Brentford. Love him. 9/10. We will finish … If we get our injured players back by March, I’d like to think we’ll finish the season as brightly as we started. Glass half full says 14th. Funniest moment in 2021? I could be churlish and say Fulham being relegated a year after mocking us for losing in the play-off final. But I won’t. I still chuckle at the time we recorded a podcast at the Globe pub with our directors of football, Rasmus Ankersen and Phil Giles, in front of a live audience then surprised them as we put them on the spot about a future signing they thought was under wraps – Frank Onyeka. The pub roared with laughter as Rasmus was completely tongue-tied trying to talk his way out of that one. • Billy Grant Beesotted podcast and blog; @Beesotted; @BillyTheBee99 Brighton We started so well – the talk even turned to Europa League qualification. But then we stopped scoring. If we don’t beat Brentford we’ll have gone 100 days without a victory: an unbelievable run given that we’re still playing incredibly entertaining football and fell out of the top half only this month. We just need one win to get ourselves back on track. 7/10 Stars/flops Leandro Trossard has been our standout player; he scored the winner at Brentford in September and hopefully he can do it again as we host them. It’s been wonderful to see Shane Duffy thriving on his return from Celtic, Joel Veltman works hard every week and big-hearted Solly March creates chances. But it’s hard to be super scary and fired up without the injured Lewis Dunk. And Aaron Connolly should be moved on: it really isn’t happening for him. Happy with the manager? We’re privileged to have him. He’s instilled class and fight - and he comes across as a really decent guy in interviews. He’s smart, has the all-round welfare of the players at heart and stood his ground admirably after a few ridiculous boos following the draw with Leeds. It was heartening to see the applause he got at West Ham. 8/10 We will finish … 9th. Funniest moment in 2021? Maupay’s stunning 89th-minute equaliser on 1 December against West Ham. Fan site We Are Brighton noted: “Nothing in this world is certain except death, taxes and West Ham not beating Brighton.” And on a personal level, realising I was about to get my first tattoo from a Palace fan. Eek. • Steph Fincham Burnley It’s hard to be pleased with how it’s going. We’ve won just once and the bottom three at Christmas is never a good place to be. The results have been a continuation of the second half of last season, which brought us only 17 points. Performances have been better than the results – but it’s results that will determine whether we stay in the division. It’s not great off the field, either: there’s a lack of communication with the supporters’ organisations since the takeover. We need big improvements. 4/10 Stars/flops Undoubtedly the big star has been Maxwel Cornet, signed from Lyon in August: an exciting talent. Nathan Collins, another summer arrival, has really impressed and looks a real prospect in defence. Charlie Taylor has also been outstanding in so many games this season. A few have struggled, though: Chris Wood hasn’t looked the same player this season – representing New Zealand at the Olympics probably didn’t help. He’s still scored three goals, though: we need a return from the other strikers. Happy with the manager? He’s having a tough spell but he’s done a great job over nine years here. He just needs backing during this difficult time. 7/10 We will finish … Hopefully, 17th or higher. But I doubt it’ll be much higher. Funniest moment in 2021? It’s hard to laugh when you’ve lost but Newcastle’s reaction to beating us – a lap of honour and dressing-room celebratory photos – really was funny. • Tony Scholes UpTheClarets.com, @utcdotcom Chelsea It’s been a solid first half of the season. Recent form has been a disappointment – defeat at West Ham at the start of December, plus draws with Everton and Wolves – but overall we have to be happy to be in the top four at this stage. Until the recent stumble we were probably exceeding expectations, leading the table for a good couple of months above two excellent teams in City and Liverpool. 8/10 Stars/flops Reece James, Thiago Silva, Ben Chilwell and a resurgent Mason Mount are the pick so far: Mount has added some much-needed goals to his impressive work rate and, once again, Silva is just oozing class at the back. As for flops: Saúl, on loan from Atlético Madrid, has really found the Premier League a tough gig; Lukaku started well but has failed to impress lately; and Pulisic continues to struggle with form, fitness and limited minutes. Happy with the manager? Tuchel appears as frustrated as the rest of us with the way things have been going recently but he knows what he’s doing. If he can crack getting past the parked buses and get our forwards firing we’ll have a successful second half of the season. 8/10 We will finish … 3rd. Funniest moment in 2021? Rüdiger charging down the pitch like Usain Bolt to join in the post-match melee with the Leeds players this month was hilarious. He loves a tear-up. • Paul Baker in memory of Trizia Fiorellino Crystal Palace With so many players off in the summer, and the search for a manager taking so long, plenty were tipping us to finish bottom this season. So in short, it’s gone far better than anyone expected. The style of football has been an utter transformation: dominating possession, playing out from the back – unimaginable in the grind of the last campaign. To a man all of the new signings have settled in wonderfully and this young, attacking team has filled even the most hardened Palace fans’ hearts with joy. 8/10 Stars/flops Conor Gallagher has been a revelation: goals, assists, boundless energy, all with a beaming smile on his face. Marc Guéhi’s partnership with Joachim Andersen can be a foundation stone at the back for years to come, Michael Olise has been very effective off the bench, and Odsonne Édouard looks very promising up front. And James McArthur has belied his years – we’ve badly missed him since his injury. Luka Milivojevic and Cheikhou Kouyaté haven’t always looked settled, though, and Christian Benteke and Jordan Ayew still miss too many chances – though you can’t fault their work rate. Happy with the manager? Everyone knows Vieira wasn’t first, second or even third choice but he has settled in brilliantly. He commands incredible respect from the players, and he gets what the club stands for. He is very clear in his football philosophy, which has the total backing of his fans. If he can just get the team to manage leads late in the game better, then we will have the complete package. 9/10 We will finish … 11th. Funniest moment in 2021? Winning 2-1 at Brighton with the last kick, having had just two touches in their box for the entire match. Wonderful. • Chris Waters @Clapham_Grand Everton A decent start, then a terrible run in the last 10 games: one win, two draws, seven defeats. We’ve a terrible injury list with questions over the club’s rehab programmes – but that doesn’t disguise Rafa Benítez’s poor selection, tactics and game management, or the less than stellar performances from experienced players. So it’s 3/10 – and it would have been 2/10 save for the performances against Arsenal at home and Chelsea away. Stars/flops Pickford has been in superb shot-stopping form. Anthony Gordon is growing into his role, while Gray is the signing of the season: pace and goals, all for £1.7m. Flops? Rondón, unsurprisingly not fit and too slow; sadly Iwobi, technically superbly talented in training but not in matches; and Digne, disappointing and seemingly out of the door in January. Happy with the manager? Always a contentious hire, he made a good start and communicated well. But the downturn revived all the concerns about him; dour, cautious football, no cohesion, an inability to get the best out of players and so on … 2/10 We will finish … DCL’s return will be a lift but it’s still a threadbare squad. No better than 12th, no worse than 16th. Funniest moment in 2021? If any young pro wants lessons on how to engage and endear yourself to fans, look at Richarlison. Not his greatest season on the pitch but fabulous off it. A recent video of him managing a team on a local park was hilarious. • The Esk TheEsk.org; @TheEsk Leeds It’s a cruel twist of football that, if last season hadn’t been so good, this one wouldn’t be rating so low. Maybe we got carried away but, far from building on ninth, Leeds have been dragged into a relegation scrap we thought we’d dodged. We’re still on target for the big-picture aim of establishing the club in the Premier League over two seasons but it’s not nearly as much fun. 1/10 Stars/flops Illan Meslier, the young keeper with Serge Gainsbourg’s voice, veers heroically between winning points and keeping scores down. Up front, Joffy Gelhardt is worth his hype. A shout, too, for Adam Forshaw, 771 days out injured, never playing better. The rest? Staying fit would be a start. Happy with the manager? Marcelo Bielsa is getting full support in spite of everything that’s happened lately, and it’s fun how it really annoys people who don’t understand Leeds United Football Club. 10/10 We will finish … 15th. Just like being back in the Championship. Funniest moment in 2021? For a few weeks Bielsa was spotted wearing wonky glasses. Eventually Pat Bamford confessed to belting him in the face with a shot in training, and the boss was too busy to get them fixed. It’s a sort of charming chaos at Leeds sometimes. • Daniel Chapman thesquareball.net; @MoscowhiteTSB Leicester Am I pleased with how it’s gone? In a word, no. Leicester have been well short of their best – arguably turning in only two good 90-minute performances all season. The dominant wins over Manchester United and Newcastle showed our finest form isn’t unreachable but ultimately our performances this season have more often resembled our yellow-bellied humbling by Chelsea. Thankfully, though, the results have been better than our displays. 5/10 Stars/flops It’s pleasing to see Vardy and Patson Daka scoring so regularly, and to see Maddison finally rediscovering his form. Youri Tielemans continues to show flashes of genius – fans voted him our player of 2021. Less positively, signing half the backline of the team you beat 9-0 in Vestergaard and Bertrand has gone down exactly as you’d expect … Happy with the manager? To borrow an over-used cliche, Rodgers has credit in the bank but he has a lot of work to do to iron out Leicester’s defensive chaos and general malaise. Most fans are willing to give him a chance to rediscover our best football – but they won’t wait forever. 5/10 We will finish … With injuries and our defensive record, anything above 10th would be a minor miracle. Funniest moment in 2021? It’s hard to look past Kelechi Iheanacho wearing the FA Cup as a crown and offering to sell it to two Wembley stewards. • Chris Whiting clippings.me/chriswhiting; @ChrisRWhiting • Part two: Liverpool to WolvesIn uncertain times, there’s a lot to be said for Christmas traditions. Tastes and smells, like familiar tunes, can instantly transport you back to childhood. Food matters, especially at Christmas – and tradition is part of the reason why it packs such a punch. Let’s start with the stocking. Gone are white sugar mice and candy cigarettes, replaced by gummy bears and chocolate reindeer poo. But it’s good to know the traditional tangerine – usually left to rot under the bed – continues to have its place for my own kids. The chocolate coins remain. The story goes that three sisters unable to afford a dowry were doomed to be sold into loveless marriages. Wishing to keep his donation anonymous, and inspired to act, the 4th-century Saint Nicholas secretly dropped coins down the chimney into stockings they’d left drying by the fire. I’m not sure anyone knows how it turned out for the girls, but clearly a colossal fail for St Nick’s wish to remain anonymous. Now to dinner. There’s an end-of-year obsession with eating foods said to bring prosperity. Steal a coin-like silver scale from your carp on Christmas Eve, place it in your wallet, and there it will trick other money into joining it. Luckier still are lentils which resemble piles of pennies, while green vegetables are a symbol of wealth and luck in nearly every culture going. There’s the sixpence added to the Christmas pudding batter, which, provided you don’t break a tooth, should grant good fortune for the coming year. In fact, the Christmas pudding is possibly the most ancient of the modern traditions. Starting out in medieval times as an unappetising meat, spice and fruit porridge, over the years it’s been outlawed, reinstated, immortalised by Charles Dickens, and set on fire time and again. Christmas traditions – like with the pud – are forever changing, not least when families merge. Recognising all faiths, dietary requirements and television programming preferences can be an undertaking. Supposedly rational adults will suddenly become hysterical because the gravy’s not in the special Christmas jug, while the smallest of changes have ripple effects. A menu swap to beef means no bones for turkey soup. Think of the sacrifice the turkeys made to get to your plate. Back in the day, farmers would walk the fowl from Norfolk to London: to protect their feet on the 100-mile hike, they crafted the birds leather shoes. It was notoriously harder to cajole a goose into wearing these shoes so their feet, instead, were dipped in tar and feathers – and the phrase “to shoe a goose” was born, marking a futile task. These days, we’re broadly more discerning about how our food gets to our plate. But for those who can’t be bothered with the faff, a solution born of the pandemic may well change Christmas dinner for ever. At-home dining kits are available for every festive menu imaginable and encompass every dietary requirement, crafted by top chefs with fresh, local ingredients and delivered direct to your door. Just put it in the oven and watch YouTube for the plating instructions. If you go for a home deli hamper, you don’t even need to do that. Admittedly, they can be a little pricey; anything from £20 for a mince pie kit to several hundred pounds for a seafood extravaganza. Truth be told, I would miss the holiday kitchen. The smell of oranges studded with cloves, ready for mulling wine, the sight of lopsided gingerbread houses with runny icing glue. There are, of course, traditions definitely worth losing. Being force fed 12 mince pies to ensure a year of happy months – a watered-down superstition that harks back to the early 1800s, when mince pies could only be eaten during the 12 days of Christmas and, for the full lucky effect, one each in 12 different houses. Then there’s the headache-inducing buck’s fizz that my mother insists we drink on Christmas morning. Originally created in 1921 at Buck’s Club in London, buck’s fizz is traditionally made with one part orange juice to three parts champagne; for some unfathomable reason, it suddenly became a hit in the 1980s and is still around today. The last tradition to note is New Year’s Eve. Here, haggis deserves a mention. Offal sausages were prized by the Vikings and the Romans – even a mate of Socrates raved about a tasty feast of offal-stuffed bladder. Made of lamb innards, onions, oatmeal and spice, it isn’t exactly plant-based. But it’s bang on trend for nose-to-tail eating. Throw tradition to the wind and fry yours in butter before dousing it with whisky. Add neeps, tatties and some bagrock, and you’re set for the year ahead. Sam Wydymus is a British chef, restaurateur and writer based in FranceWe are becoming accustomed to hearing moments in women’s sport – on and off various fields, pitches, courts, pools and tracks – be described as gamechanging. It could be seen as an overused phrase or an exaggeration given how frequently it is rolled out. Except women’s sport is benefiting from a broader movement and advocacy for women in society generally – against sexism and abuses, for reproductive rights and equal pay – and the broad increase in consciousness around these issues. What is no longer acceptable in wider society is also not acceptable in women’s sport and athletes, coaches and the women’s sports community are picking up the pitchforks to demand better in increasing participation and, critically, there is momentum behind the drive for change. The reality, then, is that referring to a moment or event in women’s sport as a game-changer or gamechanging is not an exaggeration because we are living in a golden age in the development in women’s sport, and 2022 promises to be no different. Women’s football has the potential to take a huge leap forward next year, especially in England. The home European Championship in England, postponed from summer 2021 to 2022 because of the pandemic, is central to this. England has hosted a women’s Euros before, in 2005, yet the impact was minimal. So, what makes this tournament different? In part, it relates to the time we are living in, when women’s football is being championed domestically and internationally as never before. The 2005 tournament did not benefit from the same level of media coverage and financial backing as women’s football does today. For the 13th edition of the competition, everything including the kitchen sink is being thrown at it to make sure it leaves a deep legacy. How successfully or effectively that is being done remains to be seen and many variables will affect how impactful the tournament is. A strong performance from England is key, but preparations have not been easy. Because the host nation qualifies automatically the Lionesses missed out on a number of competitive fixtures and struggled to arrange high-quality friendlies owing to Covid restrictions. The gap between the close of the 2019 World Cup and the start of the qualifying campaign for the 2023 World Cup in Australia and New Zealand in September 2021 was large. This tumultuous time also resulted in Phil Neville leaving earlier than planned, forcing the Football Association to turn temporarily to Hege Riise as interim England head coach and manager of Team GB for the Olympics, before the arrival of Neville’s planned successor, Sarina Wiegman. Under Wiegman England have breezed through World Cup qualifying to date, and the newly launched Arnold Clark Cup in February promises to offer their first real warm-up test. Spain, who boast a number of Barcelona’s Champions League stars, Germany, the Euros’ most successful team, and the Olympic champions Canada will travel to England to play a round-robin format consisting of three double-headers across seven days and will put England’s credentials as European title contenders under extreme pressure. This mouthwatering mini-tournament is sandwiched by the second half of a most-watched domestic season that has twists and turns left to go. With Arsenal four points clear of Chelsea at the top of the Women’s Super League, unbeaten but having dropped two points in a draw with Brighton, this has been the first time in a number of years where there has not been an air of infallibility around a single team. The first season with the Sky Sports and BBC Sport broadcast deal offers a level of exposure in the buildup to a women’s international tournament unlike anything seen before. For the reigning European champions, the Netherlands, the boost from hosting the 2017 Euros was huge. The country was awash with orange as Dutch fans flocked to support the team’s phenomenal run to the final under Wiegman, who left to join England this summer. Still, the national team have tens of thousands show up to watch friendlies. Yet the profile of women’s football in the Netherlands and the development of the country’s domestic leagues before that tournament are dwarfed by the state of the game in England. The Lionesses will be talked up as a contenders, but the competition in European women’s football has never been fiercer. Seven of the eight teams in the last World Cup quarter-finals were from Europe, with only the eventual champions, the United States, bucking the trend. Regardless of whether England triumph in July, there is a real opportunity to embed women’s football into society. Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, France, Sweden, Denmark, Norway and England could, to varying degrees, legitimately be aiming for the trophy because the competitive level is better than ever, denting England’s hopes of emulating the Netherlands’ success. No fewer than 700,000 tickets are available across the month-long tournament. In the Netherlands 240,000 attended games. The FA has sold 162,000 tickets in pre-sales and had 268,000 tickets requested through a first ballot window in October. Come the close of the Euros the new domestic season will be on the horizon and positioned to capitalise on any increased interest. Few, if any, countries have managed to translate the thirst for international women’s football into an appetite for the domestic game. Could 2022 be the year that changes? Maybe.In a pastoral scene that has changed little in centuries, farmers wearing red woollen ponchos gather on a December morning in a semicircle to drink chicha, made from fermented maize, and mutter an invocation to Pachamama – Mother Earth – before sprinkling the dregs on the Andean soil. Singing in Quechua, the language spread along the vast length of the Andes by the Incas, they hill the soil around plants in the numerous small plots terraced into a patchwork up and down the Peruvian mountainside. The Andes sustains one of the most diverse food systems in the world. Through specially adapted farming techniques, these farmers conserve a great variety of maize, also known as corn, and other biodiverse crops that could be key to food security as global heating causes a more erratic climate. Maize has been grown in Lares, near Cusco, for thousands of years, in one of the highest farming systems in the world. Choquecancha and Ccachin communities specialise in more than 50 varieties of the cereal in a myriad of different sizes and colours. “In the old days, the Incas grew these ecotypes and now we continue the path set down by our ancestors,” says Juan Huillca, a conservationist in Choquecancha, a tiny mountainside village. On a blanket are ears of corn ranging in colour from faintly yellowed white to deep purple. All have thick kernels and evocative names. Yellowish corncobs with red tinted kernels are called yawar waqaq (blood crier). White cobs flecked with grey, whose toasted kernels are served as crunchy canchita with Peru’s flagship dish ceviche, are more prosaically called chuspi sara (small corn). Historians believe what is now the world’s most widely grown cereal crop was first domesticated by people in modern-day Mexico about 10,000 years ago and subsequently spread south down the spine of the Andes to reach Peru about 6,000 years ago. Long before the climate crisis, these farmers’ ancestors adapted to growing crops in different niche ecosystems, from icy mountain peaks to sunny valleys. “In this landscape it would be difficult to produce just one variety of one crop, because in one year you can have frosts, hail, droughts or torrential rain,” says Javier Llacsa Tacuri, an agrobiodiversity expert who manages a project to safeguard the farming techniques, which have been identified as one of a handful of globally important agricultural heritage systems. “With a few varieties, you could not face a farming year, so the response is to have many varieties. The frosts and hailstorms have always occurred and their ancestors knew how to face them,” he says. With more than 180 native domesticated plant species and hundreds of varieties, Peru has one of the world’s richest diversity of crops. Backed by the UN’s Food and Agriculture Organization, the project supports the farmers to preserve the native species, and Llacsa Tacuri and colleagues help find markets for the multicoloured corns. “Peru is one of eight places in the world which is considered a centre of origin for agriculture,” says Llacsa Tacuri. “The first inhabitants and their descendants – the peasant farmers who are here – started their adaptation to this landscape more than 10,000 years ago.” Huillca says his village and its neighbours are already feeling the climate crisis. “Diseases like stem rust or blight arrive, sometimes we get frost or hail. That’s why we have our seed bank in order not to lose our maize ecotypes, so we can recover what we’ve lost and resow those varieties,” he says. In a simple farmhouse in Ccachin lies the genetic heritage of thousands of years of crop domestication and variation. Dozens of types of dried kernels are stored in plastic containers for rainy days. “But many young people migrate to the city because this doesn’t generate much income,” Huillca adds. “What we do doesn’t bring enough income to sustain the family, so they move to the city.” Sonia Quispe, a maize conservationist in Choquecancha, says the harvest is half what it would normally be. “With the climate crisis, there’s less harvest, but we substitute our diet with potatoes,” she says. “It’s important to work with the different varieties of maize for our food security. With global heating, there are varieties that are more resistant to illnesses and pests.” Quispe can identify the variety of three-month-old maize shoots from the stalks. She explains that the ones with red at the base will produce red-tinted cobs with a bitter taste that repels pests, which are moving further up the mountain as the sun becomes more intense. Julio Cruz Tacac, 31, a yachachiq, or farming teacher, who returned to Ccachin after studying in Cusco, has seen weather patterns change. “When I was little, the sun didn’t shine with such intensity, the temperature was mild,” he says. “It’s as if we live in an Eden in terms of food products, we have everything to hand,” he says of his childhood home. This is in contrast to city life, where “everything is money”, he says, and which became even harder during the Covid-19 pandemic – Peru had the world’s highest Covid mortality rate. The custom of ayni, reciprocal communal work, remains in these remote villages, but a bartering form of exchange, known as trueque, has been hit by the pandemic’s economic impact. “We go to the market and we trade with the fruit and coca from the farmers in the valley,” says Genara Cárdenas, 55, from Ccachin. “But now with the pandemic the people don’t want to barter, they want money.” Financial pressures have affected the village’s traditional way of life, but their crops have helped them remain self-sufficient despite the economic problems. Even so, the climate crisis presents new challenges, says 55-year-old farmer Victor Morales. “When I was young, the rains, the frost, all had their time. But today everything has changed. We had many types of potatoes and maize, now we have varieties which are more resistant to climate change.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:The daughter of Captain Sir Tom Moore has encouraged people not to grieve alone if they are missing a loved one over Christmas. Hannah Ingram-Moore, whose father died in February, has said people “don’t need to” go through grief alone, and encouraged them to reach out for support if they need it. Sir Tom’s family are experiencing their first Christmas without the charity campaigner, who raised more than £32m for the NHS when he walked 100 laps of his garden before his 100th birthday in April 2020. She told the BBC: “We understand what you’re going through. Many of us have gone through it. You can’t tell anyone how to grieve but you can say ‘don’t feel isolated’. “Loss and grief can come from nowhere; you listen to a song and it makes you cry, you smell a certain smell or watch their favourite programme. “It can be hard but don’t feel alone. There are people you can talk to.” Second world war veteran Sir Tom raised £38.9m in total for the NHS, including Gift Aid, with the money given to NHS Charities Together. He was knighted by the Queen in recognition of his efforts and made an honorary colonel of the Army Foundation College in Harrogate. He died on 2 February at Bedford hospital after testing positive for Covid-19. At the time, his family said the last year of his life was “nothing short of remarkable” and he had “experienced things he’d only ever dreamed of”. In a statement, Ms Ingram-Moore and her sister Lucy Teixeira said: “We are so grateful that we were with him during the last hours of his life; Hannah, Benjie and Georgia by his bedside and Lucy on FaceTime. “We spent hours chatting to him, reminiscing about our childhood and our wonderful mother. We shared laughter and tears together. “While he’d been in so many hearts for just a short time, he was an incredible father and grandfather, and he will stay alive in our hearts for ever.” Outlining how the family is coping this Christmas, Ms Ingram-Moore told the BBC: “We definitely have reflective moments of sadness, but we also have the sheer joy of the legacy he’s left the world.”2021 proved another disastrous fire year for the American west. Amid a historic drought and record-breaking heatwaves, wildfires that erupted across the US burned close to 7.7m acres. Some broke records that had only recently been set. And while the amount of land burned this year didn’t reach 2020 levels, a troubling new trend emerged: fires are getting harder to fight. “With the conditions we saw this year and everything leading up to it – historic drought, these prolonged dry, heatwaves – everything together made it a very challenging year,” said Aitor Bidaburu, a wildfire program manager for the US Fire Administration. His biggest takeaway on the blazes “was just the intensity with which they burned”, he says. The statistics tell the story of a fire season that now stretches far into the year, fires that have grown more ferocious, and climatic conditions that are causing the blazes to behave erratically and dangerously. Here’s a look at the fire year in numbers. A long and intense season The season of high fire threat is stretching longer and longer. Wildfires used to be largely confined to a four-month period but the threats are now felt through the year. By 21 June, close to 29,000 wildfires had already ignited across the US – roughly 4,000 more than average years according to the National Interagency Fire Center. The threats didn’t subside after the summer and autumn. Blazes burned through Montana and Colorado into December this year and fire weather warnings prompted power safety shutoffs in southern California over the Thanksgiving holiday in late November. Megablazes are becoming the norm Megablazes – fires that blacken more than 100,000 acres – were once considered a career highlight for firefighters. But they’re increasingly becoming the norm. “We hear from the first responders that they have never seen fire behavior like this in their careers,” said Bidaburu. “[Megablazes] are becoming routine. During the summers we are seeing them on a weekly basis.” The number of fires that burn each year is trending downward – but the average acreage burnt by the blazes is rising. In California, roughly 2.6m acres of land went up in flames this year, eclipsing the 5-year-average of 1.4m. Eight of the top 15 largest wildfires in the golden state occurred in the last two years Flames are reaching new heights Fires committed feats never seen before. “For the first 25 years of my career, fires moved in a certain way and in a certain fashion but now they are acting very uncharacteristically,” said Jon Heggie, CalFire battalion chief. “There’s no denying that fires are burning hotter and faster.” The Dixie fire, which burned close to a million acres in California over three months, became the first fire to cross over the Sierra Nevada range. Soon after, the 221,775-acre Caldor fire became the second. The Windy fire and the KNP Complex fire, which tore through California’s Sequoia &amp; Kings Canyon national parks, resulted in the deaths of up to 3,637 mature sequoia trees – a species that thrived through fires for centuries. Landscapes are turning into tinderboxes Fire risk across the American west was exacerbated by historic conditions: a record-breaking drought and unprecedented heatwaves. Higher heat not only dries landscapes faster, making them prone to burn, it also reduces snow, reducing the water flow into rivers and reservoirs. “You are just racking up year after year of high temperatures and below-average precipitation” said Andrew Hoell, a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration meteorologist who serves as co-lead on the agency’s drought taskforce. “It’s just a lousy situation.” 2021 delivered the hottest summers on record in California, Nevada, and Oregon. Washington and Arizona had their second hottest summer this year. By the end of November – even after heavy rains doused the Pacific north-west and northern California – 80% of the west remained categorized in severe drought. Half of the region was still experiencing extreme drought. Enormous pressure on resources Combined, the fires put enormous stress on the US’ firefighting resources. Bidaburu says the increasing intensity and the proximity and danger to communities has driven up costs. “You get these intense fires and they require more resources, the urgency is higher, the public safety aspect is much higher,” he says. The cost of battling these blazes in 2021 was more than $4.4bn, according to the NIFC – more than double the 10-year average for federal firefighting costs. That’s the most ever spent on a fire season by the federal government and these numbers don’t include state and local expenditures. Federal agencies categorize “preparedness levels” on a scale of one to five to denote the amount of resources deployed to battle blazes across the country. This year, the country was cast in categories four and five for 14 consecutive weeks, the longest stretch ever documented at the two highest levels. At level four, more than half of all national firefighting resources are deployed. At level five, resources are nearly exhausted. Shifting strategies The intensity of this year’s fire season has raised the stakes, forcing governments to adapt their suppression strategies. If high greenhouse gas emissions continue, climate models show that the risk of large wildfires could jump up to 6-times higher in the next three decades. “We are seeing a dramatic increase and this environment we are in is here to stay,” said Heggie, the CalFire chief. States like California are ramping up mitigation efforts and prioritizing programs to educate the public on fire safety, but are constantly fighting to keep up with the changing conditions. Officials are trying to plan five steps ahead of the fire, anticipating that the flames could spread 10 times faster than they once did, according to Heggie. Blazes once battled over two to three weeks are now burning the same amount of space in a single day. Budgets are being boosted. Biden’s $1.2tn infrastructure bill includes $3.3bn for wildfire management, including pay increases and programs for firefighters bearing the brunt of the increasing intensity. In California, legislators granted close to $1bn in wildfire prevention for the 2021 fiscal year and at least $200m annually over the next 6 years. A $15m increase in funding was included in Noaa’s budget request for fiscal year 2022 to fund fire weather research and observations that will give communities access to key predictions. In the social safety-net and climate bill still in Congress, Democrats have proposed spending $27bn on protecting the nation’s forests, which includes $14bn for fuel reduction projects.Pope Francis has used his Christmas Day message to call for dialogue on the world stage as he looks to resolve conflicts ranging from family feuds to threats of war. The pontiff listed tensions in several countries in Asia, Europe and Africa as he delivered his Urbi et Orbi address, and called on individuals and world leaders to talk rather than dig in their heels. This aversion to discourse, he said, has been worsened by the Covid-19 pandemic. “Our capacity for social relationships is sorely tried; there is a growing tendency to withdraw, to do it all by ourselves, to stop making an effort to encounter others and do things together,” he said from the central balcony of St Peter’s Basilica in the Vatican. “On the international level, too, there is the risk of avoiding dialogue; the risk that this complex crisis will lead to taking shortcuts rather than setting out on the longer paths of dialogue. Yet only those paths can lead to the resolution of conflicts and to lasting benefits for all.” He added: “We continue to witness a great number of conflicts, crises and disagreements. These never seem to end; by now we hardly even notice them. We have become so used to them that immense tragedies are now being passed over in silence, we risk not hearing the cry of pain and distress of so many of our brothers and sisters.” Before an unusually small crowd, which was reduced by Covid restrictions and the weather to only several hundred, he asked God to “give serenity and unity to families”, praising those who strive to keep them and communities together in such divisive times. “Let us ask him for the strength to be open to dialogue. On this festive day, let us implore him to stir up in the hearts of everyone a yearning for reconciliation and fraternity.” He used the word “dialogue” 11 times in a speech of little more than two pages as he spoke to people huddled under rain parkas and umbrellas. The day before, during his Christmas Eve midnight mass in St Peter’s Basilica, the pontiff had called for more solidarity with those living in poverty. He urged the congregation of about 2,000 people to “value the little things in life”, adding: “On this night of love, may we have only one fear: that of offending God’s love, hurting him by despising the poor with our indifference.” The pope referred to the shepherds who Christians believe watched over the infant son of God. “That is where Jesus is born: close to them, close to the forgotten ones of the peripheries,” he told the faithful. “He comes where human dignity is put to the test. He comes to ennoble the excluded and he first reveals himself to them; not to educated and important people, but to poor working people. “God tonight comes to fill with dignity the austerity of labour. He reminds us of the importance of granting dignity to men and women through labour, but also of granting dignity to human labour itself, since man is its master and not its slave. On the day of life, let us repeat: no more deaths in the workplace. And let us commit ourselves to ensuring this.”It’s a saccharine sweet story about a young deer who finds love and friendship in a forest. But the original tale of Bambi, adapted by Disney in 1942, has much darker beginnings as an existential novel about persecution and antisemitism in 1920s Austria. Now, a new translation seeks to reassert the rightful place of Felix Salten’s 1923 masterpiece in adult literature and shine a light on how Salten was trying to warn the world that Jews would be terrorised, dehumanised and murdered in the years to come. Far from being a children’s story, Bambi was actually a parable about the inhumane treatment and dangerous precariousness of Jews and other minorities in what was then an increasingly fascist world, the new translation will show. In 1935, the book was banned by the Nazis, who saw it as a political allegory on the treatment of Jews in Europe and burned it as Jewish propaganda. “The darker side of Bambi has always been there,” said Jack Zipes, professor emeritus of German and comparative literature at the University of Minnesota and translator of the forthcoming book. “But what happens to Bambi at the end of the novel has been concealed, to a certain extent, by the Disney corporation taking over the book and making it into a pathetic, almost stupid film about a prince and a bourgeois family.” Salten’s novel, Bambi, a Life in the Woods, is completely different he said. “It is a book about survival in your own home.” From the moment he is born, Bambi is under constant threat from hunters who invade the forest and attack indiscriminately. “They kill whatever animal they want.” It soon becomes apparent that the forest animals are living out their lives in fear and that puts the reader constantly “on edge”: “All the animals have been persecuted. And I think what shakes the reader is that there are also some animals who are traitors, who help the hunters kill.” After Bambi’s mother is murdered, so is his beloved cousin Gobo, who had been led to believe he was special and the hunters would be “kind” to him. Bambi is shot too, but survives thanks to the old prince, a majestic stag who treats him like a son (and may well be his father). But then, sadly, the old prince also dies, leaving Bambi utterly bereft. “Bambi does not survive well, at the end. He is alone, totally alone … It is a tragic story about the loneliness and solitude of Jews and other minority groups.” There is a sense at the end that Bambi and all the other wild animals in the forest are merely “born to be killed”. They know they will be hunted – and they know they will die. “The major theme throughout is: you don’t have a choice.” Salten, who had changed his name from Siegmund Salzmann during his teens to “unmark” himself as a Jew in Austrian society, earned his main income as a journalist in Vienna. Zipes thinks he could see the direction in which the political winds were blowing. “I think he foresaw the Holocaust. He had suffered greatly as a young boy from antisemitism and at that time, in Austria and Germany, Jews were blamed for the loss of the first world war. This novel is an appeal to say: no, this shouldn’t happen.” At one point in the novel, two leaves on a tree discuss why they must fall to the ground and wonder what will happen to them when they do. “These leaves talk very seriously about really dark questions humans have: we don’t know what is going to happen to us when we die. We don’t know why we must die.” By writing a story about animals and wildlife, Salten could get past the negative preconceptions and prejudices many of his readers held about Jews and other minorities: “It enabled him to talk about the persecution of the Jews as freely as he wanted to.” Without being didactic, he could encourage the reader to feel more empathy towards oppressed groups – and Bambi could openly question the cruelty of their oppressors. “Many other writers, like George Orwell, chose animals too because you’re freer to tackle problems that might make your readers bristle. And you don’t want them to bristle, you want them to say, at the end: this is a tragedy.” Importantly, the new translation, which will be published on 18 January by Princeton Press, attempts to convey in English for the first time the way that certain characters in Salten’s novel have a Viennese “flair” when they talk in German. “The animals have wonderful ways of talking, which makes you feel as though you are in a Viennese cafe. And you immediately recognise that they’re not talking how animals talk. These are human beings.” By contrast, the original English translation, which was published in 1928, toned down Salten’s anthropomorphism and changed its focus so that it was more likely to be understood as a simple conservation story about animals living in a forest. This was the version read by Walt Disney, who loved animal stories. When Germany annexed Austria in 1938, Salten managed to flee to Switzerland. By then, he had sold the film rights for a mere $1,000 to an American director, who then sold them on to Disney: Salten himself never earned a penny from the famous animation. Stripped of his Austrian citizenship by the Nazis, he spent his final years “lonely and in despair” in Zurich and died in 1945, like Bambi, with no safe place to call home. • This article was amended on 17 January 2022. In an earlier version a photograph of the front cover of the book was credited to Alenka Sottler, whereas, as shown on the cover, the book is illustrated by Sottler.We hoped this would be the year everything would come right: that concert venues would buzz with capacity crowds; that musicians would be back in full-time work; that soloists might again travel without fear of quarantine and testing (quite aside from the unresolved difficulties caused by Brexit) – above all, that Covid-19 would vanish. Instead, Omicron gallops ahead and even optimists must accept we’re not there yet. For all the cancellations and underlying mood of chaos, countless musical events touched lives. The BBC Proms, cautiously but definitively, were back, with premieres from Charlotte Bray, Shiva Feshareki, Britta Byström, Grace-Evangeline Mason, George Benjamin and more. Highlights included John Wilson and his lithe Sinfonia of London; the Scottish Chamber Orchestra, revelatory in Mozart’s last symphonies; the Icelandic pianist Víkingur Ólafsson wowing the crowds in his Proms debut. Another pianist, Janeba Kanneh-Mason, introduced Florence Price’s one-movement concerto to the Proms. Podium exits and arrivals shaped the season: Domingo Hindoyan took over from Vasily Petrenko at the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra. Petrenko himself injected vitality into his own “new” orchestra, the Royal Philharmonic. After a triumphant five years, Mirga Gražinytė-Tyla announced her forthcoming departure from the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra; Kazuki Yamada, from 2023, is her successor. Esa-Pekka Salonen said goodbye to the Philharmonia; Santtu-Matias Rouvali has already made a thrilling splash as his replacement. Succeeding Vladimir Jurowski, Edward Gardner launched his innings with the LPO, electrifying in Tippett’s The Midsummer Marriage. As some regretfully anticipated, Simon Rattle will shorten his stay with the London Symphony Orchestra to work more in Germany, now his home. Antonio Pappano will take over (from 2024); his successor at Covent Garden has yet to be announced. Opera struggled back to the main stages, with Janáček at the Royal Opera and Glyndebourne, Wagner at English National Opera, Puccini at Welsh National Opera, Bizet at Opera North, Gilbert and Sullivan at Scottish Opera, and at ENO too. The ever adaptable smaller “country house” venues fared well. Longborough built a big top for Monteverdi. Grange Park was strict with social distancing, with Bryn Terfel as Verdi’s Falstaff a star attraction. Garsington’s airy pavilion, with striking Richard Strauss and Handel, might have been designed with a pandemic factored into its risk assessment. Opera Holland Park cleverly reconfigured its entire auditorium for the benefit of audiences. Covid and its ring road of consequence kept me closer to home than usual, often at events in non-traditional venues: a reminder that quality of performance takes precedence over a perfect acoustic. Grimeborn enthralled in Arcola’s new urban “barn”. Bold Tendencies, winner of this year’s Royal Philharmonic Society Gamechanger award, lured the Philharmonia into its car park space for Brahms’s two piano concertos in one evening (herculean soloist Samson Tsoy, conductor Maxim Emelyanychev). Waterperry Opera charmed in a rustic glade. West Wycombe chamber music festival was a discovery. There were losses. The softly gracious Dutch conductor Bernard Haitink, mighty and fiery the moment he lifted his baton, died aged 92. The death from coronavirus of opera director extraordinaire Graham Vick left us reeling. Composer Anthony Payne and singer Jane Manning, the husband-wife partnership who illuminated musical life for over half a century, died within weeks of each other, gone like the abrupt felling of great oaks. The composers Louis Andriessen, Simon Bainbridge and Frederic Rzewski, as well as the genre-bending Stephen Sondheim, all left us, as did the librettist Amanda Holden and the mezzo-soprano Pamela Helen Stephen. A performance that lives on: in January, the pianist András Schiff, in between playing incomparable Bach in a live online Wigmore Hall recital, gave a commentary of such obscure humour that I listened back four times to be sure I had understood. I can’t recall the jokes, but Schiff’s Bach has blazed in the mind throughout this troubled year. The top 10 classical music performances of 2021 1. Monolith: I Extend My Arms Snape Maltings, Suffolk Unforgettable Tansy Davies premiere, performed by the Britten Sinfonia. 2. Mahler Chamber Orchestra/Benjamin Royal Albert Hall, London The Proms’s only foreign orchestra on star form. 3. West Wycombe chamber music festival St Lawrence’s church, West Wycombe Viola player Lawrence Power and friends, in a church on top of a hill. 4. Alcina Arcola Outside, London Handel stripped down and brilliant, from Ensemble OrQuesta/Grimeborn. 5. Tosca South Facing festival, Crystal Palace, London Natalya Romaniw on glorious form in ENO’s Puccini with pizza. 6. Ragged Music festival Ragged School Museum, London Where the soloists (Pavel Kolesnikov, Samson Tsoy) put the chairs out themselves. 7. L’heure espagnole Online Ravel on film: tick-tock wit in a clock shop in Grange Park Opera’s pandemic-defying season. 8. Patricia Kopatchinskaja and Sol Gabetta Queen Elizabeth Hall, London A violinist, a cellist and a world of imagination. 9. LSO/Rattle and East London Academy Trafalgar Square, London Novices alongside professionals under Nelson’s gaze. 10. Der Rosenkavalier Garsington Opera; available online until 29 April Sumptuous Strauss for eyes and ears. Turkey English Touring Opera’s Amadigi: excellent cast and band but a theatrical dud.The most ambitious, costly robot probe ever built, the $10bn James Webb telescope, has been blasted into space on top of a giant European rocket. Engineers reported on Saturday that the observatory – which has been plagued by decades of delays and huge cost overruns – was operating perfectly after going through the most nervously watched lift-off in the history of uncrewed space exploration. Described as a “time machine” by scientists, the telescope will allow astronomers to study the beginning of the universe shortly after the big bang, 13.8 billion years ago, and to hunt for signs of life-supporting planets in our own galaxy. “We have delivered a Christmas gift to humanity,” said the European Space Agency’s director general, Josef Aschbacher. “With this telescope we are enabling new science. This was a special moment, nerve-racking but successful in the end.” This point was backed by Nasa’s administrator, Bill Nelson. “It’s going to give us a better understanding of our universe and our place in it: who we are, what we are, the search that’s eternal.” The James Webb telescope began its journey into space at exactly 12.20 GMT when the solid fuel boosters of its huge Ariane 5 launcher were ignited. On top of a fiery plume of thick smoke, the rocket rose above the tropical rainforest that surrounds the Esa centre in Kourou, French Guiana, and within a minute had disappeared into the thick clouds overhead. After 27 minutes of powered flight, the telescope separated from its launcher’s upper stage and was placed precisely into its planned trajectory. The manoeuvre was greeted with tumultuous applause from flight controllers in Kourou. Jubilant scientists – some wearing Santa hats – hugged each other and held up signs that read “Bon Voyage Webb”. Once in orbit, the telescope’s solar arrays were unfurled and the observatory began its million-mile voyage to its final destination, a region of deep space where it can be kept stationary in roughly the same position in the sky. Cameras on the rocket’s upper stage provided one last glimpse of the shimmering telescope before it sped into deep space. Designed as a replacement for the Hubble space telescope – still in operation after its 1990 launch – the James Webb telescope is a far bigger and much more complex instrument with many more ambitious goals. For a start, it will not study the visible part of the electromagnetic spectrum – as does the Hubble and most ground-based telescopes – but only infra-red radiation. As a result, it has had to be fitted with complex shielding and cooling equipment to hide its instruments from solar radiation that would otherwise trigger spurious signals. The James Webb – named after a former Nasa administrator – will spend a month on its journey and will then need a further five months to get ready. First, its enormous gold-plated 6.5 metre mirror and its huge, tennis-court-sized sunshield need to unfurl; they were folded origami-style to fit into the nose cone of the Ariane 5. Then its instruments will have to be carefully calibrated. In all, hundreds of release mechanisms need to work perfectly in order for the telescope to succeed. “Like nothing we’ve done before,” said Nasa programme director Greg Robinson. The observatory – built by Nasa with European and Canadian collaboration – has been designed to revolutionise our study of the universe. Among the hopes of astronomers is the prospect of imaging the first galaxies to form after the Big Bang, understanding how stars are born and evolve, and investigating the potential for life to appear in planetary systems. All this will have to be done in a decade, the maximum likely lifetime of the James Webb. After 10 years, it is expected that it will run out of fuel and slowly drift off course – to become the most expensive piece of space junk ever built. But for now, scientists are eager to begin work on the observatory. “For the thousands of astronomers across the world, we must now be patient for many weeks,” said Durham University’s Professor Martin Ward, who has worked on one of the main instruments on board. “One can say that this is just the end of the beginning … The best is yet to come, we hope, over the next 10 years, including discoveries that we have not even imagined. Watch this space.” • This article was amended on 26 December 2021. The James Webb telescope was built by Nasa – with collaboration from Canadian and European partners – but it was not launched by Nasa, as an earlier headline said.When the term “vegan” was first coined, even vegetarians believed it was a fringe lifestyle. But the image of vegans as eccentric ascetics is now itself a marginal view. More than a third of people in the UK are interested in becoming vegan, according to a new poll which indicates that the number of people eating a plant-based diet has soared in the last two years. Thirty-six per cent of UK adults believe eating a vegan or plant-based diet is “an admirable thing to do”, the YouGov survey found. The poll, conducted on behalf of the Veganuary organisation, which encourages people to try veganism in January, asked 2,079 adults about their attitudes towards giving up animal products. YouGov found that 8% of respondents said they were already eating a plant-based diet. Previous estimates of the proportion of vegans in the UK have put the number much lower – in 2019, the Vegan Society estimated that 600,000 adults, or just over 1% of the population, were vegan. Market research group Kantar said last year that 1.9% of households include at least one vegan. Veganuary is being promoted with a cinema advertising campaign featuring Succession’s James Cromwell, which began today in about 500 cinemas across the country. The Veganuary organisation’s Toni Vernelli said: “As more people become aware of the incredible impact our food choices have on our day-to-day wellbeing and the health of our planet, attitudes towards eating vegan are changing. It is incredibly exciting to see one-third of Brits now interested in trying a vegan or plant-based diet, something that would have been inconceivable just a few years ago.” Veganism was born in 1944 when some members of the British Vegetarian Society asked for space in the group’s newsletter for people who also avoided eggs and dairy products. When the request was rejected, Donald Watson invented the term vegan and created a new quarterly publication with about 100 supporters, including George Bernard Shaw. It grew slowly. By 2014, the Vegan Society was pleased to say that as many as 150,000 people were vegans. That was the starting point of what advocates refer to as “the second wave of veganism”. Now every supermarket devotes space to its own plant-based ranges, vegan materials are entering mainstream fashion, and dozens of celebrities espouse veganism. Cadbury has followed food brands such as Greggs in launching plant-based products – there is now a vegan Dairy Milk, with almond paste instead of milk. The Great British Bake Off has had Vegan Week rounds since 2018 and featured the first vegan contestant, 19-year-old Freya Cox. Part of the change in attitudes is led by availability and convenience. Companies making fake meat burgers and home meal deliveries have been backed by venture capital, which means more than 50,000 products are now certified by the Vegan Society. Supermarkets offer plant-based Christmas ranges, while star chefs such as Jamie Oliver list dozens of vegan recipes on their websites. Yet although one in eight home-prepared meals is now vegan, according to Kantar, with less than two-thirds of meals now involving meat, most people who eat plant-based meals are not solely vegan but flexitarians. Two-thirds of meals in the UK still involve meat or fish, however, and the first Covid lockdown in 2020 led to a boom in meat consumption, with turkey sales up by 36% in 2020. That has led to higher meat prices and less availability of meat due to demand. Another lockdown-induced change – the growing number of pet owners – has led to a boom in vegan pet food. Judy Nadel and Damien Clarkson set up The Pack last year and launched their first products in September. “There’s no way we could have launched this five years ago,” Nadel said. “We had the idea in 2018 but we knew we had to wait for the right time, because people have to make their own conscious decisions about their own lifestyle and diet before they start thinking about their pets. “I think the reason why it went mainstream is that there was an inclusive, non-judgmental approach, where people were not forced to do everything at once and give up meat,” she added. “The innovations coming out in food and beauty and fashion have made it exciting to try.” “I’ve been vegan since 2013,” Clarkson said. “I would have to defend myself at parties and social gatherings about why I was vegan, where I got my protein from – I had to justify myself. I used to be ‘that guy, Damien, he’s a vegan’. I don’t get that now because people have 20 or 30 friends who are vegan.”The former Liverpool striker Daniel Sturridge has been ordered to pay £22,400 to a man who found his lost dog. The footballer said his pomeranian, named Lucci, was stolen from a house in Los Angeles in 2019, and he offered a reward for its safe return. Foster Washington, a rapper known as Killa Fame, shared pictures on social media and helped reunite Sturridge with his pet but said he was not paid. A Los Angeles court has now ordered Sturridge to pay Washington $30,000. Court documents show a default judgment was given, meaning Sturridge did not respond to the complaint. Washington said he felt “let down” by Sturridge. “Hopefully he pays up and doesn’t try to appeal it,” he said. “I’m excited about it, I’ve been fighting this case for over a year, I can’t believe it’s over. When we found the dog, I thought my life was going to be better.” Washington added he had yet to arrange the payment with Sturridge. Sturridge, 32, said he was “grateful” Lucci was back with his family and claimed he had paid a reward to a “young boy who found my dog”. Writing on Twitter on Saturday, he said: “On Christmas Day to have to relive the events of a robbery is shameful. Other people are trying to benefit for their own personal gain. Thank you to the young boy once again. This was 2 1/2 years ago and a crazy 24hrs. I’m very grateful lucci is back with our family. Love to all.” In July 2019, Sturridge, who now plays for Perth Glory in Australia’s A-League, said thieves had broken into a house in west Hollywood, California, and taken a number of bags in addition to his dog. He posted a video showing a broken glass door at the property and said: “Somebody’s broke into the house in LA, took my dog from the house. Listen, whoever knows who broke into my crib, I’ll pay you anything. I’m dead serious. “I wanna know what’s went on. I wanna know why they’ve took my dog. I wanna know why they’ve took bags from upstairs. “How can you break into a house in LA and take somebody’s dog? Are you crazy? You’ve come into a house to take a dog? “Yo, somebody please find my dog. I’ll pay anything, I’m dead serious. I want my dog back man.” In a separate post, he offered “20, 30 grand”, although it was not clear if he meant dollars or pounds.A British woman who worked as an estate agent in Florida has been shot dead while preparing to show a property, allegedly by an evicted tenant. Sara Trost, 40, from Southend, Essex, was shot on Thursday while sitting in her Jeep outside a house in Coral Springs, 40 miles north of Miami, at about 12.33pm. Police arrested Raymond Reese, 51, before later charging him with first-degree murder. A spokesperson said: “Following an extensive investigation, Raymond Wesley Reese has been charged with first-degree murder. Reese is currently being transported to the Palm Beach sheriffs office for processing.” Investigators have not detailed the circumstances surrounding the shooting. Emergency services tried to save Trost’s life on the property driveway, but she died before she could reach hospital. “When officers arrived, they discovered a vehicle with one female occupant in the driver’s seat suffering from multiple gunshot wounds. Despite immediate medical treatment, the driver succumbed to her injuries on scene and was pronounced dead,” the Coral Springs police department said. Detectives arrested Reese in nearby Boca Raton, and the police report said there were no additional suspects being sought. A resident, Donna Smith, suggested to local television station WPLG Local 10 that the shooter may have been a “disgruntled tenant” who was recently evicted from the home. Trost, who lived in Parkland, a city north of Miami, was married with a three-year-old daughter. She owned the business after working as an interior decorator.UK and the EU set to remain best of enemies as 2022 dawns Daniel Boffey Brussels Bureau Chief When Ursula von der Leyen, the European Commission president, gave her lengthy “state of the union” speech last September, there were mentions aplenty of the EU’s vital relationships with Turkey, the western Balkans and Africa. The continent’s security and economic prosperity depended on nurturing and deepening ties with its neighbourhood, explained Von der Leyen, a former student at the London School of Economics. Britain did not register in the hour-long speech. Not a word was said of the UK, the recently exited EU member state and the sixth-largest world economy. Now, read back Liz Truss’s, admittedly short, back catalogue of speeches as foreign secretary. A visitor from Mars might assume that the UK is an Indo-Pacific power. Europe barely gets a mention and if it does it is described in terms of being historical baggage. The year 2021 has been marked by a remarkable level of petulance in the UK-EU relationship. The unfortunate reality is that 2022 doesn’t offer much hope of redemption. France will hold the rolling presidency of the EU for the first six months, during which Emmanuel Macron will have an election campaign to fight and win against the centre and far-right. Boris Johnson is on his uppers, with a large and vocal wing of the Conservative party frothing over Covid restrictions and a lack of Brexit dividend. It is quite hard to imagine a less favourable context for relations to be patched up and mature conversations to be had. And yet the spats must be buried, the difficult compromises simply have to be found. To give just one joint challenge as an example, the most immediate military and diplomatic threat to British interests on the global stage remains Russia, whose government has thought nothing of murdering people on UK soil. The Kremlin is building up a fighting force of more than 100,000 troops on its border with Ukraine, whose army and navy has been the beneficiary of British training and support. British and EU interests are as one on this. The UK did not want to include a foreign and security cooperation aspect to the Brexit deal it signed last Christmas Eve. After almost five years of being lectured at, and with the bloc being far from nimble in this area, this was perhaps understandable. The UK holds many of the cards, given the strength of its intelligence agencies and investment in its military. The government instead sought to focus on bilateral relations, particularly with France, with whom it has close military ties through the 2010 Lancaster House treaties. But the lesson of this year must surely be that relations with France, or indeed Germany, cannot be dealt with in isolation from the wider relationship with the EU. Downing Street has been seeking a summit between Johnson and Macron for months, where it had hoped to build on past agreements, but has been stonewalled by the Élysée Palace, irritated by the British approach to its treaties with the EU and its constant bad-mouthing of the project, whether over the vaccine rollout or the challenges of illegal migration. New German chancellor Olaf Scholz attended his first EU summit just a week ago, but it is yet to be seen whether a date with the British prime minister is even in the diary. Britain might not want to be part of the European union, but the EU exists. Ignoring one other might be an option but it isn’t a smart one. Omicron and decline in trade threaten 5% growth target Phillip Inman Economics Editor Britain’s economy heads into the new year weighed down by a decline in trade and falling business and consumer confidence. Exports were 14% below their 2018 average level in the third quarter of 2021, and there are many economists who doubt sales of UK products abroad will return to 2018 levels until 2024. UK car manufacturing output declined by more than a quarter in November as the combined shocks of Brexit and the after effects of the Delta variant forced factory owners, struggling with job vacancies and component shortages, to cut production. December, marred as it is by the Omicron variant, is not expected to provide a lift to an industry that exports 80% of what it makes. Samuel Tombs, chief UK economist at the consultancy Pantheon Macroeconomics, says: “Exporters have lost market share, due to the woefully inadequate EU trade deal,” adding that the uncertainty over trading relationships with the EU and other countries, “will continue to deter firms from making Britain their export base.” On the domestic front, high street sales have failed to hit their usual Christmas peaks and most events, indoor and outdoor, have reported declining visitors. The Bank of England, worried about the effect of inflation, became the first major central bank to raise interest rates since the pandemic started when it increased the base rate earlier this month. While the 0.15 percentage point nudge to 0.25% is unlikely to tip many businesses or households into bankruptcy, it came at a time when official figures showed levels of corporate insolvencies already hitting pre-pandemic levels. Insolvency experts have predicted a threefold increase in bankruptcies across the UK in 2022 and probably more if interest rates rise by more than the expected 0.5 percentage points by December next year. The BoE’s GDP growth forecast of 5% next year is beginning to look vulnerable to a downgrade, especially if the government fails to restrict the spread of the Omicron variant and consumer confidence falls further. Rishi Sunak has avoided providing a further stimulus to the economy after the closure of the furlough scheme after warnings about a rise in unemployment proved unfounded, notwithstanding a £1bn boost for the hospitality and leisure industries to support them during the crisis However, it has become clear that high levels of inflation will be sustained well into 2022, damaging households’ real disposable income and putting pressure on the chancelor to provide more support, especially for low-income families. In April, disposable incomes will probably be hit again by a near 40% to 50% rise in Ofgem’s energy price cap, which will push average inflation above 6%. At a deeper level, the Office for National Statistics revised data for business investment last week. It showed the money spent upgrading plant, machinery and IT fell by 2.5% in the third quarter to leave private-sector investment 11.7% below that seen in the fourth quarter of 2019. Taking note of the collapse in funds devoted to capital spending, the Office for Budget Responsiblity, the Treasury’s independent forecaster, said it could be partly laid at the door of Brexit, which had cost the UK 4% of its GDP, or around £80bn. The UK in a Changing Europe thinktank, based at Kings College London, said Brexit had left a permanent scar on the UK economy, damaging investment and trade, to the extent that it cost 6% of GDP. Andrew Goodwin, chief UK economist at Oxford Economics, said that the outlook for the economy would be determined by the way the government reacted to Omicron after a sharp slowdown in growth over the last five to six months. “The extent to which this hangover carries on into the first three months of 2022 will be determined by what we learn about the new variant of the virus, and the way in which the government responds,” he said. Serious hits to fishing and farming has left a sense of betrayal James Tapper If any areas were to see the sunlit uplands of Brexit, the most likely were surely farming and fishing. These two industries were being hamstrung by EU rules which government ministers could not change, Leave campaigners had claimed. Yet both have taken serious hits since last January, and there is deep anger and a sense of betrayal. “It’s been an abject failure,” said Jane Sandell, the chief executive of UK Fisheries, which owns Britain’s largest trawler, the Kirkella. It makes up the UK’s distant waters fleet, operating in Arctic waters and providing about 12% of the cod cooked in British chippies. “The only conclusion is that they just don’t care about the distant water sector.” Fishing is governed by international quota agreements to prevent fish stocks being destroyed by overfishing. Quotas are negotiated each December by Norway, Iceland, the Faroes, Greenland and the EU and in 2016 the fisheries’ minister, George Eustice, said British fishing was being harmed because the UK was denied a seat at the table. When UK officials took up that seat in December last year they failed, according to Sandell. “There was no deal with Norway. They just gave up,” she said. “They decided there wasn’t a deal to be done.” Since December 2020, the Kirkella has been moored in Hull. “It’s been devastating for our crews.” Jacob Rees Mogg’s “British fish” have mostly been Norwegian. Last week, the UK did reach a deal with Norway and the EU. “They’ve done a deal, but it’s not a good deal,” Sandell said. “The arctic cod [quota] is a derisory amount. We would normally have about 10,000 tonnes – there’s 500.” The government said UK vessels could catch 7,000 tonnes of arctic cod, an increase of 1,500 on last year – a statement Sandell said was misleading because it was half the normal amount. “We’ll be operating at 50% capacity next year. In the new year, we’re going to have to sit down and seriously think about the way ahead.” The Kirkella may be moved abroad. Not all crew are worse off – those catching mackerel and other pelagic fish have seen an increase in the amount they can catch. But, overall, the fishing fleet will be £300m worse off by 2026, according to the National Federation of Fishermen’s Organisations. At the start of the year, many vessels had been unable to land catches in European ports due to new export rules, but those issues had been resolved, according to NFFO chief executive Barrie Deas. The deal signed with the EU meant that UK fishermen could only catch 12,000 tonnes of non-quota fish in European waters, while their counterparts could take 40,000 tonnes. “It really reflects the imbalance that was in the Common Fisheries Policy,” he said. Farmers are less directly involved in EU trade but there is clear discontent about the outcome of Brexit. Farming is a significant part of the North Shropshire constituency, a Leave-dominated area that swung dramatically to the Lib Dems in a by-election earlier this month. The National Farmers’ Union said that total agri-food exports so far this year were down by 16% compared to 2019. Although the pandemic created trade problems, exports to the EU were down by 22% to £7.2bn, but only by 2% in the rest of the world to £4bn. Pig farmers have been hit by shortages of abattoir workers, while fruit and vegetable growers have not been able to find people to pick crops. Livestock farmers have benefited from higher prices caused by extra demand during the pandemic last year – beef is up about 15%. Nick Adams, an organic beef and sheep farmer in Derbyshire, helped campaign for Leave and remains convinced it was the right decision. “The prediction was that we would lose our main export market to Europe, but that hasn’t happened,” he said. As an organic farmer, he relies less on fertiliser, which has risen in cost, and does not need a large labour force. “I do appreciate other sectors have found it incredibly difficult, but relying on cheap labour needed to be changed and would have had to change anyway.” Elections and DUP are threat to the ‘protocol pragmatists’ Michael Savage Policy Editor Brexit has forced Northern Irish businesses to deal with new barriers, while the delicate political balances in the region have been strained. Yet close observers warn that the combination of Northern Ireland elections next year and the potential for a Tory leadership challenge mean further pitfalls await for the region in the months ahead. Months of negotiations with the European Union over the workings of the protocol governing the special treatment of Northern Ireland after Brexit have seen both sides give ground. However, the talks have also resulted in last week’s resignation of Lord Frost, the government’s chief negotiator, and provoked growing agitation from the Democratic Unionist party. Several figures said that negotiations that should be about technical fixes to the trading arrangements between Northern Ireland and Britain were already being used politically – and those tensions would only increase as May’s elections to Northern Ireland’s assembly in Stormont approached. Business figures in Northern Ireland said that some of the early teething troubles with the new arrangements had dissipated and their impact was now split. Some companies continue to be hit by the new checks taking place in the Irish Sea, but others are booming – exports to Ireland have increased 63% over the last year. While difficulties remain, Stephen Kelly, chief executive of Manufacturing NI, said the vast majority of his members were “protocol pragmatists” who wanted to make existing arrangements work. He also questioned the UK government’s previous insistence that the European Court of Justice (ECJ) be removed from oversight of the protocol – something Frost had demanded before his resignation. “I haven’t had a single conversation from 2016 to today with a business that is concerned about ECJ oversight,” said Kelly. “It is purely a political issue. The things that we’ve been asking for begin with stability, and there’s no doubt about it that we have an unstable political environment here. But business is getting on with it as best it can. Where you have prosperity, you have peace.” Political tensions are rising, however. The DUP are already reported to be planning to pressure Liz Truss, the foreign secretary now in charge of negotiations, to suspend part of the protocol. That would provoke some kind of reaction from Brussels. The UK had been softening its demands before Frost’s resignation, but there are fears that Truss’s leadership ambitions could tempt her to woo the support of Tory Brexiters with more sabre rattling. “At the beginning of the year, there was a hope that because we had the [overall UK-EU Brexit] agreement, because we had the protocol, there could have been the possibility of bedding down and just dealing with it,” said Katy Hayward, professor of political sociology at Queen’s University Belfast and senior fellow in the UK in a Changing Europe thinktank. “We end the year in a very different situation, with the DUP threatening to pull out of power sharing. Coming into this next assembly election by May next year, the protocol can be seen genuinely as a campaigning issue.”My first memory is cycling to the top of the path outside my childhood home, on a yellow kids’ bike with fat grey tyres. I turned on to the road and said aloud: “I’m me, doing this, now.” I was heading away from the home and people I loved, off on my own adventure. The love I felt as a child was unconditional, especially from my mother. I loved Dad deeply, but was wary of him. It was idyllic, our gang of kids playing out on a Salford council estate. My children are middle-class Londoners, but I sit on the porch and let them play in the street just like I did. Deciding to become an actor was a real risk. I was 17. My gut told me acting was my way out. After I got a part in Macbeth, I knew I had to play him for the Royal Shakespeare Company. I fell off the stage during my third performance as Macbeth. The lights cut out and I stepped into space, hitting the floor as my crown went flying. This was all I’d worked towards, it could have been devastating. I locked eyes with a bloke where I’d landed, and in his eyes saw total empathy. Joni Mitchell was once asked about how she came to write Blue. She said she’d had what’s called a nervous breakdown in the west, but in the east is known as a spiritual rebirth. In 2015, I had a severe breakdown of my own. I tried to apply her thinking. The vulnerability, the sense life might slip away, gave me a second bite. I wouldn’t wish it on my worst enemy, but it’s the best thing that has happened to me. When I left the hospital I went to stay at Mum’s, still ill. Getting back to work helped me find a way through it. Scripts got me out of bed. I knew I needed to provide for the children. It turns out pretending to be someone else is incredibly useful when I’m struggling. My physical appearance, accent and class might suggest machismo, but I’m anything but macho. I’m very much the son of my mother. I’m often cast in tough, gritty roles, but I’m nothing of the sort. We’re all forced to put that armour on, but I move through life gently. Even with all the success I’ve had, if I had my time again, I wouldn’t be an actor. I’d aim to run the National Theatre or a TV channel instead. As a working-class person, if you want to change things, that’s how to do it. Notionally, the arts are more inclusive now, but it’s not backed up by financial reality. If someone from my estate asked for my advice, I’d say acting is great, but aim bigger. Caring for my kids has transformed me. I wish my dad had shown his vulnerability more – I’ve never wanted to appear tough to my two. I cried when I was with them last weekend, their love makes me emotional. My daughter often says she feels like she has a girl for a dad. I take that as the greatest compliment. Close to Me airs weekly on Sundays at 9pm on Channel 4. All episodes available on All 4On New Year’s Day the UK will have been fully out of the European Union for a year: out of its political and legal structures, out of its single market, out of its customs union. This was what Boris Johnson and Michael Gove – who led the Leave campaign – had wanted. No awkward halfway house like Theresa May had negotiated. No Brexit light. Out completely. Gone. Brexit well and truly done. It was only with a clean break, they told us, that the UK could unleash its full potential, and wrestle free from the chains of EU regulation and bureaucracy. Liberated, we could take back control of our borders, our money, our laws. We could look outwards to the world in a new age of discovery, striking trade deals far away from the EU, creating fresh levels of prosperity for Global Britain. So a year on, how is it all going? The resignation last weekend of Lord Frost, the minister overseeing Brexit, gave a clue that all was not entirely well. “Brexit is now secure … the challenge for the government now is to deliver on the opportunities it gives us. You know my concerns about the current direction of travel,” Frost told the prime minister in his resignation letter. There are suggestions from some in government that Frost – a Brexit purist and fanatical deregulator – came to suspect Johnson had no real plan, no real detailed idea of how to make Brexit work beyond slogans and soundbites. He was also frustrated at the deadlock over Northern Ireland. A year into Brexit proper the UK is still at loggerheads with the EU over the Northern Ireland protocol that Frost and Johnson themselves negotiated and hailed as a good way to solve difficult border problems, as part of the withdrawal agreement. Whatever issues were riling Frost the most, delivering on Brexit promises is proving a lot harder than making them had been. What is clear is that, initially at least, Brexit is making us poorer. It has contributed to labour shortages in many business sectors as EU workers have returned home. There are grievances that run deep in specific sectors that were promised much and got almost nothing. Fishermen feel betrayed. Farmers are uncertain that a replacement subsidy and payments regime will be all it is being cracked up to be. Small businesses which export to the EU have been hit by extra costs and paperwork. The extent of economic damage from Brexit has been made clear by the Office for Budget Responsibility, which predicts that leaving the EU will reduce our long-term GDP by around 4%, compared to a fall of around 1.5% that will be caused by the pandemic. Rather than boosting our trade, Brexit is holding it back. Goods exports were down 14% year on year in the third quarter of 2021 according to the Office for National Statistics, with both exports to the EU and non-EU destinations suffering. According to the Food and Drink Federation, UK exports of food and drink are down £2.7bn (-15.9%) in the first three quarters of 2021 compared to pre-pandemic levels. This is largely due to a drop in sales to the EU of £2.4bn (-23.7%) resulting from new barriers to trade with the EU and the ongoing effects of the Covid pandemic. And this is before new rules on imports from the EU will be implemented in January, which business leaders say will lead to further falls and delays. Then food products from the EU will face extra physical inspections from the summer. Disentangling precisely what has been caused by the pandemic and what is the result of Brexit is difficult. For Johnson the coincidence of Covid and Brexit has proved convenient in one sense, shielding him from blame and obscuring the picture. But economists broadly agree that the long term economic hit from Brexit will be far greater than from the pandemic. Another central promise of the Leave campaign was that the UK would take back control of its borders. But in a year of tragic loss of lives in the Channel, and unseemly arguments between the French and the UK over who is to blame, that claim has looked utterly hollow. Refugees living in northern France have said Brexit has made it easier and more attractive for them to reach the UK in small boats, not less. Refugees who have fled conflict zones including Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq and Eritrea have told journalists that the fact that the UK is no longer part of the EU makes it more worthwhile risking the dangerous crossings because they could no longer be sent back to other European countries. Asked how Brexit has gone so far, Charles Grant, director of the thinktank the Centre for European Reform, says that, ironically, the most obvious post-Brexit negotiating successes for the Johnson government have been in areas where it has managed to stay close to the EU, not move away – such as the “rolling over” of EU trade deals. These have included agreements “rolled over” with Japan, Canada, Switzerland, Turkey and South Korea which have become bilateral ones with the UK. The only entirely new trade deal is that recently signed with Australia. The UK, he says, has also managed to secure agreement over flow of data with the EU, though this could soon be under threat as we seek to weaken privacy rules. In other areas, Grant says the UK has been weakened, particularly in its influence and power on the European and world stages. “Lord Frost refused to have any form of structured relationship on foreign and defence policy post-Brexit with the EU – though the EU wanted one – and we are paying a very heavy price as a result,” he says. “We lack intelligence about what is happening in the EU because we don’t have any regular system of meetings with people in Brussels. We can’t influence what is going on because we are not in the room. On issues such as Russia, China and climate issues the British – even outside the EU – could have a degree of influence because we have good people and real expertise.” Joël Reland, researcher at the independent thinktank UK in a Changing Europe, has worked on a “divergence tracker” which has looked at the extent to which the UK has succeeded in breaking free and replacing EU rules with its own, as Johnson promised. What he has found is a lack of divergence in many areas and an absence of a plan.“The main message is that the UK has been talking a big game on divergence. Frost has spoken repeatedly about the long dark years of EU membership and the need for change to free up growth and innovation but it has just not been followed through. If you look at the most significant policy changes in the budget or the net zero strategy there is very little that could not have been done inside the EU.” Reland says that in agriculture, city regulation, and areas such as green taxation and fintech, new ideas and progress on divergence are evident but in big areas such VAT little or nothing has happened. “There is no joined-up thinking on divergence strategy across government,” he says. The reason he says is that while replacing all EU regulation sounds neat, in practice it is complex and costly for business. “I think the UK is finding that it is really difficult to develop and there is more bureaucracy rather than less once you try to change everything,” he says. “The cost of getting all UK companies stamped with a UK mark rather than an EU mark … it is not worth the cost.” Our latest Opinium poll shows that over 60% of people now think Brexit has either gone badly or worse than they expected. It also found that 42% of people who voted Leave in 2016 had a negative view of how Brexit had turned out so far Getting Brexit done was the easy bit. Proving it was worth it and for the good is turning out to be far more difficult.The lost episode of the Morecambe and Wise Show screened this Christmas dates from 1970, just as the comedy duo had made it to BBC One. They would go on to be Britain’s most popular entertainment act, with their Christmas special seven years later drawing over 20 million viewers – by some estimates an extraordinary 28 million. Of course, that was in the days of only three TV channels, and no internet or smartphones. The viewing figures this time round will be considerably smaller. But what of the comedy itself? How will it have aged? Coincidentally, the day before the news broke of the rediscovered episode, the veteran actor Maureen Lipman claimed that comedy was on the brink of being wiped out as a result of “cancel culture”. “It’s in the balance,” she said, “whether we’re ever going to be funny again.” Leaving aside the question of whether Lipman herself was ever funny pre-cancel culture, do Morecambe and Wise fit her contention that “all the things that are being cancelled … are the things that have always made people laugh”? It’s hard to imagine Morecambe and Wise offending anyone, though we should never underestimate the forensic commitment of the most intrepid seekers of offence. Although they were at their height in an era in which crass racist and homophobic stereotypes and jokes were commonplace on TV in programmes such as Love Thy Neighbour and The Comedians, the duo’s comedy was at no one’s expense so much as their own. What it most evokes now, perhaps more than laughter, is an almost touching sense of innocence. The episode that is being screened this Christmas is the first in which they were filmed together in a double bed. That two middle-aged men in pyjamas shared a bed without any resort to double entendres or, indeed, explanation was a conceit that seemed bizarrely natural. According to his son, Eric Morecambe was reluctant to introduce the bed scene but was persuaded when he was reminded that his comedy heroes Laurel and Hardy used the same setting. The comedic links between Laurel and Hardy and Morecambe and Wise are not hard to see, in terms of slapstick and wilful misunderstandings, though it’s the sense of enduring friendship that is perhaps their joint comedy legacy. It’s about a relationship put to an unceasing, yet not unaffectionate, test of teasing, and from it springs a world of gentle absurdity that everyone can – or at least once could – recognise. In a different but related way, another highly productive partnership from that period was recently placed in the spotlight to fascinating effect. The year before the Morecambe and Wise episode was shot, the Beatles met to record, and film the recording of, an album that would become Let It Be. Because the album and resulting film were not released until after the band had split, they have long been known for the acrimony that led to the break-up. But in Get Back, Peter Jackson’s three-part eight-hour re-editing of the original film tapes made by Michael Lindsay-Hogg, we can see that the relationship between the band members, and in particular the lead songwriters John Lennon and Paul McCartney, was still drawing on substantial stores of mutual respect, understanding and fondness. It’s an amazing film in many respects, not least because of the insight it gives into the creation of music that would become timeless. You can’t quite believe there was a time when McCartney didn’t know what the lyrics were to the song Get Back, or that George Harrison was struggling to work out what words should come after “Something in the way she moves, attracts me like …” You feel like shouting the answer back through time. What is most affecting, though, is to witness the often non-verbal communication between Lennon and McCartney, a realm of creativity inaccessible to the rest of the world, including Harrison, who had grown into a songwriter to rival his bandmates. The way they laugh at each other, mess around with songs, then are gripped by moments of shared enthusiasm is magical to behold. It speaks of the bottomless possibilities when two people “get” each other, the sense of the very future opening up before your eyes, but also of the countless experiences from the past that went into forming that understanding. There is also, amid the banter and playfulness, an encroaching awareness of the final curtain being drawn. You can hear it in McCartney’s instant-classic ballads The Long and Winding Road and Let It Be – that knowledge that even the best of times come to an end. Or as Harrison put it in his debut solo album made up of his songs that Lennon and McCartney had rejected: All Things Must Pass. The Beatles lasted 10 years, Morecambe and Wise 43 years, concluding only with Morecambe’s death in 1984. How long they will last in the public imagination is anyone’s guess, although it’s undoubtedly true that music has a far longer shelf-life than comedy. But in both cases, what’s worth bearing in mind, particularly at a time of the year when we focus on family and community, are the love and joy that informed those partnerships, even in periods of tension. As Dawn French said last week, talking of her jealousy when her comedy partner Jennifer Saunders enjoyed huge success with Absolutely Fabulous: “When you love somebody as much as I love Jennifer, the glee and the happiness and the pride overshadows any other stuff in the long run.” Cue Morecambe and Wise dancing off into the brand new bright tomorrow to the strains of Bring Me Sunshine.A major Tory donor who backed Boris Johnson before the last election has openly questioned whether he should survive as Conservative leader, as another poll confirmed a clear poll lead for Labour. John Caudwell, the billionaire founder of Phones4U who handed the Tories £500,000 before the last election, said he had been hugely disappointed by “the mistakes and faux pas” made by No 10 and said he did not know if Johnson could or should lead the party into the next election. With Tory MPs openly speculating about who might replace Johnson, Caudwell said he had been particularly alarmed by Johnson’s initial attempt to protect former cabinet minister Owen Paterson from punishment after he was found to have lobbied ministers. “What really concerns me is this sleaze issue and him not standing firmly enough against what’s gone on,” he told the Observer. “I was unbelievably disappointed when I heard him almost defending and ... trying to find an out for Owen Paterson. [However,] I like him as a charismatic leader. It’s a very, very positive thing to have somebody who feels down to earth, so I like Boris from that point of view. “I’m not sure he can survive this, and I’m not even sure he should survive it. If he cleaned his act up and made it clear to MPs that they cannot take money from other sources, and started trying to get the government on a very ethical, whiter-than-white basis, I guess I would still support him. But I suppose the question you’ve really got to answer is, is it in his character to do so?” Caudwell also warned he would not continue to support the party should it continue to be hit by allegations of sleaze. “Whoever can rule this country properly, in my view, I will vote for,” he said. “I’m not a dyed-in-the-wool Conservative that will stay Conservative. I will vote for anybody that I believe has got the right set of principles to keep Britain great. The Conservative party can’t take my support for granted.” It comes as the latest Opinium poll for the Observer found that Labour retains a comfortable seven-point lead over the Tories following controversies over Paterson, the refurbishment of the prime minister’s Downing St flat and various claims of lockdown parties in Whitehall and No 10. Labour is on 39% of the vote, with the Tories on 32%. The prime minister’s personal approval ratings continue to be in the doldrums at -31%, though it is an improvement from the record low of -35% recorded two weeks ago. Some 24% approve of the job he is doing, with 55% disapproving. Keir Starmer’s approval rating stands at +4%, the highest since the end of April. Starmer has also taken the lead on who voters see as the best prime minister, leading 30% to 24% over Johnson. However, still both trail the 34% who opted for “none of these”. After a similar lead a fortnight ago, it represents the strongest run of leads on this question Opinium has shown for Starmer. While Caudwell said he did not think there was an obvious successor to Johnson, he criticised chancellor Rishi Sunak for his handling of the economy during the Covid crisis, arguing that the furlough scheme had made some people better off while ignoring others. He also praised Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, seen as a frontrunner to replace Johnson. “When you’re thinking about a new leader, there’s nobody that actually strikes me as being the right person,” he said. “I think Liz Truss could be that person. Rishi is very popular among a lot of the country because he has put money in people’s pockets. Has he done it really intelligently and got the best results out of my tax pounds? No, he hasn’t. Without doubt, he has not done that. “I’ve not been extremely complimentary about the Conservative party these last two years. But I still believe that it’s the best party to run this country, and I’d be terrified of the Lib Dems getting in and even more terrified of Labour.” Caudwell said he had held talks with the chancellor about his own plans for helping Britain through the pandemic, including investing in future infrastructure, green industry and apprenticeships. He also called on billionaires to add their name to a commitment to give away the vast majority of their wealth. “At the moment, there’s too few,” he said. “Governments need to do everything in their power to encourage people’s voluntary philanthropic giving in that way. Because what difference would it make to me, Jeff Bezos, or Elon Musk, or any of them to pledge their wealth? You don’t need to give it away until you die. And if you decide to give most of it away before, then you’ve got the privilege and the pride of making a huge difference to people’s lives. Why would you not do it? I can’t even begin to comprehend why people don’t do that.”According to Dame Maureen Lipman, comedy is in a terrible state. “It’s in the balance whether we’re ever going to be funny again,” she told the Today programme on Radio 4, in a segment tied to a YouGov poll that found that many people censor their beliefs when meeting strangers. (Shocking that more people don’t introduce themselves with their full voting history and a row about immigration.) Lipman gravely asserted that “we’re on the cusp of wiping out comedy”. Poor old comedy, now consigned to reclining permanently on a chaise longue, having swooned at the thought of causing offence one too many times. Poor old comedy, hooked up to the life-support machine, fighting off the virus of cancel culture. It’s 50/50: will we ever laugh again? There are plenty of arguments that continue to be made about cancel culture and whether it is real or imagined, by plenty of people who are smarter than I am, though it’s worth noting that many of the most successful comedians seem to grumble about it from their thrones of solid gold. The right to cause offence is, in some ways, a separate issue, one that balances finely on questions of power and taste. But the idea that comedy could disappear as a result of comedians being afraid to say whatever they want to say is a strange one for anyone who watches much comedy, particularly in a live setting. The live comedy spirit, more outrageous, more provocative, may not be making its way on to our screens in swaths, but that has always been the case. Television is often less risky than the live arena, because audiences are bigger and broader and that must be factored in. Perhaps it’s falling into the trap, nevertheless, to list TV comedies that are clever and witty and leave you with the sense of a boundary pushed or a line crossed, but when I watch Alma’s Not Normal or Ladhood or PEN15 or We Are Lady Parts, I never get the impression that they are holding much back. The bedfellow to poor comedy is the “it wouldn’t get made now” line, the equivalent of “it was better in my day”, usually used to complain about one trend in modern comedy, to punch up rather than punch down. I suspect many older shows I love would not be made now, but many shows that I love now would not have been made 20 years ago. Comedy evolves, changes, adapts, follows trends until it bucks them. Someone discharge comedy and free up the bed: the prognosis is that it’s absolutely fine. Michael Keaton: the human face of a drug disgrace While I do love an end-of-year list, deadlines mean that most of them are compiled in late November and so anything with a December-ish release date is probably going to miss out on the accolades. One such show is Dopesick, which came to an end on Disney+ last week and went straight into my own belated personal top 10. This harrowing drama series, starring Michael Keaton as a doctor in an Appalachian community that is all but wiped out by oxycontin abuse, has been outstanding, a furious and infuriating indictment of Purdue Pharma, the Sackler family and the repulsive profiteering of huge corporations, at the cost of hundreds of thousands of lives. Keaton, who is having a fine late career, is wonderful, and though it is not an easy watch, I would recommend it for those with a strong constitution and a few hours to spare. I tend to use end-of-year lists as a catch-up guide for what I should watch during the Christmas holidays, so in case you do the same and any of the following may have dropped off your radar, I can also recommend this lot. In My Skin, on iPlayer, is a brilliant, funny, heartbreaking drama about a teenage girl, her tough family life and mental illness, which might not sound like a festive joy, but is utterly beautiful. Landscapers, starring Olivia Colman (you may have heard of her), is an inventive drama quite unlike anything else around, and also on Sky is Yellowjackets, a dream for fans of 90s film stars and horror and survival series. Too late for the lists, but well worth a look. Thom Sonny Green: drummer who lives to play live I did not know that I was an Alt-J fan until recently, but their single U&amp;ME has been one of my favourites of the year. A news story about the band’s drummer, Thom Sonny Green, then caught my eye, as he has spent a lot of the pandemic shielding, but has said that he has decided he will be rejoining the band on tour from February. “Who knows what will happen if I catch Covid again? But anything I have to do to get back out on stage, I’ll do it,” he told the BBC. One of my unexpected highlights of 2021 was going to see Fontaines DC on a whim, in Manchester, finding myself in a room filled with 3,000 people for the first time since early 2020. As the band powered through their opening song, shouting “life ain’t always empty” on repeat, you could feel the crackle of energy rippling through the room. Music has been treated appallingly by this government during the pandemic and live music is once again on a precipice, but when it’s back, music reminds you of its sheer vitality and power. I had not known just how much I’d missed it. Green’s urgent need to be with the band on tour is completely human. • Rebecca Nicholson is an Observer columnistWhen Scarlet Davies first saw deaf actor Rose Ayling-Ellis on Strictly Come Dancing , she felt inspired. “Rose has had such a massive impact on young people,” said the 15-year-old, who is also deaf. “She reinforces the message that we shouldn’t let other people dictate to us because of our deafness.” Davies, who lives in Hertfordshire with her family and wants to be a teacher, said Ayling-Ellis made her “feel that I don’t need to worry about my deafness getting in the way of my future. She also makes me believe that I can do anything in life and my deafness will never stop me.” New research carried out in the wake of Ayling-Ellis’s victory on the BBC One show last weekend shows more than three-quarters of deaf children think the programme has given the public a better understanding of deafness. A survey of deaf children and their families by the National Deaf Children’s Society also found that Ayling-Ellis’s visibility led to two-thirds of deaf children feeling more confident about wearing their hearing aids, with seven in 10 saying they felt happier talking about their own deafness. Alongside her professional dance partner, Giovanni Pernice, Ayling-Ellis was crowned winner of the celebrity dance competition, despite being able to hear only parts of the music and keeping time by counting beats. The 27-year-old actor, who plays Frankie Lewis in EastEnders, has been praised for being open about her disability and for using British Sign Language (BSL) with Pernice, who learned the basics in order to be able to communicate with her. Interest in learning BSL has now exploded, thanks to Strictly, with some teaching centres reporting waiting lists for BSL courses. Figures support this increase in visibility: Google searches for BSL rose substantially during Strictly and, according to numbers from Signature, an awarding organisation for deaf communication qualifications, searches for local BSL courses more than doubled in 2021, compared with 2020.In particular, the pair’s routine in week eight created a surge in interest in learning BSL. Performed to the song Symphony by Clean Bandit featuring the Swedish singer Zara Larsson, the dance featured a silent section where the music cut out, giving non-deaf viewers an indication of what life can be like for some deaf people. Martin McLean, senior policy advisor at the National Deaf Children’s Society, said Ayling-Ellis’s winning run “helped put paid to lots of misconceptions about deaf people”, which “has meant a huge amount to deaf children and young people everywhere”. He said: “What’s important now is keeping this going because increased awareness and understanding of deafness can only be a good thing.” McLean urged people to take on board tips for communicating with deaf people, such as asking how they communicate, facing them when talking and never saying things such as “It doesn’t matter” or “I’ll tell you later”. He said: “It really will make a big difference next time they speak to a deaf child or young person. A little deaf awareness goes a very long way.” Lindsay Foster, the executive director of Signature, said the awareness raised was not only about the barriers and challenges that Ayling-Ellis overcame but “also the way in which Giovanni has embraced it”. She said: “His understanding and passion for learning alongside Rose has been thrilling to watch, and to see him using BSL on the show and with Rose really does show an outstanding commitment. “They have inspired so many people to think about learning and they have shown what a fun and engaging language it is.”The Department for Education recently confirmed it would be holding a public consultation at the start of next year on the possibility of launching a new GCSE in sign language, despite a moratorium on new subjects. The GCSE is being piloted in six schools, mostly in south-east England. Foster added: “With the potential for a GCSE in BSL within the next few years, we hope the momentum continues to improve communication for all.”Emma Barnett is the main presenter of Woman’s Hour on Radio 4 and a regular host on BBC Two’s Newsnight. Born into an Orthodox Jewish family in Manchester in 1985, she studied history and politics at Nottingham University and worked at the Daily Telegraph and LBC before joining the BBC in 2014, as a presenter on Radio 5 live. She lives in London with her husband and three-year-old son. This month, Barnett was named interviewer of the year at the British journalism awards and her new series Emma Meets… starts on Bloomberg QuickTake on 6 January. 1. Exhibition Trading Station: How Hot Drinks Shape Our Lives (Manchester Art Gallery) This exhibition tells the story of tea, coffee and hot chocolate, touching on histories of slavery and colonisation, but also looking at the social movement around these drinks. It shows women coming together over cups of tea – some of the first times that women were able to be out together, unaccompanied, were in tea houses. I loathe coffee and all the pomp around it, but I adore tea. I love having a tea with friends, and it’s incredibly important for me at work – that first cup when I’m writing or reading scripts. 2. Theatre Indecent (Menier Chocolate Factory) This is one of the best things I’ve ever seen. It’s about a play called The God of Vengeance, written by a Polish-Jewish playwright, which made it to Broadway in the 1920s. It centres on a lesbian relationship, which was scandalous at the time and led to the play being taken off Broadway. I went because Maureen Lipman told me it’d be the worst thing if I didn’t go, and you tend to do what Maureen Lipman says. I’m so glad I did. I found it incredibly moving as well as entertaining. 3. Game Tetris You’re going to laugh at this one, but I started playing Tetris again. I recently rediscovered, to my huge delight, my Gameboy from 1993 and it’s still working. But I’m not playing Tetris on that; I downloaded it on to my phone and I’m loving it. I really zone out to it, and I love a bit of competition with myself. It’s changed quite a lot over the years – it’s in colour now, and you can tweak the settings – but it’s great. I was an extremely good Tetris player back in the day and I’m hoping to regain that calibre. 4. Book There Is Nothing for You Here by Fiona Hill This is one of the best books I’ve read in a long time. Hill was a Russia adviser to Trump, and before that Obama. The chapter title that best describes [the book] is “From the Coal House to the White House” – Hill’s father was a miner in County Durham. There’s been a lot since the 2019 election about trying to understand the red wall and the political shifts that have happened, and somehow this book just manages to take it all in. It’s so much more than an insider’s guide to the White House. 5. TV A Very British Scandal (BBC One) I was lucky enough to be able to watch this early (it premieres on Boxing Day) because I interviewed [its star] Claire Foy for Woman’s Hour. It tells the story of the Duchess of Argyll, Margaret Campbell, who has been described as the first woman to be slut-shamed by the British media over a court case about adultery. She was named “the Dirty Duchess” and judged in all sorts of ways that her husband wasn’t. There’s loads of comedy as well as pathos and heartache, and Claire Foy is magnificent in it. 6. Music Why Don’t You by Cleo Sol A friend told me about this British singer-songwriter and I listened to her for the first time this year. I love the way her music sounds – the song Why Don’t You in particular – and she has a beautiful voice. It sounds like she’s talking to you and the lyrics are all quite pointed. But I was also really drawn by her artist profile image on Spotify: she’s lying back with her baby on her chest, not smiling but looking pensive. It’s so at odds with the highly coiffed images of musicians that you usually get.Thomas Anderson (Keanu Reeves) is the designer of The Matrix, a popular video game set in a virtual reality. His bosses have ordered a sequel; at an ideas meeting, his colleagues throw around a few ideas. PVC. Guns. Trans allegory. There is much winking and nudging in Lana Wachowski’s follow-up to the groundbreaking sci-fi films she co-created with her sister Lilly. Wachowski understands that in the 20 years since, their legacy has been boiled down to a catalogue of memes with lucrative franchise potential. Yet her newest chapter manages to be self-aware (at times overly so) without being entirely cynical. Those foggy on the details of the trilogy’s plot will benefit from the exposition-heavy first act. Plagued by memories of his past, Anderson – also known as Neo – must once again choose whether to take the red pill offered by hacker Bugs (Jessica Henwick, whip-smart), and wake up, or continue to swallow his current reality. Carrie-Anne Moss’s Tiffany, a motorcycle mechanic and mother of two whom Neo remembers as Trinity, has a choice to make too. The romance between them has always been the molten core of the Matrix films; their power as a duo is what drives the story forward. The actors’ chemistry remains flammable. “I’ve had dreams that weren’t just dreams,” he tells her. “You mean dreams that come true?” she replies. The film is a utopian riff on the apocalyptic source material, a Technicolor reimagining flooded with light and optimism. From the sun-dappled cinematography to the primary colours worn by Morpheus (Yahya Abdul-Mateen II), this world feels liberated from the oppressive green of computer code associated with the original.Other people! We stepped – some hesitantly, others pell-mell – back outside last spring. Even if summer and autumn 2021 often felt like a cautious return to normalish (terms and conditions very much applied), amps were dusted down, guitar techs tuned up and Portaloos could not be hired for love nor money as audiences and artists once again met IRL to exchange CO2. For every summer festival that went ahead, though, it felt like two were cancelled. The live music industry cried out for government-backed insurance schemes; these came very late in the day. Glastonbury went online, but glitched; Kano, Idles and Thom Yorke’s new project the Smile nonetheless made memories. Indoor venues reopened; the practice of being politely frisked for your Covid status became just another part of going out. The future kept arriving at pace: popular under lockdown, live streams remained an evolving fixture, many of them reinventing the live spectacle as they went. K-pop superstars BTS probably monopolised the most eyeballs, but in a crowded field, three more stood out: Bob Dylan’s stunning, smoke-filled Shadow Kingdom; Bicep’s retina-melting graphic introduction to Isles from London’s Saatchi Gallery; and St Vincent’s glitzy, sepia Down and Out Downtown. Non-fungible tokens became a trending search term: somewhere between a digital work of art and betting on crypto, NFTs generated cash for some forward-facing artists (Grimes and Kings of Leon among them); for smaller names, not so much. There was some encouraging news for the medium-sized artist, however. Hopes that the streaming model – under which artists are currently paid a pittance – might be reformed, at least in the UK, was sparked by an extensive cross-party Department for Digital, Culture Media and Sport inquiry calling for a “complete reset” of the economics of streaming remuneration. Almost as important as the streaming platforms themselves, as a shopfront for music, was TikTok, where memes, dance crazes and fan-generated creative reuses made reputations daily (such as the UK’s PinkPantheress) and gave old tracks (Little Simz’s Venom, say, or Salt-N-Pepa and En Vogue’s Whatta Man) new leases of life. Hand in hand with the new came blasts from the past. Get Back was a groundbreaking deep-dive documentary that threw back the veil on the Beatles’ final weeks in 1969, laying bare their creative process and inter-relationships. Summer of Soul, Questlove’s equally unmissable documentary about the 1969 Harlem Cultural festival, also made use of extraordinary vault footage and featured electrifying performances from everyone from Nina Simone to Sly and the Family Stone. While pop continued to throw out fresh sensations – welcome Olivia Rodrigo, pop-punk adjacent chanteuse of teen heartbreak, who bossed charts either side of the Atlantic – the old-school album could still shift dials. Abba returned in fantastic voice after nearly 40 years. Force majeure Adele, meanwhile, came back with 30, a full-throated, grownup record about female unhappiness and its remedies. Her desire to not settle for a life of quiet desperation was echoed in the indie sphere by Rebecca Lucy Taylor’s equally powerful second album as Self Esteem. And behind the scenes, one camera-shy talent came into his own: Adele’s was one of a number of records this year in which shadowy but tireless London producer Dean Josiah Cover, AKA Inflo, had a hand (Sault’s Nine and Little Simz’s Sometimes I Might Be Introvert were the other two headline-grabbers, not forgetting Cleo Sol’s Mother). A couple of very 21st-century US artists proved they weren’t mere flashes in the pan. Emotive and thought-provoking albums came from made-over Gen-Z siren Billie Eilish and genre-slaying, LGBTQ+ mischief-maker Lil Nas X. Dave’s second album, the pandemic-referencing, self-examining We’re All Alone in This Together, maintained the high bar of his first. Whether going deaf in public with friends once again, or the communities self-generating on TikTok, togetherness proved a mighty weapon this year. A case in point: Britney Spears’s conservatorship ended, with empowered fan activism widely credited as the irresistible force that pushed over the immovable legal object. The top 10 albums of 2021 1 . Ignorance The Weather Station Tamara Lindeman’s oblique, elliptical breakup album between humanity and the planet was as beautiful as it was desperate. 2. Prioritise Pleasure Self Esteem Recovering people-pleaser Rebecca Lucy Taylor channelled her considerable wit and frustration into this liberatory dance-pop opus. 3. Promises Floating Points, Pharoah Sanders and the LSO One electronic producer, one jazz great and an orchestra ebbed and flowed in stunning fashion. 4. Space 1.8 Nala Sinephro Spiritual jazz for right now, the medicinal debut album by Belgian-born, London-based harpist Sinephro was the panacea a wounded world demanded. 5. Nine Sault Sault’s albums of 2020 tackled the brutality of US law enforcement; this year’s Nine doubled down on the collective’s London roots, their pain and their joy. 6. Sometimes I Might Be Introvert Little Simz Incipient fame caused rapper Little Simz to tussle with her own demons, celebrate Black sisterhood and exude compassion and rage. 7. Isles Bicep Frequently tagged as 90s rave revivalists, the Northern Irish duo’s second album transcended their sources with a slew of emotive digital bangers. 8. For the First Time Black Country, New Road Guitar music for the 21st century: klezmer hooks, lashings of sax and riveting lyrics about sertraline. Unmissable. 9. Spare Ribs Sleaford Mods Great guests and peeks into Jason Williamson’s childhood elevated the Mods’ bilious sixth record alongside Andrew Fearne’s sublime beats. 10. Pohorylle Margo Cilker The contemporary country debut by this ninja-level Oregon troubadour had everything: dangerous rivers, broken hearts and a longing for “all of the wine in the world”. Turkey Donda Kanye West Overhyped and confused, West’s 10th album was no fitting tribute to the late Dr Donda West.Most people were keen to leave 2020 behind but had I known what was coming in 2021, I might have chosen to stay there. From the first days of January I started to experience extended bouts of dizziness – a feeling that the ground was moving beneath me, with bursts of tinnitus, nausea and head pressure thrown in. One thing I can tell you about near constant dizziness is that it’s not the ideal state to be in if you are trying to homeschool a four-year-old, entertain a stir-crazy one-year-old and hold down a full-time job. As for fun activities: just looking at a playground roundabout was enough to send me spinning out. I have a dormant blood cancer and my doctors were concerned that these symptoms could be a sign that it was developing. By September, I was travelling regularly into central London for various tests: blood work, ultrasound scans and the always-good-for-a-laugh bone marrow biopsy, in which a nurse forces a needle inside your hip bone to suck out the insides. None of these tests were as bad as the fear of what the results might bring. Dealing with all this after 18 months of the pandemic had made me somewhat dejected. Then one day, turning my head (dizzily) towards Trafalgar Square, I saw it – Heather Phillipson’s sculpture The End, on the fourth plinth. A giant dollop of cartoon cream that appeared to have splatted down on top of the plinth during lockdown when nobody was looking. From my angle I couldn’t really see the fly that sits on top, nor the drone hovering at the cherry – it was just a big, sweet treat sitting cheerily among the greying war generals and their horses. I forgot about the impending long needles and went to sit with it for five minutes, grinning at the sheer absurdity of its existence. “The impression of something being dumped from the stratosphere was a key part of the sculpture’s genesis,” says Phillipson when we are in touch by email. “I was sensing not only how it would land conceptually, but also, simply, visually – brazenly – among all that statuary.” The sculpture, there until spring 2022, is not called The End for nothing. For all its vibrant appearance, the cream can be seen as a metaphor for an increasingly unstable world. The drone speaks to the technological creep upending our lives, and as for the fly? Well, the work was conceived before the pandemic, but it couldn’t have landed on the plinth at a better time. The germy little insect seems to be saying: “Enjoy this tempting treat and you might get sick.” Yet these bleak undertones were not what resonated with me as I made my regular pilgrimages to see The End en route to the hospital. The tests would eventually come back stable and the dizziness was attributed to ongoing migraine-related issues. But while everything hung in the air, I embraced the cherry-topped cream’s most immediate and surface-level meaning: a little burst of joy in what had been a long, gloomy year.The Queen looked back on a year marked by personal, as well as national, grief in her Christmas Day message – the first since the loss of her husband – yet strived to strike a more hopeful tone for the year to come. As a second year marked by the Covid-19 pandemic drew towards its end, the 95-year-old monarch said she could understand the feelings of all those who have lost loved ones, having been bereaved herself in April. Nevertheless, she looked forward becoming the first British monarch to celebrate a platinum jubilee – 70 years on the throne – in 2022. “Although it’s a time of great happiness and good cheer for many, Christmas can be hard for those who have lost loved ones. This year, especially, I understand why,” the Queen said in her annual televised address. She wore the same sapphire chrysanthemum brooch as on her honeymoon in 1947, and displayed a framed picture of her and Prince Philip, the Duke of Edinburgh, on their 60th wedding anniversary. Her Majesty told the nation that she had drawn great comfort from the “warmth and affection” shown in the tributes to the Duke of Edinburgh’s life. “His sense of service, intellectual curiosity and capacity to squeeze fun out of any situation were all irrepressible. That mischievous, enquiring twinkle was as bright at the end as when I first set eyes on him,” she added. She also spoke fondly of Princes Charles and William, and their families, for their shared focus on climate change. But there was no reference – either on screen or by name during the nine-minute broadcast – to her middle son Prince Andrew or Harry and Meghan; the trio having recently stepped back from royal duties. The personal message is particularly apt given the upheaval many families have experienced during another year affected by coronavirus. The Queen acknowledged the impact of the Omicron variant, having cancelled her regular trip to Sandringham in order to spend Christmas at Windsor. She was joined on the day by Charles and Camilla, Clarence House announced. The Queen, whose speech was recorded in the White Drawing Room at Windsor Castle, said: “While Covid again means we can’t celebrate quite as we may have wished, we can still enjoy the many happy traditions.” She added: “I am sure someone somewhere today will remark that Christmas is a time for children. It’s an engaging truth, but only half the story. Perhaps it’s truer to say that Christmas can speak to the child within us all. Adults, when weighed down with worries, sometimes fail to see the joy in simple things, where children do not. “And, for me and my family, even with one familiar laugh missing this year, there will be joy in Christmas, as we have the chance to reminisce and see anew the wonder of the festive season through the eyes of our young children; of whom we were delighted to welcome four more this year.” The Queen also hinted at the prospect of reuniting with loved ones in the new year. She said: “February, just six weeks from now, will see the start of my Platinum Jubilee year, which I hope will be an opportunity for people everywhere to enjoy a sense of togetherness … and also to look ahead with confidence.” And she added that, next summer, the nation will host the Commonwealth Games. “The baton is currently travelling the length and breadth of the Commonwealth, heading towards Birmingham, a beacon of hope on its journey. It will be a chance to celebrate the achievements of athletes and the coming-together of like-minded nations,” she said. The Queen concluded: “I wish you all a very happy Christmas.” The speech was broadcast hours after the Prince of Wales and the Duchess of Cornwall arrived for their annual morning service at St George’s Chapel, Windsor Castle, without the Queen. It is understood the Queen’s absence from the service is a personal choice and follows a precautionary approach seen over the past six months. The service, which is ticketed, is attended by residents of the Windsor estate and members of the chapel congregation. Charles and Camilla were joined by the Earl and Countess of Wessex and the Duke and Duchess of Gloucester.“Well, you can never go wrong with bread, cheese and tomato,” Lou Reed, poet of the New York streets, would sometimes remark as he passed by one of the city’s multitude of pizzerias. The late musician was a fan of Coney Island’s legendary Totonno’s, close to the site of one of the first recorded pizza parlors established by Italian immigrants in the 1880s. One hundred and forty years on, New York’s obsessive relationship with cheap street pizza – there are around 1,700 pizzerias across the city – is as enmeshed as ever. But there are now cracks in that union. Rent is increasing, and supply chain problems leading to inflation is pushing up the cost of oil, cheese, wheat and meat. Deliveries are spotty, tomato sauce faces higher shipping costs, and pizza boxes are scarce. Now the existence of the fabled 99¢ or dollar pizza outlets that rely on fast, high-volume trade is being threatened after nearly two years of pandemic-reduced foot traffic. That is a blow not only to the city’s image, but also to many low-income New Yorkers in times of trouble. Abdul Muhammad, owner of 99 Cent Fresh Pizza, an eight-location chain in Manhattan, said he may raise the price of his slice for the first time since opening in 2001 if costs continue to rise. “I have to think about it because my customers, many of them unemployed and struggling to make rent, can’t afford to pay more.” 99 Cent Fresh stayed open during the pandemic except for one month in March 2020, in part, Muhammed said, because he knows that for some of his customers a slice is all the food they may get. “I feel bad because everybody has had a lot of problems with the coronavirus, no jobs, everything was closed, and the food stores that were open doubled their prices. So I try to stay open to help the people,” Muhammad added. Outside the 99 Cent Fresh location on 6th Avenue and 8th street, several customers said they relied on the outlet. “I come here when I’m hungry, but I can’t come here all the time because I’m diabetic,” said Sam Pegano, who said he was homeless. “It’s important to me, especially in the winter, because it’s hot food.” Others stopping by said the dollar slice was important to their lives because it was fast and cheap. “People in New York love dollar-slice pizza because they’re everywhere around the city and they’re open late,” said NYU data science graduate Bishank Gaglani. “Whenever you need to grab a bite, and don’t know what to have, you can have a slice and you’re good to go.” Gaglani said he’d noticed that prices had been rising. “I can’t imagine New York City without the dollar slice. But even if it goes to $1.50, people will still come.” Within New York’s complex pizza ecology, the 99¢ or dollar slice has a controversial reputation. Pizzerias like the famous John’s of Bleecker Street won’t touch the slice trade, opting only for complete pies. Others embellish their slices, and jack up prices to $4 or more. The search of the perfect pizza, a quixotic undertaking, occupies some minds, including that of Scott Weiner, owner of Scott’s Pizza Tours, which ferries enthusiasts across the city by bus in that search. According to Weiner, the dollar-slice business model emerged as a business that worked next to homeless shelters. “It almost seemed like a public service,” he said. After the 2008 recession, the business expanded to high foot-traffic areas and transportation hubs. “It became late-night food for drunk people with the same economics as a $3 slice shop but with more volume,” he said. “At the same time, it lowered the perception of quality of pizza in New York, and became a shining beacon in a city that’s so expensive to live. It was like, look at how cool this city is – you can get a slice of pizza for a dollar.” While New Yorkers are forced to pick and choose their battles – high rents being common – the cheap pizza slice is a way to, in a sense, win one back. “The citizenry is empowered by the variety of pizza in New York because you can choose between getting a 12in, high-quality, great-ingredients, skilled-producer single-serving Neapolitan pizza for $18 or the dollar-per-slice at the opposite end of the spectrum,” said Weiner. Both, Weiner said, can quench the thirst – “it just depends on what the thirst is”. At the same, Weiner worries that dollar-slice chain owners have committed themselves to their pricing in their name and cannot withstand pricing fluctuations. When leases are renewed with higher rents, that alone can wreck New York’s famously tough restaurant business model – which has been hit hard by the pandemic. By some estimates, more than 1,000 New York restaurants have closed during Covid-19. But – despite current travails – New York’s pizza love affair will continue. After all, it has such a long past. Pizza historian Peter Regas traces the first published accounts of a pizzeria to Naples around 1845, when it was described as the “gastronomic thermometer of the market”. By the end of the century, Italian immigrants had bought the tradition to New York, where they established pizza ovens, often in taverns, in harbor or beachfront neighborhoods like Red Hook and Coney Island. “It’s pretty definitive that New York is the home of the pizza in America,” Regas said. The industry grew after prohibition was lifted in 1933, and gre more during the Great Depression and after the second world war, spreading to Chicago. Regional differences began to develop. Chicago, home of the deep-crust pizza, has scant tradition of slice culture. The custom of the single slice, which came into being in the late 1940s, is integral to New York, despite the misgivings of more traditional pizzeria owners, said Regas. The loss of it, he believes, would be a loss to all. Regas recalled a legendary pizzeria, Di Fara on Avenue J in Brooklyn. The elderly owner, Dom, who had been operating there since 1964, became known as the guy for a slice. “I went there in 2006 and there were like 50 people in his shop just staring at him,” he said. “There’s a magic to pizza. There’s an individual personality to a pizza that you don’t necessary get with a hamburger or hot dog, and that plays into the mystery and drama of the whole thing.”An armed man was arrested after attempting to break into Windsor Castle where the Queen was celebrating Christmas with her family. Police said the intruder was carrying an offensive weapon but did not break into any buildings on Christmas Day morning. The suspect was being held in custody and the royals had been informed, Thames Valley police said. A 19-year-old man from Southampton was arrested on suspicion of breach or trespass of a protected site and possession of an offensive weapon, they added. Officers from Thames Valley and the Metropolitan police responded to a security breach at around 8.30am within the grounds of the castle in Berkshire. The Sunday Mirror said the arrest came after security controllers monitoring CCTV spotted a man carrying what appeared to be a crossbow. The Mail on Sunday said sources suggested the man was armed with a crossbow and used a rope ladder to scale a metal fence. Police did not confirm what the weapon was and it is not known where exactly the man was on the grounds and how close he got to the castle itself. Supt Rebecca Mears said: “An investigation is ongoing following this incident and we are working with colleagues from the Metropolitan police. “The man has been arrested on suspicion of breach or trespass of a protected site and possession of an offensive weapon. He remains in custody at this time. “We can confirm security processes were triggered within moments of the man entering the grounds and he did not enter any buildings. “Members of the royal family have been informed about the incident. We do not believe there is a wider danger to the public.” The Queen was celebrating Christmas at Windsor with Prince Charles and his wife, Camilla, in the first year since the death of her husband, the Duke of Edinburgh. Charles, Camilla, Edward and Sophie, along with their children Louise and James, attended a church service in St George’s Chapel, in the castle grounds, at 10.45am on Christmas Day.Lawyers are calling for stronger warnings on breast implants as government figures show at least 88 women in the UK have been diagnosed with cancer linked to the surgery. A small number of women who have implants can develop a rare type of lymphoma known as Breast Implant Associated Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma (BIA-ALCL). Several types of the implants most commonly associated with the disease – known as textured implants – are banned in France and Australia. The US Food and Drug Administration issued “black box” warnings – its most stringent warnings for drugs and medical devices – in October for breast implants, including their association with BIA-ALCL. There have been 733 cases of this cancer linked to breast implants reported worldwide and 36 deaths. The UK’s Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) provided the figure to the Observer of 88 reports of confirmed cases in BIA-ALCL in UK patients as of 31 October. That includes some cases where the original operation was not in Britain. The cosmetic surgery industry came under tougher regulatory scrutiny in 2010 after it was found that breast implants manufactured by the French company Poly Implant Prothèse (Pip) had been filled with cheap industrial silicone unauthorised for human use. It was estimated about 50,000 British women had had Pip implants fitted, which had more than double the rupture rate of other implants. A breast implant register was subsequently set up, but it is not mandatory and thousands of women are missing from it. Carole Roberts, 61, from Derby, had Pip implants fitted at a private London clinic in 2004. They were removed after the scandal emerged and replaced with textured implants at a private hospital in Birmingham in 2012. Seven years later, she was diagnosed with BIA-ALCL. She said: “I was concerned because I found a lump under my arm. I was diagnosed with BIA-ALCL and was told by the doctors ‘this is not breast cancer, this is down to your implants’. I was in absolute shock. I hadn’t been given any warnings about the risks.” Roberts recovered after an operation to remove the implants, followed by chemotherapy and radiation treatment. She is now one of eight women represented by legal firm Leigh Day who were diagnosed with BIA-ALCL and are now planning legal action over the alleged product failures of their implants. Bozena Michalowska Howells, head of product safety and consumer law at Leigh Day, said patients needed to be better informed about the risk. She said: “There should be better warnings and closer follow-up. The breast implant registry should also be mandatory.” Sarah Moore, a partner at the legal firm Hausfeld who has worked on product liability involving medical devices, said: “Breast implants shouldn’t be seen as an extension of Botox and having your eyebrows done. These are significant surgical interventions and there can be serious problems.” She said prominent warnings on possible side effects should be provided to the patient along similar lines to the “black box” warnings used by the FDA. Suzanne Turner, professor of cellular and molecular tumour biology at Cambridge University, said the Allergan Biocell textured implant which had been linked to higher rates of BIA-ALCL was voluntarily withdrawn by the manufacturer in July 2019. Out of 733 cases of the cancer identified by the FDA in January 2020, 620 were reported to have involved Allergan products. Turner, who is investigating whether BIA-ALCL may be linked to chemicals in implants, said regulators should consider withdrawing other textured breast implants. She said: “It should perhaps be the case that we need to understand more about the link between these implants and cancer before we let them be freely used.” She said patients who had had the implants faced a small risk and were not advised to have them removed. They should contact a doctor if they notice a sudden onset of swelling, a lump, and/or pain. Nora Nugent, a plastic surgeon and council member of the British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons (Baaps), said the MHRA was consulting on the regulatory system for medical devices, including implants, which may result in new requirements about advice given to patients. Baaps members are already advised to discuss the risk of BIA-ALCL with patients. Medical device regulations do not currently require patients to be provided with written warnings of the possible adverse effects of breast implants, but clinicians have a legal obligation to discuss the potential risks with patients. The MHRA said its consultation proposed a new requirement for information on implants to be provided for patients in leaflet or digital format. A spokesperson said: “This could include a caution that risks may emerge during the use of an implantable device.”When construction began to great fanfare in 2019, the Linglong car tyre factory outside of Belgrade was heralded as the jewel in the crown of Serbia’s burgeoning strategic partnership with China. Two years later, 500 Vietnamese construction workers were allegedly found last month working in conditions of forced labour with their passports confiscated and living in cramped and degrading conditions. The allegations have shocked Serbians with the European parliament demanding an investigation into to how a major case of human trafficking could have apparently been allowed to fester in the heart of Europe. Yet Linglong factory was only the first stop in a much longer journey towards the UK and Europe for many of the workers found at the factory. An Observer investigation has found that Serbia and Romania are being used as new gateways to Europe for smuggling and trafficking gangs who are using guest worker visa programmes to transport large numbers of Vietnamese workers into eastern Europe. There they are often exploited in factories and construction sites before some are transported across land borders into the EU and, eventually, to the UK. At all stages along the way, Vietnamese workers are highly likely to fall into forced labour or debt bondage, often charged up to £30,000 for passage to the UK. In 2019, the death of 39 Vietnamese migrants in a lorry container highlighted the dangers that many face when attempting to reach the UK. Those who do arrive safely are often forced to pay off their debts in nail bars, restaurants and cannabis farms, with Vietnamese people one of the largest groups of modern slavery victims in the UK year after year. Nusrat Uddin, a trafficking specialist from Wilson Solicitors LLP, regularly acts for victims of trafficking and modern slavery in the UK. She said that many of her recent clients started their journey by flying on work visas into Serbia or Romania: “Almost all [our clients were] promised decent work with fair wages, but the reality is far from that. Many then travel onwards through Europe, again under the false premise of better conditions elsewhere.” According to interviews with Vietnamese workers, the Vietnam to Serbia migration route began operating in the summer with more than 500 workers flying on guest worker visas from August-October. Each worker was charged around £1,700, generating at least £850,000 in revenue for recruitment agencies arranging visas, jobs and travel. Tuan* travelled from Vietnam to Serbia on a guest worker visa after seeing an ad on Facebook promising well-paid work in a German-owned tyre factory. He ended up at Linglong. “When I arrived I found that the factory was basically buying Vietnamese workers and when you got there you had to do whatever they told you to do,” he said. He claims they took his passport and he was forced to sleep 50 to a room. “Many of us got Covid … and we didn’t even get any medicine,” he added. “The water was very bad, it was yellow and undrinkable and sour. The food was also very bad and not enough, sometimes we would go into the forest and hunt for food, anything we could catch, like rabbits.” Linglong has previously denied that the workers were working in conditions of forced labour. In statements to Serbian media, the company said that it was not responsible for the workers but that they were employed by subcontractors and job agencies in Vietnam. The company said workers had now had their passports returned. Tuan says that out of those he was working alongside at the Linglong factory, 30 have already left Serbia for the UK, France and Germany, and many more were planning to go. He says since the tragedy of the lorry container deaths, new smuggling routes via Serbia and other eastern European countries had become increasingly popular. “For people who want to go to the UK, going to Serbia first is cheap. It only costs 50m VND (£1,626) for the visa, whereas the people who died in the lorry had to go many months on a dangerous route. So this choice is an easy one.” The Observer’s investigation found that workers who continued on to the EU and UK from the Balkans could take several routes, with smuggling networks taking Vietnamese people across the border into Romania and then on to Slovakia, Germany and France. They then waited in a makeshift camp for the chance to take an inflatable raft to the UK. Mimi Vu, an anti-trafficking expert living in Vietnam, has spent the past months researching the links between bilateral visa schemes in eastern Europe and the exploitation of Vietnamese migrant workers. “A key selling point to the Serbia route is that, like Romania, you can migrate legally through the reciprocal visa arrangements and it only costs a few thousand pounds, which is seen as a great bargain compared to the more traditional routes of going through Moscow or one of the central EU countries such as Poland or the Czech Republic into Europe, which can cost up to £30,000,” she said. “In the case of the Linglong factory, people were either coming because they were promised work in a German-owned factory or as a new Balkans gateway to the UK and Europe.” Vu says that the exploitation that workers like Tuan face when they arrive in countries such as Serbia and Romania also provides a huge incentive for workers to try to move into Europe and the UK in search of better paid work. Debt is also a major driver for people to try to move. The Observer has seen paperwork, called “Commitment not to escape forms” from Vietnamese recruitment agencies arranging guest worker visas for Serbia where workers must sign an agreement that their families must pay more than a year’s salary within a week if workers leave jobs. “Most people who leave Vietnam have family who have raised money for them to leave and they feel they can’t go back without paying off their debts,” said Vu. “So if they’re not earning what they’ve been promised in Serbia then the promise of higher paid work elsewhere is a huge incentive to leave.” Tuan says many of the Vietnamese he had been working with at Linglong had to raise thousands to pay for their passage into Europe. “Some who had been working at the factory with me had arranged to go to the UK before they arrived in Serbia,” he said. “I think they have to pay [smuggling gangs] around £6,000 to get them there from Romania. The smugglers would call family members in Vietnam to arrange to get the money so they could continue with their journey.” While Serbia is believed to be a new landing post used by criminal gangs, Romania, which signed a bilateral visa agreement with Vietnam in an effort to fill a huge manual labour shortage in 2018, is already established as a point of entry into Europe. Many also find themselves trapped in exploitative and dangerous work when they arrive there. Manh*, arrived in Romania with 60 other workers from Vietnam in 2019 to work for a major construction firm. By the end of his contract in 2021, half had crossed the border towards the UK and Europe. “Many ran away just one or two months after arrival,” he said. Manh’s brother, who worked for a different company in Romania, was among the many who left the country. “The pay in Romania was too low,” he said. Manh says he is now trapped in Romania. His contract expired in March and his employer has refused to extend it, leaving him working without a valid residence permit and unable to afford his flight home. When asked if he had any plans to leave Romania to search for work, he replied: “It’s a secret.” Over the past five years at least 231 Vietnamese people were intercepted trying to cross into Europe according to data from the Romanian border police. Hungarian police intercepted another 101 in the same period. Experts like Vu estimate this is only a very small portion of Vietnamese who leave Romania into western Europe. “As a new modus operandi, Vietnamese citizens enter Romania legally, based on work visas, and are subsequently detected on their way out of the country, trying to illegally cross the border,” a spokesperson from the Romanian border police told the Observer. Social media plays a central role for smuggling gangs. Facebook groups visited by the Observer offer “VIP” routes in private cars out of Romania. Packages are advertised with the dialling codes of the destination countries, with buyers able to pick the “44” package for the UK, “49” for Germany and “33 for France”. Prices fell during the pandemic, but a trip to the UK can still cost over £10,000. The reality of these VIP trips is harsh. Vietnamese migrants caught trying to leave Romania illegally by the country’s border police have been found hiding behind boxes of fruit or packed in minivans with “fake walls”. In the past year, people smuggling of Vietnamese migrants out of Romania has continued despite border restrictions caused by the pandemic. Trung, 36, now lives in Germany undocumented after having worked legally in Romania, taking the journey in the midst of a locked-down Europe in October 2020. Trung wanted to stay in Romania, but his employer refused to update the paperwork that would have let him remain legally in the country. He says he was faced with a choice of paying for forged paperwork or taking the risky journey to Germany. “The pay in Romania is only slightly higher than in Vietnam,” said Trung, whose Romanian employer paid him US$750 per month. Trung knew the dangers of travelling west, but he went anyway. “I believe in fate. Deciding to go is like a game of cards: chances of success are 50-50.” Yet for those trying to reach the UK, the perils are greater than those destined for France or Germany. Regardless of whatever VIP package they might have purchased to ensure safe passage, all must attempt the Channel crossing on flimsy rubber boats. “Historically, Vietnamese smugglers have had their own networks helping them get people to the UK in the back of lorries, but after Brexit and the resulting driver shortages and the 2019 container deaths they have had to pivot to using boat crossings that are controlled by non-Vietnamese smugglers,” says Vu. “In interviews I’ve conducted with Vietnamese who have made it to the camps in Dunkirk or across the Channel to the UK, all have said that crossing by boat is the only option.” She says that smugglers are telling Vietnamese in the makeshift camps in Dunkirk to stay apart and are then deliberately limiting the number of Vietnamese they are sending per boat so that they would be less visible among other ethnic groups. Last week, it was revealed that one of the 27 people who drowned while attempting the crossing last month was Vietnamese. Media reports named him as Le Van Hau, from the Nghe An province in Vietnam, who reportedly paid around £10,000 to find legal work in Poland before leaving immediately for France to attempt the Channel crossing. Once in the UK, and with thousands of pounds of debt, Vietnamese people become one of the most vulnerable groups to be trafficked into forced labour, debt bondage and sexual exploitation. Official Home Office figures show that Vietnamese were the third largest national group to be identified as victims of modern slavery. There were 653 Vietnamese people confirmed as victims of slavery in 2020, with the majority discovered in cannabis farms and nail bars. Last month, in a freezing migrant camp in Dunkirk, two young Vietnamese men huddled together for warmth, one of a group of around 20 or 30 scattered among hundreds of others refugees in the wasteland of tents. They said they left their home in Vietnam because of flooding, and borrowed money from loan sharks for their visa to Serbia in order to travel to the UK to find work in nail bars. When they got to the UK, they would owe an additional £18,000. “It has taken us two months to get here but finally the end is in sight,” said one, breaking off from a FaceTime call with his wife and small child in Vietnam. “I don’t know when I’ll get to go home, I can’t return empty-handed.” • This article was amended on 26 December 2021. Text was added to state that Linglong has previously denied that workers were faced with conditions of forced labour, and to more accurately reflect the nature of Tuan’s claims. * Names have been changedRichard Hughes has one of the best views in London. From his open-plan office on the 14th floor of the Ministry of Justice building, he can see Buckingham Palace in one direction and parliament in the other. As well as compiling the government’s economic and financial forecasts, Hughes has become something of an amateur meteorologist. “You can look out of the window and say, ‘It is going to rain in 15 minutes’ time.’” A pandemic has meant Hughes’s day job has been a lot trickier than predicting the next shower in central London. As chair of the Office for Budget Responsibility, Hughes and his staff of 45 have had to delve into new disciplines to understand what is happening to the economy. “We spend a lot of time talking to public health experts, to epidemiologists, to [England’s chief medical officer] Chris Whitty and to Sage advisers. We start by saying: what’s the outlook for the virus? How effective are the vaccines? What are the prospects of having to reimpose Covid restrictions? Because all of that dictates the near-term economic outlook.” The point is emphasised by a glance around the OBR office, where there are only three other members of staff at their desks. Everybody else, thanks to the Omicron variant, is working from home. Hughes is 46 and went to school in Pittsburgh after his parents, both doctors, moved to a practice in the US. “In the postwar years, steel was in decline where I was growing up, so it was very much a city where you were watching it struggling with the trials and tribulations of the post-industrial period.” * * * CV Age 46 Family Single Education Attended Shady Side Academy in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, a private school that paved the way for him to study political science and government at Harvard before doing a master’s in development economics and international development at Oxford University. Pay He gets £150,000 a year as the OBR’s chair, and says the megabucks salaries offered by the City have never had much appeal: “For me, the questions facing policymakers are more interesting than those in the private sector.” Last holiday Venice Best advice he’s been given “Hope for the best but plan for the worst.” Biggest career mistake Nothing major springs to mind, he says. “Fortunately, I have made it this far without making too many.” Word he overuses “I have used ‘unprecedented’ an unprecedented number of times.” How he relaxes Reading and watching cricket. * * * He joined the Treasury in 2000, when Gordon Brown was in his pomp as chancellor, then after a brief spell advising the French finance ministry in 2007, spent eight years at the International Monetary Fund, which was in the throes of the global financial crisis when he arrived in 2008. Hughes worked on programmes for Iceland, Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Libya and South Sudan, but recalls the trickiest technical challenge being Zimbabwe during its period of hyperinflation. “Hyperinflation makes all your analytical tools almost impossible to use. When we arrived there in 2009, our biggest problem was trying to figure out what GDP was in any kind of hard currency, because the exchange rate between the Zimbabwe dollar and the US dollar was somewhere in the quadrillions.” The IMF team ended up constructing its own version of the “Big Mac index”, a way of comparing how much it costs to buy an internationally uniform product in any local currency. “We knew that civil servants were paid Z$100tn as their monthly salary and we asked them what could you buy with it and they said that basically it was enough to buy lunch on that day … Z$100tn was worth around US$2.50.” There were, he says, parallels with the pandemic. “When you are hit with an enormous shock, you gather information from wherever you can get it.” The OBR was set up by George Osborne when he became chancellor following the 2010 election. Designed to keep government economic forecasting honest, it was consistently too optimistic about the UK economy in its early years, but those mistakes were nothing compared with its forecast before the March 2020 budget. Published before the full implications of Covid were known, it assumed the economy would grow by about 1% last year. In the end, it contracted by almost 10%. “We have just had our biggest UK forecasting error in history in 2020,” says Hughes, who took over at the OBR in October last year, following a second spell at the Treasury that started on the day after the 2016 Brexit vote and a year at the Resolution Foundation thinktank. All forecasters make mistakes, he adds, but what matters is what they learn from the experience. Noting that the UK seems to face a big shock every 10 years, he says: “There was a lot of uncertainty in March and April of 2020. We didn’t know if any vaccine was going to come along, we didn’t know how the economy was going to cope with the stresses and strains, we didn’t know how long the lockdown was going to last.” The OBR, like forecasters, also underestimated how adaptable the economy would be to pandemic conditions, with the result that each lockdown has caused less economic damage than the last. The tightening of restrictions under plan B was factored in to the latest OBR forecasts prepared for Rishi Sunak’s October budget. “What is not assumed in our forecasts is a vaccine-escaping variant. We are all waiting to see what Omicron does to hospitalisations and deaths, and whether it requires tighter public health restrictions than are assumed in plan B.” As well as forecasting the short-term path of the economy, the OBR looks at some of the longer-term fiscal risks facing the UK, such as the potential cost of climate change and the debt interest bill from the Covid crisis. “The pandemic has helped taken these things out of the realm of science fiction and shows these risks are not the work of catastrophists and Cassandras, but that these are risks that can happen to a country like the UK.” More in hope than in expectation, he adds: “It would be nice to have some semblance of normality to think about longer-term issues a bit more.”Nestled in the peaceful Lower Engadine valley in Switzerland, surrounded by spruce-covered mountains and their snow-dusted peaks, Laura Poretti’s Alpine chalet is something of a refuge. The Italian fashion-industry stalwart, who spent much of her childhood in the area with her grandfather, bought the place 14 years ago to counter the chaos of life in her native Milan, a two-and-a-half-hour drive away. “When I got married, my husband and I decided to have a different space, just for us. That’s why we decided to come here, because it’s far from people and the sun stays [out for] longer,” she laughs. “I have a very stressful life in Milano so when I come here it’s a place to relax.” Poretti is the creative director of concept store Milaura, which she founded in 2015 (a Dover Street Market meets Liberty-style boutique, stocking more than 250 brands, from Victoria Beckham to Birkenstock). Just before the pandemic, she embarked on an ambitious but unfortunately timed expansion in Milan’s trendy Brera area, and has spent much of the past two years getting her baby – successfully – back on track. Needless to say, weekend escapes to the mountains are well deserved and hard won. Each Friday, Poretti and her family pack up the car and head north. While her three daughters, aged 13, 11 and nine, swoosh off to ski school on a Saturday morning, the couple meet friends for lunches, go for walks or unwind at home. Unlike a lot of the surrounding homes, the three-bedroom space is modest. “The nicest thing about my house for me is that it’s simple and chic, which is the best combination,” she says. “Here in Engadina you can find outstanding, sophisticated chalets, but for me, that’s too much.” In the chalet, this translates to cosy with a side of cute. Traditional embroidered tablecloths and contemporary Tupperware she picked up locally sit alongside cushions and cashmere throws, ready to cuddle up with under the comforting eye of ancestral portraits. Elsewhere, pieces she has designed herself mingle with contemporary furniture, making the Swiss retreat an extension of her inviting Corso Garibaldi flagship, where Poretti also curates items she has bought with pieces she has conceived. Poretti points proudly to gingham bed linen she has designed and curtains she had made by craftswomen in the Italian Tyrolean region of Trentino-Alto Adige. “I designed this pattern of embroidery and I went to a very, very little place called Casere, near Austria, where all the old women specialise in a very specific technique called ricamo tombolo,” she says. “I wanted to have 20m of it made [for the windows] and it took these ladies three months to embroider that much!” Poretti is passionate about every inch of the haven she has created: “I love the details,” she says. One such example is the Milaura doll that pops up on everything from textiles to tea sets. She designed the figure after a cancer diagnosis in 2015, and the doll became an emblem of the battle she faced when diagnosed. Now the logo of her brand, it serves as a reminder of the struggle she overcame. “I’m always grateful for that experience, because if I had never had cancer, I would never have done Milaura – I wouldn’t have had the courage to do something like that,” she says. “I have been a manager in big companies, but to do your own thing is a completely different job. I love my job, I work really hard. My dream is not just to have a store, but to find and build a huge company.” After spending years “shopping with other people’s money” as she puts it, Poretti has “a very clear idea of what I like and don’t like”. The same confident assertion is extended to her interior. “I don’t like when houses are messy, I love to have everything nice and I hate branded things,” she says. “For me, being very elegant means to be unique and different, that’s why in my concept store I don’t just have well-known brands – and the same goes for my home.” While work takes Poretti and her family back to Milan each Monday, the Engadine haven gives her the balance she needs. “I used to travel all over the world with the collections,” she says. “Now I just love the idea of feeling comfortable here.” Milaura, Corso Garibaldi, 20, 20121 MilanIn the first of his four (stunning) Reith lectures on living with artificial intelligence, Prof Stuart Russell, of the University of California at Berkeley, began with an excerpt from a paper written by Alan Turing in 1950. Its title was Computing Machinery and Intelligence and in it Turing introduced many of the core ideas of what became the academic discipline of artificial intelligence (AI), including the sensation du jour of our own time, so-called machine learning. From this amazing text, Russell pulled one dramatic quote: “Once the machine thinking method had started, it would not take long to outstrip our feeble powers. At some stage therefore we should have to expect the machines to take control.” This thought was more forcefully articulated by IJ Good, one of Turing’s colleagues at Bletchley Park: “The first ultra-intelligent machine is the last invention that man need ever make, provided that the machine is docile enough to tell us how to keep it under control.” Russell was an inspired choice to lecture on AI, because he is simultaneously a world leader in the field (co-author, with Peter Norvig, of its canonical textbook, Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, for example) and someone who believes that the current approach to building “intelligent” machines is profoundly dangerous. This is because he regards the field’s prevailing concept of intelligence – the extent that actions can be expected to achieve given objectives – as fatally flawed. AI researchers build machines, give them certain specific objectives and judge them to be more or less intelligent by their success in achieving those objectives. This is probably OK in the laboratory. But, says Russell, “when we start moving out of the lab and into the real world, we find that we are unable to specify these objectives completely and correctly. In fact, defining the other objectives of self-driving cars, such as how to balance speed, passenger safety, sheep safety, legality, comfort, politeness, has turned out to be extraordinarily difficult.” That’s putting it politely, but it doesn’t seem to bother the giant tech corporations that are driving the development of increasingly capable, remorseless, single-minded machines and their ubiquitous installation at critical points in human society. This is the dystopian nightmare that Russell fears if his discipline continues on its current path and succeeds in creating super-intelligent machines. It’s the scenario implicit in the philosopher Nick Bostrom’s “paperclip apocalypse” thought-experiment and entertainingly simulated in the Universal Paperclips computer game. It is also, of course, heartily derided as implausible and alarmist by both the tech industry and AI researchers. One expert in the field famously joked that he worried about super-intelligent machines in the same way that he fretted about overpopulation on Mars. But for anyone who thinks that living in a world dominated by super-intelligent machines is a “not in my lifetime” prospect, here’s a salutary thought: we already live in such a world! The AIs in question are called corporations. They are definitely super-intelligent, in that the collective IQ of the humans they employ dwarfs that of ordinary people and, indeed, often of governments. They have immense wealth and resources. Their lifespans greatly exceed that of mere humans. And they exist to achieve one overriding objective: to increase and thereby maximise shareholder value. In order to achieve that they will relentlessly do whatever it takes, regardless of ethical considerations, collateral damage to society, democracy or the planet. One such super-intelligent machine is called Facebook. And here to illustrate that last point is an unambiguous statement of its overriding objective written by one of its most senior executives, Andrew Bosworth, on 18 June 2016: “We connect people. Period. That’s why all the work we do in growth is justified. All the questionable contact importing practices. All the subtle language that helps people stay searchable by friends. All of the work we have to do to bring more communication in. The work we will likely have to do in China some day. All of it.” As William Gibson famously observed, the future’s already here – it’s just not evenly distributed. What I’ve been reading Pick a side There Is no “Them” is an entertaining online rant by Antonio García Martínez against the “othering” of west coast tech billionaires by US east coast elites. Vote of confidence? Can Big Tech Serve Democracy? is a terrific review essay in the Boston Review by Henry Farrell and Glen Weyl about technology and the fate of democracy. Following the rules What Parking Tickets Teach Us About Corruption is a lovely post by Tim Harford on his blog.Just over a year ago, Anna-Jane Casey was forced to abandon the Covid-shuttered West End to deliver hundreds of parcels in a second-hand van. She was overjoyed to find herself back on stage this Christmas in one of theatreland’s most star-studded and critically acclaimed shows: Cabaret. But productions are at the mercy of Omicron, with the highly transmissible Covid variant ripping holes in casts and backstage staff daily, so Casey’s triumphant return to the West End has been put on hold. “Cabaret had to come off [last week] because there are about four to five cast members ill,” she said from her home in Kent. “It’s hit so many different departments: the dressers in the wardrobe department … our automation and sound and lighting. We’ve got a lot of cases across the board – and we’re a new production so the understudies aren’t ready to step in yet.” Cabaret – which stars Eddie Redmayne and Jessie Buckley in a revival of the 1960s musical about the Nazi-menaced nightlife of the Weimar republic – is not the only theatrical casualty of the wave of infections sweeping the capital. Last week more than 70 performances of 31 shows were axed, including Moulin Rouge, Mamma Mia! and Matilda. “Up until about four days ago, 2021 was rocking along just fine. But we seem to be back where we were last year,” said Casey, who has appeared in shows including Chicago and Billy Elliot. “Producers are losing money hand over fist. Our producers are being unbelievably generous and paying us while we are not working but I don’t know how long that will last.” One of the few unscathed West End shows is Pride &amp; Prejudice* (*sort of). But the play’s producer, David Pugh, fears for the theatre industry because the costs of daily testing and recruiting backup staff are mounting while audiences are staying away. Last week, the production lost £22,000. “Our running costs are increasing but our audiences are dipping. We’ve sold out but we are playing to about 35% of our audience,” said Pugh, who has won two Tony awards in the US and four Olivier awards in the UK. “We are all running out of money. Our box offices don’t reflect our increased costs. That is terrifying.” It costs £62,000 a week to stage Pride &amp; Prejudice, including salaries and theatre rental. “With the additional staffing and all the extra PCR testing, it has gone up to over £65,000 a week. Audiences are rightly expected not to mix in groups. But we have to keep going because there is no insurance.” The government-backed insurance scheme for live entertainment only covers shows closed by lockdowns – it does not pay out if actors or production staff catch Covid. Only a few dozen, mostly commercial conference companies, are thought to have used the scheme. “We all looked at it and went ‘no’ – there is nobody [in the theatre sector] using it,” said Pugh. Chancellor Rishi Sunak last week announced a £30m top-up to the culture recovery fund to support museums, cinemas, and theatres to cope with the impact of Omicron. “We really welcome it. But when you divide it up by the many, many people that have suffered, I’m not sure whether it’s going to be enough to stop some companies going into liquidation,” said Pugh. “When this happened before, there weren’t as many shows on. There must be 100 to 150 pantomimes in the country and they have every right to apply to the scheme.” The uncertainty is taking its toll, after the prime minister refused to spell out new restrictions for England before Christmas – unlike the Welsh and Scottish governments. Casey said no one involved in live entertainment could plan for the future. “It is unbelievably stressful,” she said. “There’s a lot of anxiety for people who work in any kind of live entertainment at the moment.” Casey, who plays the tragic but chilling nightclub dancer, Fraulein Kost, in Cabaret, is desperate not to go back to delivering parcels, which she and her husband were forced to do last year to pay their mortgage and provide for their children. “We did about eight months of deliveries from the start of the summer to December,” she says. “I hope I never have to do that again. Not because I am workshy. But it was quite a toll on myself and my husband’s mental health. It was quite disheartening. It was not what we trained to do and love to do.” The stakes are high for an industry that adds billions to the British economy. Arts and culture contributed £10.47bn to the UK economy in 2019, employing 226,000 people. “New productions will not be developed if the risk is all on the producers,” said Casey. “We’re getting to the point where an industry that we’ve had for hundreds of years and is world-leading is going to be thrown away because we don’t have a workable insurance policy.”With hundreds of thousands of Britons forced to self-isolate on Christmas Day, the spectre of Covid still hung over many people’s celebrations. But, thanks to social media, people were able to share their festivities, posting pictures of their drinks, decorations and, of course, their pets. The hashtag #JoinIn was trending on Twitter on Saturday, allowing users to admire each other’s makeshift Christmas dinners and solo celebrations. The initiative was driven by comedian Sarah Millican, who urged followers not to “leave people hanging” if they were looking for companionship. People responded in the spirit of Christmas, sharing photos and videos – whether they were alone or with friends and family. Twitter users also made themselves available for a chat, just in case an unlucky person started to feel adrift in self-isolation. Breakfast shares included Christmas tree-shaped crumpets and various forms of sandwiches while others opted for biscuits, teacakes or early Christmas pudding. Others took the discussion away from food, posting up pictures of their pets dressed in Christmas clothing, wreaking gift-wrapping havoc, and their own forms of entertainment. George, a cat at Stourbridge Junction station in the West Midlands, had his whole day at the station documented, from early morning moments by the Christmas tree through to the post-lunch washing up. “I am very lucky to have so many people who are kind to me. I know that this time of year can be difficult for many. Please don’t feel alone,” the account tweeted, sharing the community spirit everyone using the hashtag was trying to amplify. The conversations sought under Millican’s campaign included offers of jokes and singing, simple conversations about how people were spending their day and empathic exchanges about precious moments missed during the past year. Beside the entertainment, some shared how difficult Christmas could be because of loneliness or longing for relatives they had lost in the past year and received outpourings of sympathy. Twitter user Jo Griffiths tweeted: “I was feeling a bit low this morning but I’m a bit more festive now so I thought I’d say hi to the #JoinIn community. You’ve all kept me company for at least three Christmases now and I wish you all the most wonderful day.” Samaritans, which highlighted that its hotline was open for anyone wanting to talk, also tweeted advice on calming breathing exercises for anyone struggling with stress or anxiety.Merry Christmas everyone, hope you’re having a lovely Christmas day. There’s no official liveblog for this year’s Strictly Christmas special, but as usual we’ve opened a blog so you can sprinkle a little festive magic and sparkle in the comments below. It’s a FAB-U-LOUS lineup this year, without a previous contestant in sight – Mel Giedroyc, Adrian Chiles, Moira Stewart, Anne-Marie, Fred Sirieix and Jay Blades will all be taking to the Strictly dancefloor with their professional partners for the very first time. Who will win the Strictly Silver Star? Enjoy the blog, and a very merry Christmas and a happy new year to you all. See you in 2022!For decades, five families in Bruges have run the tourist boats that chug serenely along the beautiful Flemish city’s picturesque canals. Day in, day out, the guides describe the medieval belfry, low-sweeping bridges and rich history of this “Venice of the north”. But there may be stormy waters ahead for the boaters of Bruges. There is talk that Chinese investors and, even worse, people from Ghent, known locally as Stroppendragers or noose-bearers, could make waves. To comply with EU law, the municipality will, in 2027, end the existing licensing regime, after which concessions will be open to tender, and competition encouraged. With the boating companies also obliged to invest in electric boats – at €200,000 a vessel, double the cost of a diesel engine – the future is uncertain. A wary eye is being cast at boat companies in Ghent, a rival city since the Battle of Beverhoutsveld in 1382. The nickname of Stroppendragers for Ghent dwellers was earned after the gentry there were forced by the Holy Roman Emperor, Charles V, in 1540 to parade with ropes around their necks after a failed rebellion. “The five shipping companies have been providing tourist round-trips for years, some even since 1905,” councillor Geert Van Tieghem, from the N-VA, a conservative Flemish party, told Het Nieuwsblad. “That is a piece of nautical heritage that we absolutely must cherish. “Now that the market is opening up, the concern is understandable. The economic market is large. You never know when people show interest from China. Or from Ghent, where there are also boats. It is important to give the Bruges shipping companies a little more legal certainty when they make such large investments.” Jos Michielsens, from the boat company Venice Van Het Noorden, which has been a proud user of a jetty near the city’s old fish market, the Huidenvettersplein, since the 1950s, said it could be the end of an era. “We are asked to make such a heavy investment, but we are not assured that we will be able to reap the benefits,” he said. “That is upsetting and makes me fearful of the future. We can’t help but go with it – it’s with the knife at the throat. If the state obliges you to make a certain investment in your home, then you do that too, right?” The alderman for tourism in Bruges, Philip Pierins, said it was necessary for the licensing procedure to be “transparent” and that the concessions would now be time-limited rather than permanent. “The city of Bruges engaged a law firm to carry out a legal screening of the existing municipal bylaw on boat trips,” Pierins said. “This screening showed that the duration of the licences for the current licence-holders could be extended indefinitely, and because the current licence-holders were always given priority in the context of the application procedure, it was virtually impossible for another interested market-player to obtain a licence.” The obligation to replace diesel boats with electric vessels has been accompanied by municipal funding to help the companies establish charging-points at their jetties. A 2024 deadline for making the transition from diesel has been extended to 2027. The regulated price for a tourist trip has also increased from €10 to €12, he said. Pierins added: “It is therefore not the case that they are ‘putting a knife to their throats’, as they seem to indicate. They are not obliged to have a full electric fleet by the end of the licence period, but every old diesel boat they replace must be an electric boat from now on. “Another condition to which they are committed is that every shipping company from now on offers at least one digital payment option, in addition to the existing option to pay in cash,” he said.On Tuesday, a Christmas miracle. Not only did my niece, nephew and I all test negative for Covid, so did the cast of the Old Vic’s production of A Christmas Carol. After days of uncertainty, our longed-for outing was on. I warned Edith and William in advance that I would probably cry and so it came to pass. I wept copiously, while they rolled their eyes. In the interval, I tried to explain that because Dickens’s story has to do with regret – with choices wrongly made and paths never taken – its wondrous power only grows as you get older. What I didn’t tell them, wanting (probably naively) to preserve their innocence, is that its central message could at this point hardly be more necessary or less likely to be heeded. How loudly the “be kind” brigade trumpet their compassion on social media! And yet how rarely, on the part of their noisiest and seemingly most virtuous members, does this involve any kind of challenge. Their mercy extending only to those of whose behaviour they wholly approve, they could hardly be more different from dear Bob Cratchit and sweet-hearted Fred, both of whom love Ebenezer Scrooge – or try to love him – in spite of his great miserliness, and who, when he wakes on Christmas morning a changed man, accept in good faith his newfound generosity, the former resisting the urge to call “for help and a strait-waistcoat”, the latter practically shaking his uncle’s hand clean off as he welcomes him into his home. Outlaw country In the Sheffield suburb of Loxley, a local teacher, Dan Eaton, has found a carved cross that he believes marks the site of the birthplace of Robin Hood: a discovery made, somewhat conveniently, behind the playground of his school. Naturally, the council is thrilled. Here is more grist for its “Bring Robin Home” campaign (Hood has been associated with Loxley since the 16th century). But the people of Nottingham remain unconvinced. “Robin Hood is as much from Sheffield as Jarvis Cocker is from Nottingham,” says Merlita Bryan, a Labour councillor and the current sheriff of Nottingham. For her, Hood is properly Robin of Locksley, named for a long-lost village in Nottinghamshire. When I was a child, my father, who lived in Loxley, was quite determined to claim Hood as a Yorkshireman, a conviction born mostly of the fact that such a proto-socialist could not possibly have come from somewhere as far south as Nottingham. But out and about, his stories weren’t hard to believe. It was on ghostly Loxley Common, where the bodies of criminals were once gibbeted, that outlaws were supposed to have lain in wait for travellers from York. Walking our lurcher in the gloaming, I always felt afraid; as the sun sank, you practically ran towards the shop that marked the border with civilisation and not just because it was the only place for miles about that had a reliable supply of the semi-illicit and noisy sweet known as Space Dust. Glimpse of light From Loxley, you can look across the valley to Lodge Moor, Dungworth and Stannington, places where, at this time of year, people traditionally gather in the pub to sing village carols. My favourite Stannington carol is Hail Smiling Morn, a version of a glee (or part song) composed in 1810 by the comically named Reginald Spofforth. Its words (I know them by heart) describe a sunrise that “tips the hills with gold… at whose bright presence darkness flies away”: lines that speak so marvellously well to this time of year, when the winter solstice has passed and we begin to inch ever closer to the light. • Rachel Cooke is an Observer columnistOutsourced security guards at London’s Great Ormond Street hospital are planning to walk out for six weeks because they are being denied full sick pay and other standard NHS employment rights by a company owned by a leading Conservative donor, Michael Ashcroft. The guards, who are employed by Carlisle Support Services, which is owned by former Tory treasurer and deputy chairman Lord Ashcroft, are desperate to be taken in-house by the children’s hospital because they fear the devastating financial consequences of falling ill. “It is hard to believe, but I do not get sick pay. What this means is if I go to work, I put myself and others in danger. If I stay at home, I don’t make rent,” said Erica Rasheed, who has been working at the hospital since March. The world-renowned hospital’s 36 security guards are only entitled to statutory sick pay, which is just £96.35 a week, whereas NHS staff at the hospital, including in-house cleaners, get up to six months of full pay when ill. This means the security guards have to survive on less than £14 a day if they stay away from work. They are, however, entitled to full pay when self-isolating with Covid. “I’ve only been off one time – I have not taken any other sick leave in four years. I have to go to work when I’m ill,” said Peter Akintoye, a security guard, who has worked at the hospital since 2017. “It’s not just me – it is almost all of us. We cannot afford to be sick. We still have to come to work. We are left with no other option.” The guards, who earn just over £11 an hour, put themselves and their families at risk during the pandemic to help medical staff, sometimes escorting infectious patients, accompanied by paramedics, into the hospital. Now the hospital is facing another wave of the virus as the Omicron variant sweeps London. “It is dangerous for us. We are on the frontline. We walk around the whole hospital and deal with parents,” said Rasheed. The guards, who took three days of strike action earlier this month, will be walking out again in January. They claim they are being denied a range of employment rights enjoyed by their NHS colleagues, including full maternity pay, extra payments for unsociable hours and employer pension contributions. They are not paid more for working night shifts. “We are treated as second-tier staff,” said Akintoye, who has three children under nine. “There has to be some dignity and respect. It is so unfair.” The predominantly black and Asian guards argue they are being indirectly discriminated against because the largely white in-house workforce has superior terms and conditions. They are taking the hospital to an employment tribunal. “We are looked down on because we are not white, because we are immigrants,” said Rasheed. “I don’t doubt it at all.” Great Ormand Street staff receive eight weeks of full maternity pay and 18 weeks of half maternity pay – but the guards only get the statutory minimum, which is 90% of average earnings for the first six weeks and then no more than £151.97 a week. Rasheed, who is three months’ pregnant, dreads the prospect of having to get by on the legal minimum when her baby is born. “Now I’m pregnant I’m more worried than before. Maternity pay is worse than sick pay,” she said. “We can’t live on £650 or so a month [after six weeks] when our rent is £1,300 a month and our bills are £1,500 a month. Then there is food and transport. And stuff for the baby. We’re going to struggle. My husband will have to kill himself to find more work.” Carlisle Support Services, which generated revenues of £65m and profit before tax of almost £1.3m in 2019, is a supplier of outsourced cleaners, guards and retail staff in the UK. Ashcroft, who lives in Belize, has ultimate control of the firm as he holds more than half of its shares. Ashcroft, whose business empire is estimated to be worth in excess of £1.2bn, donated at least £10m to the Tories up to 2010. He has started donating to the party once more in recent years, including more than £200,000 since 2020. Ashcroft became a Conservative life peer in 2000 but was dogged by controversy about his tax status as he remained a “non dom” for 10 years, meaning his permanent home was not in the UK, so he did not pay UK tax on overseas earnings. He resigned his seat in the House of Lords in 2015 but retained his peerage. Petros Elia, general secretary of the United Voices of the World union, which represents the guards, accused Ashcroft’s firm and Great Ormand Street of ignoring their plight. “At a time when our NHS could soon be at breaking point, the refusal to give the security guards equality with their NHS counterparts tells you all you need to know about outsourcing. It’s all about profits and saving costs at the expense of worker wellbeing,” he said. Carlisle Support Services said the hospital’s security team’s terms and conditions of employment were transferred from the previous provider, when it took over the service in August. It said it was a large and ethical employer that recognised the right of employees to take lawful industrial action. It said the security team at the hospital earned more than the London living wage. It noted Ashcroft was not involved in any of the day-to-day operations of the company or the negotiation of client contracts. “At all times, Carlisle has and will maintain that all statutory employment provisions are offered to all employees,” the firm said in a statement. Great Ormond Street hospital said it respected and valued the security team’s contribution, particularly during the pandemic. It said it worked with an external provider approved by the Security Industry Authority to ensure a resilient and properly regulated security service. It said it had recently invited all members of the team to a series of staff meetings to discuss any concerns.The Reith Lectures (Radio 4) | BBC Sounds Consumed By Desire (Radio 4) | BBC Sounds Look at What You Could Have Won (Radio 4) | BBC Sounds John Grant’s Beautiful Creatures Storyglass The Reith Lectures this year have been an absolutely terrifying dystopian vision of the obliteration of the human race, all delivered in the gentle tones and reasoned arguments of Prof Stuart Russell, an artificial intelligence expert from the University of California. Russell speaks so mildly, he could be a family therapist; though he isn’t, as he said in passing in response to a question from another professor, Rachel Franklin, after his fourth lecture, which went out last week. In it, Russell discussed how humans might regulate our prospective new robot overlords. In his other three talks, he has been telling stories of how AI can affect – and already is affecting – war and economics, corporations and climate change; essentially, how artificial intelligence is taking over. Also, that unless we’re very careful with our computer coding, this may not be a good thing. “On the question of the long-term safety of general-purpose AI systems we’re … still some way away from knowing exactly how to define what the algorithm templates should be,” he said in the “sorry, you have terminal cancer” tones of a caring surgeon. “We have to solve those technical problems.” Last week’s lecture was intended to give us a bit of hope, as Russell suggested how we might wrest power away from the intelligent machines that are going to destroy us. All we have to do, he said, is make sure they’re programmed so that they understand they don’t know everything. “We have to build AI systems that know they don’t know the true objective, even though it’s what they must pursue,” he said. “The robot defers to the human.” To which the only response, as an artificial intelligence non-expert and parent of non-deferential teenagers, is: “Yeah, right.” All the questions to Russell after his lecture highlighted the ways his idea could fail, from competing companies (or countries) not sharing information to the (lack of) principles the regulations of these AI beings might be based on. Franklin’s “family therapist” question was this: if a husband and wife can’t agree on something, how will a domestic AI appliance know which human to defer to? Russell didn’t really answer. He is clearly a lovely man who believes in the benevolence of other humans and the wholesomeness of their desires. I feel he might benefit from listening to Philippa Perry’s new series, which is, coincidentally, about desire. Perry’s agony aunt column for the Observer Magazine shows her amazing ability to reframe difficult human emotions in easy-to-understand ways, and in last week’s episode of Consumed By Desire, the first of three, she used this talent, as well as her abundant charm, to get clever people to unpick what desire actually is. It’s not, as we might assume, something to do with sex (though it can be, obviously), but more a feeling engendered by our interaction with other humans. Perry talked to psychologist Adam Phillips, who linked desire to neediness and said that, although society tells us that neediness is embarrassing, and we should all be aiming for independence, adults are as dependent on others as babies are, and that is fine. Producer Martin Williams included the interactions between Perry and himself in the show, presumably to illustrate that desire comes from humans communicating with each other. This was sweet, though a little distracting. Anyhow, I desire to hear the next two episodes. Another comforting Radio 4 programme (can you tell I’ve been trying to avoid Real News?) came from journalist James McMahon, who took a tour around the 1980s/90s ITV darts quiz show Bullseye in Look at What You Could Have Won. This might have been a programme just for us oldies, but McMahon was clever enough to involve young people right from the start. Twenty-four-year-old Lana and 22-year-old Kamiah, neither of whom had ever seen Bullseye before, highlighted its charms: cool “random” prizes, real cash counted out and handed over, contestants only answering questions if their partner landed their darts. Also, its un-charms. It showcased working-class people, for sure, but only the white ones and mostly the men. McMahon’s presentation was a lovely thing – interested, intelligent, cheeky – making for one of the most heartwarming shows I heard all week. And for anyone who wants a little more of that valve-toasting stuff, may I recommend musician John Grant’s new podcast, Beautiful Creatures? Yes, he’s chatting to famous people, but he’s doing so in a lovely John Grant way. Last week’s episode, with Linda Thompson, was a delight. “I listened to a song of yours today,” said Grant, “called You Ain’t Goin’ Nowhere.” “You absolute idiot – why did you listen to that?” spluttered Thompson. “It’s terrible!” Really, how can AI ever be unpredictable enough to mimic human interaction?In June, a farm worker from Mexico, who requested to remain anonymous for fear of retaliation, was transported through a trafficking network from Monterey to work on farms in Georgia. They paid the traffickers 20,000 pesos, about $950, loaned from their mother, taking frequent trips back and forth to Monterey, before being told it was safe to leave. Then they were finally transported across the border. Initially, the worker was told they would be working on a blueberry farm, but was sent to a corn farming operation instead. “We arrived at the house where we would live, and had to clean the rooms ourselves. There were roaches, spiders, mosquitoes, and the mattresses were covered in lice,” the worker said. “The bathrooms and showers were dirty and clogged. The kitchen was horrible. We had no air conditioning in hot weather.” The worker began work daily at 3 or 4am and worked until 3 or 4pm with just one 15-minute lunch break, making just $225 for 15 days of work. They heard rumors that several workers had died. The worker claimed that Haitian immigrants were also brought into the same network. After 20 days at the corn farm, the worker was sent to a cucumber warehouse where they weren’t paid anything for their work, and then transferred to Texas before escaping the operation and returning to Mexico in July. “There was a lot of abuse for little pay,” the worker added. “It was a total fraud.” The contractor the worker said he worked under, JC Longoria Castro, was one of two dozen defendants indicted on federal conspiracy charges in October, based on findings from a multi-year investigation into a massive human smuggling and labor trafficking operation based in southern Georgia that extended to Florida and Texas. The indictments characterized the operation as “modern-day slavery”, a longstanding problem in the US agricultural industry where workers were smuggled from Central American countries to the US and imprisoned as contracted farm workers. Farmworkers in the US, especially immigrant workers, have few protections. They were excluded from the National Labor Relations Act passed in 1935, and from the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938. Workers in America’s agricultural fields are regularly subjected to abuses ranging from high occurrences of sexual assault and harassment, wage theft and safety issues including injuries, fatalities on the job and exposure to hazardous chemicals. The investigation, Operation Blooming Onion, found the conspirators forced workers to pay fees for transportation to the US, food, and housing through the H2-A work visa program, while withholding their travel and identification documents and forcing them to work for little to no pay in inhumane living conditions. The two dozen conspirators made $200m from their operation, laundering the money through land, houses, more than a dozen vehicles, the purchase of a restaurant and nightclub, and through a casino, according to the investigation. More than 100 workers were freed from the operation. The H2-A visa program is an often-used avenue for exploitation of migrant workers in the US, as it ties immigration status to employment on a temporary basis with no pathways to permanent citizenship. Many of these workers are forced to take on debt to recruiters to enter the H2-A visa program, with several cases of debt peonage, forced labor and human trafficking reported through the program. “It’s really the structure of the program that facilitates this kind of stuff happening, often with impunity,” said Daniel Costa, director of immigration law and policy research at the Economic Policy Institute. He cited a severe lack of labor law enforcement in the agricultural industry as a driving factor in widespread abuses of workers, and the lack of regulation of recruiters outside the US who connect migrant workers with temporary jobs. Inspections conducted by the wage and hour division of the US Department of Labor declined significantly over the past few decades due to underfunding, and the low number of inspectors responsible for overseeing a vast number of employers. “If you’re an agricultural employer, there’s only around a 1% chance that you’ll be investigated for anything in any given year, so they can pretty much get away with not treating your workers the way they should,” added Costa. The Georgia workers were threatened with deportation or violence if they did not comply with the conspirators. The indictment includes allegations of “raping, kidnapping and threatening or attempting to kill some of the workers or their families, and in many cases sold or traded the workers to other conspirators”. At least two workers died as a result of the living and working conditions and another was repeatedly raped, the indictment said. Some of the workers were promised up to $12 an hour in pay, but instead were ordered by armed overseers to dig up onions by hand for $0.20 per bucket. A grand jury indicted the 24 conspirators in a federal court in Waycross, Georgia, on counts including forced labor, mail fraud, witness tampering and conspiracy to commit money laundering. Arraignments in the case were scheduled for 21 December and 6 January at the southern district of Georgia federal courthouse in Waycross, Georgia.California authorities have closed some beaches in San Luis Obispo county after a 31-year-old man was pronounced dead following an encounter with a shark on Friday. The fatality marked the first death in a shark attack in 18 years in the area, which lies roughly midway between Los Angeles and Jan Jose. On Saturday, county officials were still in the process of contacting next of kin before they release the man’s identity, said Eric Endersby, the Morro Bay harbor patrol director. “It’s a horrible accident,” Endersby told CNN. “Fortunately, the weather and wind has ruined the surf, so there are not many surfers, but we’ve closed the waters for safety.” Bad weather in the area had meant that there were fewer people in the water than usual. “Mother Nature was on our side because we could have had more people out for sure,” Endersby told the LA Times. The patrol director said it was not clear whether anyone witnessed the attack, but that the man appeared to be a bodyboarder . He was declared dead when paramedics reached the scene. The attack followed a series of non-fatal shark encounters in the area. In 2019, student Nick Wapner was bitten by a Great White shark off Montaña de Oro state park. Another attack took place at the same beach four years earlier when a man was hit by a shark, believed to be an 8- to 10-foot juvenile. The last fatal encounter came in August 2003 when a 50-year-old woman was attacked as she swam with seals, a favorite prey of the Great White. Enderby told the newspaper that the presence of seals should be a warning to the presence of sharks. “If you see a lot of bird or seal activity in the water, that’s a sign that people should be looking to get out of the water,” he said. “Human attacks are largely a case of mistaken identity.”As the Observer goes to press on Christmas Day, the UK’s ruling Conservatives are contemplating breaking the back of the National Health Service. Maybe they are right to avoid taking all but the most cursory precautions against Omicron. Perhaps the relative mildness of the new variant will outweigh its wild infectiousness. The fact remains that, although they want the crisis to be over, they have no idea if it is over. And on this speculative hope, Conservative MPs are prepared to run the potentially fatal political risk of collapsing the NHS. So much attention focuses on Boris Johnson’s unfitness to be prime minister that the dissolution of the parliamentary Conservative party into warring bands of ideologues and fantasists is in danger of being lost. Its contempt for rules, its willingness to gamble away its chances of holding power show a movement in the grip of radical rightwing delusion. Contrary to much political commentary, the Conservatives have not reinvented themselves to advance the interests of their new working-class voters. The aristocratic disdain of a Downing Street that partied while forcing the country to lock down shows how widely the values of the Tory elite and the average voter have diverged. A supposed truth about politics, which has been dignified with the technocratic title of “May’s law of curvilinear disparity”, holds that the professional politicians at the top of a party cannot afford to be as extreme as activists below them. Members are free to indulge their whims. Serious politicians must hug the electorate close if they hope to attain power. All attempts to create laws as certain as the laws of physics to predict human behaviour fail. The state of the Conservative party shows that May’s law is no exception. A study for the UK in a Changing Europe thinktank found Conservative MPs were more lost in rightwing ideology than Conservative members, Conservative voters and, naturally, the electorate as a whole. Almost a quarter of Conservative members and 73% of the public agreed that there was “one law for the rich and another for the poor” (as Johnson’s career has shown). Just 5% of the Conservative MPs the authors surveyed believed it. Large majorities thought that big business takes advantage of the public and that ordinary people do not get a fair share of the nation’s wealth. Conservative politicians did not. The rightwing doctrine they cling to is not a coherent system of thought. I find the best way to understand it is as truculent over-confidence. Like angry children, Conservatives demand that the world be as they want it to be and not as it is. They do not realise that they have caught themselves in a feedback loop. The nationalism and Thatcherism that once brought them electoral successes are threatening to destroy the values they think they uphold. Read the Tory press and you cannot miss the laments at the failure to turn the UK into a capitalist powerhouse. Lord Frost walks out of the cabinet saying Brexit should have brought a “lightly regulated, low-tax” country. Liz Truss positions herself to benefit from Johnson’s downfall by posing as a free-trade fundamentalist who will unchain Britannia from the shackles of the state. They still cannot admit that Brexit was an attack on wealth-creation. The Office for Budget Responsibility forecasts it will cause twice the long-term economic damage of Covid, leave trade 15% lower, bring a £100bn annual hit to national income and cost £40bn in lost tax revenue. When you shrink the tax base, you have to raise taxes to cover the shortfall just to stand still. When you shrink the private sector, the size of the state grows in comparison by definition. When you pull your country out of the largest free-trade area in the world, you have no right to protest about economic decline. “Move fast and break things” may work as a slogan in Silicon Valley but it isn’t a programme for government. The creative destruction Conservatives thought they were unleashing with Brexit has created nothing of value and left only rubble behind. Their behaviour shows that at some level they grasp the magnitude of their failure. All revolutions devour their own children as the euphoria of the initial uprising degenerates into panic. The speed with which the Brexit revolutionaries are devouring theirs is the best indication of the depth of their insecurity. They don’t even have the table manners to wait until the kids are out of nappies before sharpening the carving knives. Johnson won the Brexit referendum and the 2019 election. Now the right cannot wait to be rid of him. With a roar of “enough is enough”, Steve Baker bans Nadine Dorries from a Conservative WhatsApp group for the crime of praising the prime minister. Her work in undermining the BBC counts for nothing. In Conservative culture, as in all cancel cultures, you must show a demeaning adherence to the ideological line or you are finished. When Johnson made Sajid Javid health secretary in June, the Tory press hailed him as a Covid “hawk”, who would resist any attempt to lock down the economy. This month, fears about the Omicron variant compelled him to introduce modest restrictions. Conservative MPs did not say that, if even Javid believed there was danger ahead, they should take notice. They heckled him in the Commons as he made the case for caution with cries of “resign” and “what a load of old tripe”. “Instead of taking him at face value, they are painting him as the enemy,” Labour’s health spokesman, Wes Streeting, told me in a voice filled with disbelief, and I thought, with a hint of anticipation as well. Every senior opposition figure I talk to believes the Conservatives are no longer capable of governing themselves or the country. They have dissolved into an extremist rabble that is contorted by magical thinking, heresy hunts, fits of temper and doctrinal spasms. If the opposition parties cooperate, and if Labour can break with the calamity of the Corbyn years, there is a chance that they can eject this government from power. A faint chance, I grant you, given the scale of the Tories’ electoral advantage but a chance nevertheless. And with that uncharacteristically cheery thought, I wish you all a merry Christmas. • Nick Cohen is an Observer columnistWe’re not off to a good start. I’m fumbling with my cap, the rubber clinging to my head lopsidedly, my hair straggling out. I take it off to start again and the woman who has swum the fickle English Channel more times than any other human, the “Queen of the Channel”, instructs me in how to correctly apply a swimming cap. Chloë McCardel and I are going for an ocean swim at Bondi. She dives into the foamy sea ahead of me – more slender mermaid than broad-shouldered Amazonian. Knee deep, I feel the current suck at my flesh. It’s not one of Bondi’s better days. Chest deep, I realise I’m being dragged out and my very amateur ocean-swimming abilities are no match for this surf. Panic rises. McCardel is an impatient white-cap in the distance. What was I thinking, suggesting a swim with superwoman? By any objective measure, Chloë McCardel is also a crazy woman, her commitment to putting herself through demented levels of physical and mental torture almost inexplicable. “I own crazy, I wear it as a badge of pride,” she tells me later. On 13 October, the 36-year-old Melbourne-born, Sydney-based ultra-marathon swimmer set a new world record, completing her 44th crossing of the English Channel in 10 hours and one minute. She left the water, stood on a French rock at Pointe de la Courte Dune and raised her lanolin-smeared arms in victory. McCardel’s 44 crossings of the world’s busiest shipping highway include three non-stop doubles (to France and back) and one triple non-stop (to France, back to England, then to France again). The “King of the Channel”, Englishman Kevin Murphy, has done only 34 crossings. McCardel has conquered other waters too: in 2014 she set a world record for the world’s longest non-stop ocean swim – 124.4km from Eleuthera Island in the Bahamas to the capital Nassau, a 41-hour, 21-minute journey. But the bare numbers and facts hardly tell McCardel’s story. There are good times when the sea is as smooth as a pane of glass, the water clarity is extraordinary, dolphins bounce around and she feels her technique is exquisite. But things can go bad quickly. In 2013 she jumped into the sea in Havana, Cuba, to attempt to be the first person to swim the 166km to the Florida Keys without a shark cage. After about 10 hours of heavenly swimming, with 40 or 50 hours ahead of her, and dusk setting in, McCardel started seeing translucent shapes many metres below her. “I’m like, ‘Oh, that’s interesting,’ and then literally like 10 minutes later, it was like a blanket underneath me just rising up and I’m like, ‘Oh this is not going to turn out well.’” She was stung dozens of times by what is believed to have been a jellyfish similar to a box or irukandji. Almost immediately, her right arm was paralysed and she could no longer use it to stroke. She called to her support team to get her out but they did not realise the extent of the problem and shouted affirmations – keep going, you can do it. In a marathon swim you never get out. The jellyfish were still rising. McCardel curled into a ball to reduce the surface area of her body. “Once my head went under the water, they were like: ‘We need to get her out.’” Twenty minutes or so after the first sting, she was hauled out of the water on to the boat. “I was whimpering, I was making a dying animal noise and they were picking the jellyfish stings off me. One person even pulled one out of my mouth like a bit of spaghetti. I just wanted to die – the pain was horrific.” So many other stories: the first time she attempted the Channel in 2009, she signed up for a double crossing and the captain of the support boat lost her for a time during a dark and stormy night when she was two-thirds of the way back to English shores. “They drifted away and I was screaming out ‘Don’t leave me behind’ – I was terrified.” She was battling two-metre waves and felt the ghostly presence of hulking ships which take a kilometre to come to a stop. During her first attempt to triple-cross the Channel in 2011, the weather turned. She was floundering, barely stroking with one arm and resisted her support crew’s attempts to get her out. “My brain was not functioning.” When she was pulled out she couldn’t walk, was delirious and mumbling and dangerously hypothermic. In intensive care at Canterbury Hospital, a doctor told her that 30 more minutes in the water and she would have been dead. There are clues in McCardel’s childhood to the woman she would become. Her role models – three older and sporty siblings – told her she could only play with them if she kept up. “I wanted to be better at whatever game they were playing or I wanted to be like them and so I would push myself.” When she was about seven, she insisted on pedalling with her 14-year-old brother on his paper round. He told her she couldn’t because she wouldn’t keep up. “I’m like, ‘No, I will keep up, I’m coming.’” Her parents were far from pushy and when she started to swim competitively as a teenager, they refused to take her to swim training at 5am (they agreed to pick her up afterwards). On weekdays, a friend’s mother took her and on weekends she set her alarm for 3.15am and rode her bike 9km. She remembers the day her mother came outside in a pink nightie and, unsuccessfully, tried to stop her pedalling off in the dark. McCardel feared she’d be in trouble when she got home. “Instead, my Dad’s like, ‘Right, we’re going to buy you some lights.’” But McCardel’s times weren’t fast enough to get her into the national championships in the open category and her parents encouraged her to quit swimming to concentrate on her final two years of study. After school, she went to Monash University to do an arts degree. At some point, though, she had decided she wanted to be “the best in the world at something”. She tried triathlon but failed to reach an elite level. She did well in the Melbourne marathon and started to think that distance might be where she could be the best. In 2007, she did a marathon swim, 11.3km between Frankston and Mornington. “It was so wild and free … I had this beautiful connection with the water.” About midway through the swim she was smashing the field – the first woman, with only one man ahead of her. “I just knew at that moment that I could be the best in the world at marathon swimming.” She came second, after the male swimmer. Chloë McCardel’s swimming career has not made her money. Most of her income comes from coaching others to swim the Channel and motivational speaking. (As a survivor of domestic violence, she also advocates for the criminalisation of coercive control.) Ahead of every swim, she runs fundraisers. But the goal is the thing that pulls her forward: “I set scary goals and then I’m so petrified I get out of bed in the morning.” She has set herself another scary goal: in 2022 she wants to be the first person in history to swim the 92km from England to Belgium through the stormy, frigid waters of the North Sea. “The idea is to get to the other end before I die. And if I don’t end up in intensive care, it’s a bonus.” The Bondi surf that is making me panicky is like a soak in a bath for McCardel. She strokes back towards me and, with no small amount of embarrassment, I tell her that I think we should grab a coffee instead. No dramas, she says as we reach the sand. As we towel off, she adds: “I don’t even like waves.”Bump isn’t the kind of production one is likely to describe as kitchen sink drama, or vérité, or any other cerebral-sounding words – it is too accessible and unassuming. And yet this very enjoyable and intelligently made series, co-created by Claudia Karvan and Kelsey Munro, is presented in a “window to the world” style, sustaining the sense of realism apparent from the very first episode but increasingly manifest over its arc. The show’s premise – and the focus of its very first episode – illustrates what my colleague Brigid Delaney described as a “real-life urban myth”. On a seemingly normal day, the astute and opinionated year 11 student Oly (Nathalie Morris) packs her lunch, goes to school and then gives birth – without even knowing she’s pregnant. Before long Oly, knocked for six, is yelling at a nurse in hospital who is holding her baby to “get that thing away from me!” – an early indication that the show isn’t going to take a sappy approach to parenthood and family. It is also an early indication of Oly’s unpredictable, bolshie behaviour – which sometimes feels innocuous, sometimes a little confronting, but is always rooted in thoughtfully drawn characterisation. The most satisfying element of the series, throughout the first season and now into its second, is the development of Oly’s character, thanks in no small part to a fine performance from Nathalie Morris – who is so wholly “her” that the idea of somebody else playing the part is almost unthinkable. Audiences return to a show like this not for visual flashiness or witty writing, but for characters with whom they become increasingly familiar and – if the series is jiving the way it should – increasingly attached to, almost as if they’re people in our own world. In Bump, their lives per se are not necessarily eventful but filled with circumstances earnestly treated by the writers and directors as opportunities to develop our relationship with them. There are other strong characters too – including Oly’s parents, Angie (the ever-charming Karvan) and Dom (Angus Sampson, in his most interesting Australian performance since his butt-clenching role in The Mule), who are separated but still on relatively good terms. Plus there’s Oly’s former boyfriend Lochie (Peter Thurnwald) who came out in the first season; the father of Oly’s baby, Santi (Carlos Sanson Jnr), who is an emotionally sensitive stoner; and Santi’s stepmother Rosa (Paula Garcia) and father Matias (Ricardo Scheihing Vasquez), the latter with whom Angie becomes romantically and perhaps regretfully entwined. Season two begins by exploring a question that has bemused and befuddled every human society since time immemorial: “Why do boys draw cocks on walls?” I half expected a flashback to early humans painting on the walls of the Lascaux caves or some such wondrous ancient location, stepping back and admiring their lewd art. But this scene is already a jump back in time – to a moment in Santi’s childhood, during which his mother raises the aforementioned question and also wonders why doodles of vulvas are nowhere near as ubiquitous as cock and balls. The ensuing dramas (this review encompasses season two’s first three eps) are large and small, spanning everything from big emotional events to icky scenes with body fluids. The former involves the fallout from Angie and Matias’s dalliance, and an example of the latter occurs when Santi sucks the snot out of his baby’s nose. According to his stoner pal, he clearly enjoyed the moment: “Babies can’t blow their own noses; it’s the only way.” In this scene some parents will nod their heads and say to themselves, “Yeah, I’d do that for my kid.” Everybody else will think, “That’s friggin gross.” At times Bump comes across as a little too effortless, the writers prioritising events that don’t feel particularly significant – as if the real drama is elsewhere, in some other scene that hasn’t been depicted. That’s part of the appeal of “window to the world”-style productions, implying that we are observing only one impression of the narrative universe. It takes no effort to return to this world, that’s for sure: the tone is light but meaningful, and the characters keep growing on you. • Bump’s second season is streaming now on Stan“You’re not considered a local in Milton unless you’re in a band, raise chickens and tend your own veggie patch,” laughs Katie Stidwill, co-owner of wholefoods cafe Milk Haus, set inside a converted cheese factory, surrounded by dairy farms. A surfboard roof rack on your car is also a must. Set between emerald hills and the aquamarine sea, three hours’ drive south of Sydney, Mollymook and Milton are the gorgeous, surf-and-turf fraternal twins of Shoalhaven. Alongside their sensible sibling, the fishing port and service centre of Ulladulla, they offer white-sand beaches, massive waves, lush farmland, tranquil lakes, national park wilderness and very impressive golf-courses, if you’re that way inclined. Renowned local big-wave surfer Brett Burcher, who’s also a teacher at the Milton public school, sums it all up nicely when he says: “we’re in a good paddock down here.” Thanks to the ripple effect of a certain seafood chef from Cornwall, the food and drink scene is also on par with an inner-city neighbourhood. Rick Stein may have kickstarted the gourmet ecosystem a dozen years ago (several of his former chefs now run their own restaurants), yet the region has always brimmed with finelocal meat, eggs, dairy, produce and, of course, seafood. While Mollymook and Milton may be enviable holiday destinations, they’re also vibrant and viable year-round communities that not only are home to farmers and fishers, tradies and alternative lifestylers but also, in a post-Covid world, to digital commuters, tree- and sea-changers. This shift is not without complexity. Like many coastal areas in New South Wales, the last two years have seen a rise in homelessness as the area’s property prices spike, while tourism dollars, and their associated jobs, plummeted. Monica Mudge, a yoga teacher and founder of the not-for-profit Treading Lightly, remains optimistic. “Everybody’s part of the story,” she says. “We all have something to learn from each other. That’s what resilience looks like.” After mobilising everyone to provide food hampers and clothing for those displaced during the 2019/20 bushfires, the Treading Lightly team have now created a whole pantry of multigenerational environmental and community initiatives. Don’t miss The beaches go on for ever hereabouts. Mollymook’s 2km crescent (with lifeguards) is a great place to start. At mid-tide, swim at the Bogey Hole natural rock pool, accessible by walking around Mollymook’s southern headland or driving through the Beachside golf course. Narrawallee, Rennies and Racecourse beaches are other less-crowded gems. Burrill Lake enters the sea in a swirl of turquoise waters and shifting sands at Dolphin Point. Take surfing lessons with world champion surfer Pam Burridge, who specialises in teaching women. Go kayaking or standup paddle-boarding at Narrawallee Inlet and Burrill Lake to see black swans, pelicans and sea eagles. Walking on Water will set you up at the best spots depending on tides and wind. They also do surf lessons. From May to November watch whales breaching offshore from the Ulladulla Lighthouse or South Pacific Heathland preserve. Follow the Aboriginal and interpretive signs on the new Giriwa walking track along Burrill Lake or take the short but challenging trek up Pigeon House Mountain in Morton national park. Check out the self-guided history trail of Milton, stopping along the way to browse its antiques, homewares and clothing shops. In Ulladulla, source handmade clothing, jewellery, pottery and skincare from Slow: A Handmade Collective of local artisans. A little bit of everything A collective sense of wellbeing permeates Cupitt’s Estate with its views over the vineyards to Burrill Lake, whether it’s couples enjoying wine and cheese tastings in the historic cellar door, guys doing a beer flight on the deck, diners scanning through the farm-to-table menu in the arched restaurant, or young families eating pizza on the terrace as they listen to live music on Sunday afternoons. There are also five new and sleek accommodation pods here – though their designer bathrooms and decks do not come cheap, with midweek prices starting from $550 a night. Owner Rosie Cupitt is also the founder of the region’s Slow Food Convivium, and has worked with a local Budawang elder of the Yuin nation, Uncle Noel Butler, to add local Indigenous foods to Slow Food’s international Ark of Taste. Where to eat Dog-friendly, indoor-outdoor community hub the Milton Hotel has fabulous updated pub grub, craft brews from in-house Dangerous Ales brewery, local live music, and even a great children’s playground. Bannisters Rooftop Bar and Grill is the casual alter ego to Rick Stein at Mollymook with local seafood from Lucky’s and other delicacies. Mollymook’s moody Gwylo is Matt Upson’s pumping, neon-lit, Asian fusion street-food restaurant, with killer cocktails. Alex Delly and Jo Thomas cook mostly with local ingredients at their bijou Small Town Food and Wine in Milton. Check out their next-door providore and Lagom sourdough bakery at Burrill Lake. Two-storey Ruse, with floor-to-ceiling windows overlooking Ulladulla Harbour, is the place to indulge in tequila cocktails, tacos, bright salads and bar snacks. Milk Haus provides splendid farm-to-table cafe fare with just-picked produce from its kitchen garden. Pick up whimsical flowers from Fred in the pop-up out the back. Where to sleep Location, location, location. With absolute water frontage as Lake Burrill enters the ocean, Dolphin Point Holiday Park has powered sites for caravans and simple cottages, with rates starting at $45 a night. For beach-house rentals, check out the options at Riparide, which offers insider tips on what to do while you’re here. On Dolphin Point headland, the Nest is an affordable base for two couples and four kids. When to go Summer is getting booked up, but autumn is still balmy with warm water and fewer crowds – and there’s wonderful whale watching during the cooler months.Nick Bowman gestures to the old-fashioned gaming consoles littering his desk. “Whenever I am having kind of a crappy day, I pull out the Nintendo,” he says, pointing. “That’s a licensed one. I also have a Raspberry Pi that I have all my emulators on. [And] I have the original Pokemon Red on my smartphone.” Bowman, an associate professor of journalism and creative media industries at Texas Tech University, has a vast collection of consoles and hundreds of cartridges and discs. Like me, he grew up in a time when video games were intimately tied to a physical device. We played using handheld consoles, while the games themselves were on cartridges – the kind you pulled out and blew out the dust from if it wasn’t working. As kids we spent hours immersed in gaming worlds, but when our devices were lost, broken or superseded, the game likely was too. While music and literature has long been well-preserved, and constantly re-released, games weren’t like this. For years our favourite games were inaccessible because they were non-interoperable: the cartridges didn’t work on other devices, and old computer games wouldn’t run on newer operating systems. Playing them was only possible thanks to a handful of dedicated individuals, often anonymous, who remade or ported them to work on current systems. “Think about all the cultural capital that was tied up in cartridges and power cables that our parents threw away,” says Bowman. “And then a couple of people found it and put it back together.” Reconnecting with your past self Bowman’s research shows how powerful the nostalgia from playing old video games can be. For many people, games are intimately tied to social networks. We played Mario tennis with our friends, or racing games with our dads. “We already know that games are a source of psychological wellbeing,” says Bowman. “…With nostalgia you get sort of a bonus relatedness because you get to connect to yourself. You’re replaying a game from a positive childhood memory. Those things can be particularly powerful for short-term stress release. “It’s almost like a digital smoke break. Return to this past life, play through it, and reconnect with yourself, literally. “In our research we found that people who have social nostalgia memories – memories of playing games with friends in the past – they feel connected to themselves and their friends in the past, and they also feel connected in the present.” Nowadays, companies are going after the market for nostalgic gaming. Nintendo is slowly adding Nintendo 64 games, some of which I played as a kid, to its Switch console. “I don’t think the industry was all that interested in providing nostalgic games until the retrogramers and the modders and the emulators took it upon themselves,” says Bowman. “Coders and hackers and modders, I think, saved classic gaming. They showed industry that there is a market.” ‘I had the tools and skills’ The Raspberry Pi Bowman has on his desk is a basic computer loaded with emulators. Emulators are software that can behave like the hardware of a video game console, allowing you to simulate a console on your computer. The coders and hackers that created the emulators are driven by many factors. One of the most famous emulator projects is MAME, which was first released almost twenty five years ago and has had hundreds of contributors. “That one probably has one of the most noble goals of emulators,” says Stuart Cairne, a Tasmanian software developer. “It was trying to emulate the original hardware and preserve it so that we don’t lose that part of our history. Some of the games that it emulates are from the mid and late seventies, or even earlier than that – hardware that was only available in universities.” But other emulators are created simply for the joy of playing them, or because of the technical challenge of making them work. Many developers still have access to the old devices, and even go to the extent of opening and inspecting the chips so they can replicate bugs and make accurate digital recreations. Carnie, whose day job is at a data company, often found himself contributing to these projects so favourite games like Monkey Island would work on the operating system he used. “I wanted to play the games, and being a developer I had the tools and skills ... I would often bring them to whatever platform I was on, which has been a Mac for the past 20 years. “It’s fun just to see these things come back. It’s all that nostalgia too – there’s that game I used to play when I was 10 or 13, and now it’s working on my PC.” After the launch of the iOS App Store in the late 2000s, Carnie started working on a Commodore 64 emulator for iPhones and iPads. He and his partner in the project joined up with a big Danish game developer with industry connections so they could license everything. “We had licensed the branding, so we were able to sell it as a Commodore64,” Carnie says. The emulator sold on the app store for US$4.99 and included five games: Dragons Den, Le Mans, Jupiter Lander, Arctic Shipwreck, and Jack Attack. Sometimes it was impossible to find who owned the rights to games – over the decades many of the companies went bust, or their catalogues were sold. “We had some big names on the emulator that we had fully licensed from people who had still retained their IP … but we also found that some of the developers we were able to communicate with no longer had the rights to it or did not know where [the rights] had gone.” “We had one [game] we had released on the Commodore 64 for free because we couldn’t track down the rights to it, and then the Bruce Lee foundation messaged us to say it had to be taken down because Bruce Lee’s name cannot be used,” Carnie says. ‘I remember that joy’ For many years emulators were the link to our childhoods. They existed, as Bowman and Carnie note, in somewhat of a legal grey area. Some of the most popular – such as Visual Boy Advance, a classic Gameboy game – were created by anonymous individuals, who sometimes faced lawsuits against them. Mostly emulators were technically difficult to use. The amateur-created software could be hard to find and install, and buggy. The grey market for the games was full of shady websites. “It was hard,” says Bowman. “[Just to play them] you had to learn a lot of coding on the fly. I remember downloading those files and you had to trust the link, and unzip it and load it to this file and not that file. And it was always kind of a wink, wink culture. “I remember that joy, I think it was [the game Contra], [of] hearing the sound. You go into the emulator and you have to do all the settings and I finally got it to play and all of a sudden ... I remember getting tingles that I was about to play a game, on my work computer, that I hadn’t seen since I was in my jammies.” Even if you still physically possess an old game disc, it can be a nightmare to play. My friend Praveen owns a disc of an old Star Wars shooting game originally created for MS Dos. Actually playing it started with trying to find a copy of Microsoft Windows 95. “After that it’s pretty straightforward,” he says. But as he continues, it really doesn’t sound like it. “You have to use the command line to install it,” he says. “The other cool thing about this game is that it’s one of the early games with sound. But if you want to hear the audio you have to manually configure your sound card.” Pretty straightforward. “Hardware comparability is a huge issue with these old games,” Praveen says. “They can’t ‘comprehend’ things like 1GB of RAM when they were designed to run on 16MB. “There’s a certain level of competence and pride that comes with grabbing a controller. Turning on a 30-year-old game and entering in the same code you did when you were 11, and it works,” says Bowman. “For a lot of older gamers we pride ourselves on not going to the guide but remembering it from when we were kids.” Retro gaming is now more democratised than ever. Emulators have become much easier over the years – even available on smartphones. I have encountered numerous people who dipped into their childhood games to get through Covid lockdowns and other stressors. A recent YouTube video by someone who remade Simpsons Hit &amp; Run has had more than five million views. It’s a game I also played for countless hours as a kid. Except I didn’t actually own it, so all those hours were actually at my cousin’s house. He remembers this too. “I don’t think it would be a stretch to say that those hobbyists, emulators and rom makers may well have saved gaming in two ways: provided people access to content that had become completely inaccessible, and reminded us of properties that we had actually forgotten about,” says Bowman.Sailing has always been something best appreciated from land, I thought. Crisp, white sails dotting Sydney harbour more of a beautiful sight than an activity to get involved in. I am also not fantastically wealthy having opted for a career in journalism rather than, say, owning a casino, so have long assumed this rules me out. And if money was no barrier, skills surely would be. The Sydney to Hobart race, Australia’s best known yacht event starting Boxing Day every year, certainly makes it look daunting. But here I am at a marina at the picturesque Rushcutters Bay in Sydney stepping aboard Karma – a 35ft Dufour – for a sailing lesson. My instructor is David Kelly who took up sailing in 1985, “because it was cheaper than flying”. Not exactly dispelling the rich man’s sport theory so far, but we’ll come back to that. Beginners would normally start with a minimum two-day training course ($595 at EastSail). We have only two hours. A quick chat about wind direction and different sailing modes – that I hope will make more sense on the water – and we’re pulling out into Sydney harbour on a glorious summer morning. Life jackets on of course, although Kelly reassures me the only time a student fell in was trying to get off the boat before the floating pier was installed. It seems in no time at all, I’m at the helm sailing “close haul”. This term has something to do with the wind in relation to the sails that I have still not fully grasped. There are many new nautical terms. Before we’ve reached the Harbour Bridge, I do a tac (turn the boat 90 degrees) and pull some ropes to assist with a “gybe” where the sail switches from one side of the vessel to the other. Kelly takes over so I can look up at the underside of the bridge I’ve driven over many times – a less conventional but no less impressive Sydney view. I realise how tense I’ve been at the helm, anxious about tipping over as the wind tilts us alarmingly to one side, keeping the sails in the right spot or avoiding other boats zipping about. For Kelly it’s the opposite. “It’s so natural. Sailing was my sanity. You have to slow down, it’s all about feeling the water.” So is it a rich man’s sport? “It definitely can be but it doesn’t have to be,” Kelly reassures. In terms of what to wear, the only thing you wouldn’t already find in an average wardrobe is a pair of gloves (about $30) but even that’s not essential. Crucially, you don’t need to own a boat. Because those that do need crew. The main cost is in gaining competence. After completing the initial two-day training, there’s the option to do a further three days to achieve competent crew or day skipper level ($1,125 at EastSail). There are other models, but this is the UK’s Royal Yachting Association certification, which is widely known and internationally recognised. At this point you’re ready to join a crew. The Cruising Yacht Club of Australia has a concierge scheme to match skippers with crew members or you can simply rock up a couple of hours before a race starts and ask boat owners directly. The trick, Kelly says, is to make yourself useful. Even if that’s helping to fold a sail or making a mean toastie in a galley kitchen, Kelly says “there’s a role for everyone”. He offers a word of caution: some clubs are “a bit posh, bit full of themselves”. Look for races run by clubs that have sail schools attached and you’ll generally find some graduate-friendly events. You can also organise a group of six to eight people and charter a boat. Prices start at about $1,000 a day. Kelly has sailed in many places – Singapore, Hong Kong, Seattle – but says Sydney is the best. “My favourite thing is to go for a sail up to Quarantine Bay, drop anchor, have a swim, have a beer.” So it is possible to enjoy sailing without being a mogul. It does seem inevitable, however, that aficionados will dream of owning their own boat one day, at which point you’re looking at a small fortune and ongoing maintenance costs. As we’re cruising around the harbour, Kelly points out the yacht he owns, with three others. It’s called Sanity. This piece was supported by Destination NSW and EastSailAbout 200 temperature records in the US may be broken over the next several days as warm air across Texas and the south-east is predicted to bring spring or even summer-like conditions, making Christmas Day likely to be the warmest in 50 to 100 years in some areas. The temperatures could make this the warmest December on record for many cities in the region including Dallas, Houston, New Orleans, St Louis and Kansas City. In some areas, records have already been broken: Wichita Falls in Texas hit 91F (33C) Friday, and Grandfield, Oklahoma, reached 89F. Both beat their Fourth of July high – back in the middle of summer. Nor were they alone. “Dallas, Houston, Oklahoma City and Tulsa, Oklahoma, Little Rock, Arkansas, and Memphis, Tennessee, all stand to match or top the record high for 25 December this Saturday,” AccuWeather senior meteorologist Brett Anderson said. The unseasonal heat will bring a forecast high to Dallas on Christmas day of 83F, six degrees under its Fourth of July high. Houston has a forecast high of 81F, which is nine degrees below its Independence Day reading. While temperatures 5-10 degrees above average are not totally uncommon for a few days, temperatures 10-12 degrees over an extended period – especially for an entire month – are rare. And while individual weather events can’t be blamed on a changing climate, extreme temperatures are increasingly common because of global heating. The high temperatures, coupled with low humidity, 25mph winds and minimal predictions for rainfall, have triggered winter wildfire warnings. The Storm Prediction Center issued an advisory for parts of west Texas and Oklahoma and east Colorado on Sunday. The warm trend is anticipated to continue through midweek before temperatures come down, but only slightly. In contrast, western states in the US are experiencing coastal rain and heavy high elevation snowfall and more than 6 million people along the California coast are under storm warnings that could bring 4in of rainfall throughout the next five days. Meteorologists say the conditions are caused by Arctic air pushing into the Pacific north-west that have produced a white Christmas for Seattle and Portland, which could see 4in of snow on Christmas Day. Seattle, reported CNN, has only seen snow on Christmas Day nine times in 127 years, while Oregon is in a state of emergency due to the potential for hazardous winter weather conditions and a sustained freeze. Parts of the north-east US, meanwhile, are under a winter weather advisories, largely due to freezing rain, though New England could see more widespread snowfall by Saturday night.The Omicron coronavirus variant vigorously continued its viral march across the US on Christmas Day, throwing many winter holiday celebrations into turmoil. Airlines continued to cancel hundreds of flights Saturday as staffing issues tied to Covid disrupted holiday celebrations during one of the busiest travel times of the year. FlightAware, a flight-tracking website, noted 921 flights entering, leaving or inside the US canceled Saturday, up from 690 Friday. Over 200 more flights were already canceled for Sunday. FlightAware does not say why flights are canceled. Delta, United and JetBlue on Friday had said the Omicron variant was causing staffing problems leading to flight cancellations. According to FlightAware, the three airlines canceled more than 10% of their Saturday scheduled flights. American Airlines also canceled 90 flights Saturday, about 3% of its schedule. The global tally of cancelled flights exceeded 5,400 trips over the weekend. Christian churches were disrupted, with many canceling in-person congregations, while others planned outdoor services or a hybrid of online and in-person worship, including requirements to wear masks and show proof of Covid-19 vaccinations. Among those canceling some or all in-person Christmas services were Washington national cathedral, St John the Divine in New York, the cathedral of the Episcopal Diocese of New York, and the historic Old South Church in Boston, after religious leaders said they did not want to place worshippers and church staff at risk of contracting the disease. That came as some government offices began reducing the recommended isolation periods for those testing positive, to limit workforce shortages, and moved to increase Covid testing capacity. New York state governor Kathy Hochul said that critical workers in education, healthcare, transportation, grocery stores and sanitation sectors would be allowed to return to work five days after testing positive under certain conditions. “We need you again, we need you to be able to go to work,” Hochul said. In New York City’s Brooklyn borough, police were called after larger-than-expected crowds descended on city-run sites where health officials were giving out free at-home Covid-19 tests. But even as Omicron’s spread exceeded recorded rates of transmission of any previous strain, hospitalizations remained lower than earlier peaks as the pandemic approached two years of its spread in the US. About 70,000 Americans were hospitalized with Covid-19 as of Christmas Eve, according to data from the US Department of Health and Human Services – an increase of about 2% from last week, and up about 50% from early November, but around half the peak of January. Health officials have repeatedly warned that the situation may change for the worse for tens of millions of Americans that remain unvaccinated. “There are many places in the country where hospitalizations now are increasing,” William Schaffner, a professor at Vanderbilt University Medical Center, told CNN. Many US hospitals are reporting staff shortages as medical personnel report in sick or are barred from work after vaccine mandates came into effect last month. Joe Biden has said that 1,000 military doctors, nurses, paramedics and other medical personnel could be deployed. Federal medical teams have already been sent to some hard-hit states, such as Michigan, in recent days. Anger over mask and vaccine mandates and other rules have triggered a political backlash in some Republican-led states, with political leaders moving to limit the role of health authorities. With many hospitals under pressure, front line health care workers are giving up a festive break with their families in order to staff intensive care units where coronavirus patients are suffering. With the stress on health teams acute in some midwest states, some staff are working 16-hour shifts, the New York Times reported from Indiana. “A lot of people, including myself, had scheduled time off but are now being asked to come in and pick up shifts to cover for one another and meet the increased demands of patient care,” said Graham Carlos, executive medical director at Eskenazi Health in Indianapolis, told the newspaper. And in some areas of the country, medical personnel report that Covid misinformation remains their greatest challenge. In West Virginia, which briefly led the nation in getting people the shots, Covid vaccine penetration now stubbornly remains at around 45%. Reasons vary for West Virginians’ struggle to embrace the vaccine. Chania Batten, a nurse at a drive-thru clinic at the only hospital in that state’s rural Roane county, said she faces an uphill battle to persuade residents who are resisting vaccination, whether on moral, personal or political grounds. “There’s still, honestly, a lot of questions about the vaccine and what’s in it,” Batten said. “There’s a lot of people who are still scared because there’s not enough information out there for them. You have all that paranoia. “It can become overwhelming,” she said of her health information struggle, “but it’s my job”. With patient numbers growing and staffing levels shrinking, projections show that the number of people hospitalized for the virus during the holiday season will approach the record of more than 1,000 set in September.More than six out of 10 voters believe Brexit has either gone badly or worse than they expected – a year after the UK left the EU, according to an anniversary poll for the Observer. The Opinium survey – coming a week after the minister in charge of Brexit, Lord Frost, resigned from Boris Johnson’s government – also found that 42% of people who voted Leave in 2016 had a negative view of how Brexit had turned out so far. 26% of Leave supporters said it had gone worse than they expected, while 16% of those who voted for Brexit said they had expected it to go badly and had been proved right. Among people who voted Remain, 86% said it had gone badly or worse than they expected. Overall, just 14% of all voters said Brexit had gone better than expected. Adam Drummond, of Opinium, said the most striking finding was that Leavers were now more hesitant about the virtues of Brexit than previously. “For most of the Brexit process any time you’d ask a question that could be boiled down to ‘is Brexit good or bad?’ you’d have all of the Remainers saying ‘bad’ and all of the Leavers saying ‘good’ and these would cancel each other out,” he said. “Now what we’re seeing is a significant minority of Leavers saying that things are going badly or at least worse than they expected. While 59% of Remain voters said, ‘I expected it to go badly and think it has’, only 17% of Leave voters said, ‘I expected it to go well and think it has’. “Only 7% of Remainers think Brexit has gone better than expected versus 26% of Leavers saying it has gone worse than expected. So instead of two uniformly opposing blocs, the Remain bloc are still mostly united on Brexit being bad while the Leave bloc are a bit more split.” The poll comes ahead of the introduction on 1 January of full customs checks on goods being exported from the EU to the UK, which business leaders believe could deter some smaller operators – such as food exporters – from supplying UK retailers as their costs and paperwork increase. These will be followed by more checks on food imports from mid-summer. Shane Brennan, chief executive of the Cold Chain Federation, said he expected many of the problems faced over the past year by small UK businesses exporting to the EU, particularly the rising cost of sending small amounts because of new charges, would now confront those sending small specialist consignments the other way, from the EU to the UK. He warned that this could lead to less availability of specialist food products from the continent arriving in UK shops. “Small traders have a choice, find a way to send more less often, or don’t send it at all,” Brennan said. “For lots of businesses you can’t justify sending a lorry load of fresh food a day or week and so you won’t do it. The net result is less variety, less fresh, quality specialist goods on the shelf, from outside the UK anyway.” His fears were echoed by Dominic Goudie, head of international trade at the Food and Drink Federation, who said: “As new trade barriers are introduced, it is inevitable that businesses will experience issues at the border. In some cases, this could result in significant barriers that risk blocking deliveries from EU suppliers altogether, at least temporarily, while businesses adjust to the new requirements or restructure their supply chains. “For just-in-time supply chains, this presents a real risk which could disrupt the operation of UK supply chains where a critically important ingredient is delayed or fails to arrive. Such delays could also lead to other ingredients already at factories being unusable.”Stephen Curry had 33 points, Otto Porter Jr scored seven of his 19 during a key late stretch and the Golden State Warriors regained to top spot in the NBA from Phoenix, beating the Suns 116-107 on Saturday. Golden State arrived in the desert short-handed, missing three of its top four scorers to health and safety protocols: Andrew Wiggins, Damion Lee and Jordan Poole. Curry carried most of the load, overcoming a mediocre shooting night to crack 20 points for the first time in nine Christmas games. He finished 10 for 27, including 5 for 16 from 3 to help the Warriors end Phoenix’s 15-game home winning streak. Instead of Curry, it was Porter taking over down the stretch, hitting a step-back three and a pair of jumpers in a span of 1:02. Chris Paul had 21 points and eight assists for Phoenix. Deandre Ayton finished with 18 points in the Suns’ third loss in 28 games. The two teams with the NBA’s best records played in just the third Christmas game in which both teams had a winning percentage of at least .800. Playing on Christmas is nothing new to the Warriors. This was their ninth straight Christmas Day game and 11th in 12 seasons. The Suns, once regulars on the Christmas schedule, were in their first since 2009. Both teams put on an after-the-presents offensive show at Footprint Center, sending oohs and aahs across the Footprint Center with each dunk and 3-pointer. Curry had 11 points in the first quarter and Gary Payton II a massive rebound slam as the Warriors built an early 10-point lead. The Suns revved it up in the second quarter, going on a 15-3 run and taking a 62-58 halftime lead on Paul’s last-second three-pointer. The teams continued to trade threes and baskets in transition, neither able to gain any separation until Golden State went on a short run to go up 107-99. The Suns pulled within two, but Porter hit consecutive jumpers and a long three to stretch Golden State’s lead to nine. Dallas Mavericks 116-120 Utah Jazz Donovan Mitchell scored 33 points and the Utah Jazz beat the Covid-19-depleted Dallas Mavericks 120-116 on Saturday night. Bojan Bogdanovic scored 25 points and Mike Conley had 22 to lift the Jazz (23-9) to their 13th win in their last 15 games. It wasn’t the Christmas night matchup the NBA hoped for with Luka Doncic among the Mavs stuck in the league’s health and safety protocols. Still, it was competitive to the end despite several new signees getting significant minutes for Dallas. Tim Hardaway Jr, Maxi Kleber, Reggie Bullock, Trey Burke, JaQuori McLaughlin and Josh Green were also sidelined in the health and safety protocols for the Mavericks. In addition, Willie Cauley-Stein was out for personal reasons and Dorian Finney-Smith missed the game with a non-Covid illness. The Jazz still have not lost a player to the coronavirus, and the depth and experience showed as Utah took over in the fourth quarter. Jalen Brunson scored 27 points and Porzingis returned after two games out with a sore toe to tally 27 points for Dallas. Frank Ntilikina had a season-best 17 points, marking the first time he’s scored in double figures in back-to-back games this season. Brooklyn Nets 122-115 Los Angeles Lakers Nic Claxton threw down a tiebreaking alley-oop over LeBron James with 40.7 seconds left, and James Harden and Brooklyn returned from a week-long Coviid-19 hiatus to beat Los Angeles. Harden had 36 points, 10 rebounds and 10 assists. The last helper was a lob that Claxton caught with two hands while soaring over James, who had just helped Los Angeles erase a 20-point deficit. Claxton posterized the 17-time All-Star, then made a free throw for a three-point play and a 118-115 lead. Patty Mills added 34 points for the Nets, who had their past three games postponed because they did not have enough players to compete. They were still without Kevin Durant and Kyrie Irving, among others. James scored 39 points to pass Kobe Bryant for most career points on Christmas Day, but it was not enough to stop the Lakers’ losing streak from reaching five. Russell Westbrook had 13 points, 11 assists and 12 rebounds for his second career holiday triple-double. Atlanta Hawks 87-101 New York Knicks Kemba Walker became the seventh NBA player with a triple-double on Christmas, and New York beat depleted Atlanta for its first victory on the holiday in a decade. Julius Randle had 25 points and 12 rebounds for the Knicks in a matchup of teams that met in the first round of last season’s playoffs. But the Hawks were missing Trae Young among nine players in the NBA’s health and safety protocols, so it wasn’t much of a rematch of Atlanta’s five-game victory. Walker finished with 10 points, 12 assists and 10 rebounds. It was the first triple-double on Christmas since Golden State’s Draymond Green in 2017. John Collins and Delon Wright each scored 20 points for the Hawks. It was the first triple-double on Christmas since Golden State’s Draymond Green in 2017, continuing Walker’s strong stretch since going from out of the rotation to back in the starting lineup when the Knicks were short-handed. Fans in the sold-out crowd chanted “Kemba Walker! Kemba Walker!” for the New York native, who scored 44 points in a loss to Washington on Thursday. Boston Celtics 113-117 Milwaukee Bucks Giannis Antetokounmpo returned from the NBA’s healthy and safety protocols to score 36 points, and Wesley Matthews hit a three-pointer with 30.3 seconds left to give Milwaukee its first lead in the Bucks’ victory over Boston. Seeing his first action since 12 December, Antetokounmpo played 30 minutes and connected on 13 of 23 shots while shooting 10 for 15 from the free-throw line. Milwaukee also got center Bobby Portis and guard Donte DiVincenzo back from Covid-19 protocols. Boston had just eight players available after putting Dennis Schroder in the protocols earlier Saturday, but took control behind Jaylen Brown, who scored 14 of his 25 points in the opening quarter. Jayson Tatum also scored 25 points for Boston, which led by as many as 19 and went into halftime with a 35-22 advantage. Milwaukee trimmed the deficit to one when Middleton knocked down a three with 3:39 left in the third. But the Celtics answered with five straight and opened the fourth with a 8-0 run, including six from Parker, who converted a three-point play to make it 102-90 with 10:15 to play. Portis’ put-back with eight minutes left was the start of the Bucks’ charge, tying the game at 111 when Antetokounmpo scored and drew a foul with 1:26 left. He missed the free throw and Brown made a pair on the other end to put Boston back in front. But Matthews buried his three for a 114-113 lead, and the Bucks held on.Bryony Frost rode Frodon to a historic success in the King George VI Chase last year and Britain’s most successful female jockey believes the nine-year-old is as fit and strong as ever as they attempt to follow up at Kempton on Sunday. It was in the aftermath of her win on the 20-1 outsider in last year’s race that rumours emerged of issues between Frost and a weighing-room colleague which culminated in Robbie Dunne being banned from riding for 18 months this month after a disciplinary panel decided he had subjected her to a seven-month campaign of bullying and harassment. The jockey will be determined to put that behind her. “It is mad to think we won the race 12 months ago and it really doesn’t feel that long ago,” Frost said this week. “Everyone has counted down to Christmas Day but I’ve been counting down to Boxing Day. “Frodon galloped at Wincanton last week and my arms were a couple of inches longer that evening from him towing me around in the boisterous way he does. I was happy with that. We schooled together on Monday and it was just how we wanted it with him near enough out of control.” There were no racegoers at Kempton 12 months ago to give Frost the acclaim she deserved after becoming the first female jockey to win the highlight of the Christmas racing programme. At least 10,000 fans are expected on Sunday, however, and a repeat win for Frodon would be hugely popular. “One thing Paul [Nicholls, Frodon’s trainer] said to me last year was he wishes the crowd was there,” Frost says, “as a King George crowd is phenomenal on Boxing Day. “The public in racing are awesome when they start getting behind certain individuals and athletes. It is really cool to be one of those pairs that people look forward to seeing, and appreciating you as much as I appreciate him. I’m very lucky to have him. “People love his characteristics, his running style, his jumping. When I met him he was a very good handicapper and now he has progressed to be one of the most talked about horses. For me, I’m very proud of that.” There are no secrets with Frodon, who will set out to dominate the nine-strong field from the front as he did last year. “It was probably one of the most effortless and smoothest races I’ve had with him,” Frost says. “Nothing went wrong, it was all so smooth. “It was just a moment where you almost felt like you had stopped in time. It was like we were in the breeze just galloping along around Kempton. There were no moments where you thought, ‘that was close’ or ‘I’m not sure about this bit’. We had a rhythm and he really jumped for fun. “I remember landing over the last thinking, ‘I can’t believe I’m still in front’. Looking up at the screen and bursting through the line was just a phenomenal feeling. “If Frodon was a boxer he would already have a load of belts standing behind him in the ring when he starts parading. You just focus on the job you have to do. I know his pace and his sections. He knows me and he knows the track and he comes alive on the big days.”The good news about the leech, says Dr Turner, “is it’s a sizeable specimen, so you won’t need more than the one.” Thank goodness. I thought he was about to put the whole jar of leeches – medical grade, collected from Barts that morning – on to poor Lucille’s bruised and swollen eye, and that the Call the Midwife Christmas special (BBC One) was about to take a horrifying turn. I can deal with a bit of blood – you have to with this show – but there’s a difference between birthing matters (“I have just lost the biggest mucus plug you’ve ever seen!” announces Mrs Howells, soon to be mother-of-five) and writhing blood-suckers, about to be attached within the vicinity of an eyeball. The black eye is a hen night injury – a dangerous combination of the Nonnatus House stairs and Sister Hilda’s rum punch. Sister Hilda is recovering with aspirin; for Lucille, it’s leeches, treatment “from the 3rd century BC!” says Sister Monica Joan, with glee. “I feel sick just looking at them,” says trainee Nancy, while Lucille quivers with horror. After barely an hour, the leech is stuffed; by this point on Christmas Day, we might all know how it feels. Lucille is back to her beautiful self, and her Boxing Day wedding to Cyril is saved. But there is trouble gestating elsewhere, and I don’t just mean the split in Fred Buckle’s Santa trousers. The midwives of Nonnatus House are expecting an influx of women – an extra 20 patients assigned from St Cuthbert’s hospital. “What do you suppose was going on in March?” asks Nancy, with a smirk. There are not enough midwives, then and now. Worse, heroin has arrived in Poplar, and one of the pregnant women reluctantly attending the antenatal clinic is clearly an addict – she is, according to Sister Julienne, “underweight, and very pale”, TV shorthand for drug addiction. When Dr Turner is called to a gangland stabbing, the woman, Anita Page, is there. Anita shoots up in the laundry room, where her gangster husband – so undomesticated in 1966 he asks his mum how to make cheese on toast – will never find her. Call the Midwife is approaching its 10-year anniversary and only the most wilfully ignorant still don’t know that beyond its heartwarming Sunday-night-telly feel, it has radical politics, and deftly chronicles social change. Now drugs are involved, there is the spectre of babies born with addiction. “It is a new challenge in this country, and it will become a scourge,” says Mother Mildred (Miriam Margolyes) – for she is returned! – across a screaming newborn. “One constantly saw babies suffer like this in Hong Kong.” At the news that May, the adopted daughter of Nurse Shelagh and Dr Turner, “was one such child”, Shelagh is horrified – you can tell by the way her eyebrows mirror the shape of her glasses. They’re going to have to administer opiates to the newborn girl to ease her pain. “I know the dosage and I know the method,” says Mildred, earnestly. “No nurse who has done this work forgets, any more than she can forget that cry.” (A note on Margolyes: I revere her to the extreme, but I wonder if her newfound notoriety has ruined her for a role like this – every time she’s onscreen, especially when quietly contemplating prayer, I half-expect her to fart.) It’s Christmas Day, and the babies keep coming. Mrs Howells needs forceps; Mrs Karphopalas is bleeding. Meanwhile, out on homebirth duty, Sister Frances is dealing with her first breech birth. She looks terrified. “Are you afraid, Sister?” asks Mrs Chu, in labour on her best sheets (“They were a wedding present, I’ve been saving them for the big event”). Sister Frances shakes her head. Are nuns allowed to lie? One of my favourite things about Call the Midwife is that the religion is worn so lightly, and the nuns never let it overrule their humanity. The wellbeing of the mothers and babies comes first, as it does for the dedicated secular midwives. I’ll never tire of these wise, capable, kind women, nor this show, even if its emotional manipulation – along with its soundtrack – is fairly unrelenting. It doesn’t so much pull on the heartstrings as yank them vigorously, as if bellringing. By the time Lucille arrives at the church to discover she has bridesmaids and page boys after all – five children that she’d delivered when she first arrived in Poplar – I was undone. Pure comfort and joy.Scott Morrison has just joined TikTok - but the most popular Australian politician on the social media app isn’t the prime minister, nor the man vying to replace him. That honour goes to Julian Hill, a federal Labor MP from Victoria you may never have heard of if you’re not a user of the app famous for music videos and viral dances. With 125,000 followers and 1.8m likes on his videos at the time of writing, Hill comfortably beats the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, an early adopter of the video sharing social media app with 103,000 followers, into second place. The format allows users to post and share videos of up to three minutes (they are often shorter), rewarding those who can make an impression quickly. Homemade music or dance videos, lip syncs, mimes and satire tend to rate best among non-political users, but Hill’s attacks on his opponents have sent his viewer count soaring. Hill’s most popular video to date, with 1.1m views, is a three-minute clip of him finding creative ways to describe Scott Morrison’s “loose relationship with the truth” in a speech to parliament’s second-string federation chamber. Hill joined the app this year, thanks to the suggestion of Sam Richards, the son of family friends who completed his year 10 work experience in the MP’s office. “I was interested in [him joining] because he had a lot of social media platforms,” Richards tells Guardian Australia. “We started putting videos of his speeches and all that on there and it started to take off.” Richards says he and his friends are big TikTok users, and the platform appeals because the algorithm “tailors [videos] to what people want to see”. Hill says he published a “wide range of material” from parliamentary speeches, to pieces to camera, and while sometimes a video is a sure-fire hit, at other times “the algorithm can be mysterious”. “You’ve got to communicate with people where they are,” Hill says. “A growing number of people engage with social media through TikTok. You have to do them the courtesy of showing up and treating them as intelligent.” Hill says his golden rules are “be authentic, don’t dance, sing or do stunts”. Perhaps stunts are in the eye of the beholder – some might classify calling Indue to ask to be put on to the cashless debit card as a stunt. Hill has become something of an attack dog for Labor, from labelling Morrison a “bullshit artist” to joking about his plan to become a male model by 2050 to ridicule Coalition climate targets. Hill insists that what he posts to TikTok is often no different to content distributed through other social media, which he uses to amplify what he believes, whether said in parliament or outside. Some colleagues wonder whether Hill’s tone – for all his online popularity – may detract from his ability to convey his policy nous, such as work in parliamentary committees covering everything from outsourcing and migration to funding of the auditor general. Hill insists he does tackle the big issues on TikTok, including robodebt, climate change and jobs, immigration and visa issues. He says there is “lots of silly stuff” on TikTok but “although politics is a serious business, it doesn’t always have to be boring and un-engaging”. “That’s the line to tread.” Hill says he gets “great feedback when I’ve taken the time to explain a policy topic or the politics, as I see it, of what’s going on”. His videos about parliament sitting for just 10 days in the first half of 2022, or the Coalition’s move to block an investigation into Christian Porter’s donation disclosure are both in that vein. Richards says many of his friends now follow Hill – but Hill insists it isn’t a medium just for young people. “I had a woman in her 70s who messaged me, delighted by the [electoral boundary] redistribution. She said, ‘I’m glad I’m in your electorate because I follow you on TikTok’. “I’ve had numerous emails from [parents] thanking me for getting their kids engaged in politics, current affairs and ideas. “I get stopped in the street, in restaurants and shops by people wanting to talk to me because of something that struck them from TikTok, because I’ve taken the time to explain something by meeting them where they are.” Hill’s success has caused other MPs to flock to the platform, including the shadow education minister, Tanya Plibersek. Some of his colleagues are already stars of his channel. An unofficial account for Anthony Albanese has recently sprung up, but the Labor leader rated highly on Hill’s account for calling Peter Dutton a boofhead in question time. The manager of opposition business, Tony Burke, also rated strongly for comments attacking the government over Covid-19 vaccinations and quarantine. Richards says a lot more MPs have joined TikTok since Hill, but “no one’s topped Julian yet”. “I hope he stays in that top position, I’d love to see it … Of course it’s still going really well with the numbers – it’s exciting to see. “It was a great experience – the experience of being part of something that’s done well, and helped Julian out was really exciting for me.”Whatever happens when Chelsea visit Aston Villa on Sunday evening, Thomas Tuchel is bound to be in more of a festive mood than he was last year. “I’m very confident that I will survive Christmas with my job this year,” Tuchel said, thinking back to Paris Saint-Germain axing him on Christmas Eve 12 months ago. “We are in a fine place. We are not happy with the results we had in the home games: Burnley, Everton and Manchester United. But we are confident. We are competitive.” The German’s spirits were high after Chelsea set up a Carabao Cup semi-final against Tottenham by winning 2-0 at Brentford on Wednesday night. After a week of fretting over positive Covid tests, suddenly the air felt a little lighter. Tuchel had seen Chelsea knuckle down at the Brentford Community Stadium, even though the absence of nine senior players because of injuries and Covid led to three teenagers making their debuts. The question now is whether the European champions can put a difficult period behind them by reviving their faltering title challenge at Villa Park. It will not be easy. Villa are improving under Steven Gerrard and won this fixture last season, although Gerrard will be absent on Sunday after testing positive for Covid. They are defensively sound and will back themselves to keep it tight against Chelsea, whose lack of ruthlessness has seen them fall six points behind Manchester City in the Premier League. The hope for Tuchel is that some players who have been out with Covid will be back. The change in the quarantine period from 10 days to seven is a boost. Tuchel reported that Romelu Lukaku and Callum Hudson-Odoi could both be in contention against Villa, although there was less clarity about the status of Kai Havertz, Ruben Loftus-Cheek and Timo Werner. “We have negative tests for Romelu and Callum,” Tuchel said. “Then we need to see. The guys have been ill, they had symptoms. I know I need to check how they are.” These are still awkward times for Chelsea. They have seethed since the league rejected their request to postpone their game against Wolves last weekend. They had seven players in isolation – Jorginho was not risked after returning an inconclusive test, but he was cleared to return against Brentford – and only had four outfield players on the bench at Molineux. Tuchel was angry after a goalless draw left Chelsea further off the pace in the title race. He had taken a risk by starting N’Golo Kanté, who had not played since limping off against Juventus on 23 November, and was not in a good mood before facing Brentford. The question of player safety was still on Tuchel’s mind. He called himself irresponsible for playing Kanté against Wolves and insisted that the midfielder would not feature against Brentford. The Frenchman’s importance to Chelsea was too great; they could not afford to lose him to injury again. Yet Kanté did not want a rest and convinced Tuchel to put him on the bench. He changed the game when he came on with 14 minutes left, taking control of midfield and starting the move that led to Pontus Jansson inadvertently giving Chelsea the lead in the 80th minute. “It was nice to see that everyone was pushing to be involved,” Tuchel said. “N’Golo convinced me that he prefers to be on the bench. We agreed on that in discussions with the player. I’ve praised him so many times and of course he makes the difference because he is a very special player. I’ve said it 100 times and I will repeat it another 100 times, there are no more words: it’s outstanding quality that would help every team in the world.” It had turned into a productive evening. The young trio of Xavier Simons, Jude Soonsup-Bell and Harvey Vale all enjoyed their first taste of senior football and could be part of the squad against Villa. Trevoh Chalobah, another academy product, was excellent in defence. Mateo Kovacic, who had been out since October, got some valuable minutes. Even the much-maligned Saúl Ñíguez did well in central midfield. This was a reminder that Chelsea still have plenty of strength in depth. Tuchel was able to change the game by bringing on Reece James, Jorginho, Kanté, Mason Mount and Christian Pulisic in the second half. James fired in the cross that led to Jansson’s own goal and Pulisic won the penalty that allowed Jorginho to make it 2-0. Chelsea, who have won three of their last eight league games, need to build on that lively second half. They need to be more focused in defence and incisive in attack. They must adjust if Lukaku, Werner and Havertz are not ready to start against Villa. Pulisic, who was ineffective through the middle when Chelsea drew with Everton and Wolves, must step up if he is asked to lead the line again. “Is that his very best position where he feels most comfortable?” Tuchel asked. “Maybe not, but he’s very positive about it and he’s fighting for his confidence. And while he’s fighting we’re supporting him.” The messages were positive. Tuchel, who is unsure if Andreas Christensen and Hakim Ziyech will shake off their injuries, sees a group who are ready to fight through the uncertainty caused by Covid. “It’s the same situation for us as for everyone else and we have concerns,” he said. “We are not just football players and coaches, we are also fathers and family members. We have doubts and fears, which is not nice. “Still we are privileged to do what we love the most: to be involved in football. I’m very impressed how the team takes it. We will arrive at Aston Villa with full commitment to the competition.” Tuchel is ready. This is his first experience of football on Boxing Day and he cannot wait. “I am happy to be involved,” Tuchel said, but he still wants more. He knows that Chelsea cannot afford to slip up again. Nothing but victory will do if they want to win the league.Mikel Arteta hopes Arsenal will be active during the January transfer window as they size up their prospects of a return to Champions League football. Arsenal are fourth in the Premier League going into a highly winnable Boxing Day clash at Norwich and it is a position few had expected them to occupy earlier in the season, particularly when they lost their opening three games. Below them West Ham, Manchester United, Tottenham and Leicester have games in hand but, even if those were all won, Arteta’s team would be firmly in the hunt. It is notoriously difficult to make satisfactory deals in January but Arteta would be open to any that could see his team over the line. “If you can tweak what you need to in that period, which is not easy, it would be really helpful,” he said. “We are working on that to see the necessities we can have, and whether we can find the right solutions to that.” A striker would appeal to Arsenal, with Eddie Nketiah and Alexandre Lacazette coming out of contract and Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang frozen out, although that situation is likelier to be addressed in the summer. There would be a vacancy for cover on the right wing, though, if Nicolas Pépé is allowed to move, and Arsenal are arguably a body short in central midfield. Whoever comes in, Arteta will be at pains not to disrupt a core of young players whose stature is growing rapidly. Bukayo Saka and Emile Smith Rowe, two academy products, are arguably their most important outfielders and Arteta knows the value of the bonds players forge during their development. At Barcelona’s La Masia academy, which differed from Arsenal’s because players boarded together, he came through with a number of those who became members of Pep Guardiola’s all-conquering side, and the impression was long-lasting. “I was living at La Masia – it was a bedroom of eight,” he said. “I had Pepe Reina, Víctor Valdés, Andrés Iniesta, Carles Puyol … What I learned was that internally there was competition: we were all at the same age and wanted to be first-team players but could not all get there. But what I learned as well was within that competition you understand that you have to look after each other. That was a big, big lesson in that period for me. “Some of them are still my best friends because it is tough and you go through important, key moments in your career and it stays for life. Those relationships are unbreakable.” Saka has experienced a particularly demanding year for club and country, on the pitch and away from it. “What I see is a young boy with incredible enthusiasm and passion for this club,” Arteta said. “I see it in others too. They are really willing to bring success and they are dealing with a lot of difficult situations in a great way. “That shows the education they had, the background, environment and families they have, and how supportive the club have been throughout their careers. But it is not normal at that age to do what they’ve been doing. We have to be prepared [so] that, if they can’t cope with something, we are there to identify that and act straight away.” Arteta has not ruled out a return for Aubameyang to the side that faces bottom-placed Norwich, although it would be a considerable surprise unless Covid-19 has stretched his resources further. Aubameyang posted a festive family picture on social media with the message: “Merry Christmas #Familyfirst”. Pablo Marí, Albert Sambi Lokonga and Calum Chambers have missed recent games with the virus but his regular starting XI is yet to be affected during this wave. Arsenal are among the clubs battling to hold on to their Africa Cup of Nations representatives until 3 January, which would mean Aubameyang, Pépé, Thomas Partey and Mohamed Elneny would be eligible to face Wolves on 28 December and Manchester City on New Year’s Day. The World Leagues Forum has written to Fifa and the Confederation of African Football saying the deadline for players’ release should be pushed back from 27 December.Pep Guardiola believes masks should be mandatory in every public space to help ensure games will not have to be played in closed stadiums again due to the surge in Covid cases. Manchester City’s manager is concerned that because masks have to be used only in designated indoor environments this may not be enough to prevent football having to lock out fans once more. The champions are due to host Leicester City on Boxing Day, but Liverpool v Leeds and Wolves v Watford have been postponed because of the virus. Facing the prospect of football being played behind closed doors Guardiola said: “I would not love it, honestly. You cannot imagine how different it is playing with people. But cases rise all around the world, not only in the UK, and in the football bubbles. These people go to the stadiums and can contaminate [others because] in the stadiums, people don’t use masks. “It’s what I’m surprised about the most – you go to the street, big malls, places to buy presents for the family, no one wears a mask. The scientists from the beginning say the most protection you can have is via hand sanitisers and [face masks]. “In Spain now it will be an obligation not just in [some] places but outdoors. So on the street you have to wear it. We should start again – you know [fans at matches should be] vaccinated, have a booster if this is what is decided, but as part of that, hand sanitiser, social distance and masks too. Like this, the restaurants could still be open, football could go on. We have to try to do it, otherwise, you know, another [ban] may be coming. [And] it [may] be again and again.” Guardiola says that Ederson, along with City’s other South American players, Fernandinho and Gabriel Jesus, suffer when returning to the club after the international break. “There was a period this season when Eddy came back from previous internationals with Brazil and was a bit low, a bit sad, and sometimes that happens in a season,” he said. “But over the last two or three weeks in his training sessions I feel this is the best Eddy we have had. “Sometimes you have no specific reason for it, but it’s especially the case for players from Argentina, Brazil, all the South Americans. They go there and, because of the pandemic, play three games, whereas before it was two. They travel from here to Ecuador, Bolivia, Uruguay, to other places, take the plane, come back here, have jet lag, come back to totally different conditions. “They are human beings. They have this change of lifestyle in such a short time. So it happened with Eddy, but it has with Fernandinho when he was in the national team before, with Gabby [Jesus], with Sergio [Agüero] when he was here, Pablo Zabaleta, Nicolás Otamendi.”Rafael Benítez has held talks with several of Everton’s brightest academy prospects to convince them to commit their long-term futures to the Goodison Park club. Everton lost the promising left-back Thierry Small to Southampton in the summer after the 17-year-old, who became the youngest first-team player in the club’s history in January, rejected their offer of a professional contract. The club are in a similar predicament with the highly rated forward Lewis Dobbin, who is out of contract next July and free to sign a pre-contract agreement with a continental European club from 1 January. Benítez, however, has made a personal intervention to reassure Everton’s young talents that a pathway to the first team remains open after Marcel Brands’ departure as director of football. The academy fell under Brands’ remit and, while the club conduct a review of their internal structure, the Everton manager has sought to persuade academy players to extend their Goodison careers. The Everton manager said: “When the situation of the club changed a little bit in terms of the structure, the first thing that we did was to have two or three meetings with young players, their agents and their families to try and make sure they could stay with us for a long time. I did it personally with some of them.” The defender Jarrad Branthwaite and the forward Ellis Simms have signed new contracts at Everton recently, until 2025 and 2024 respectively, but negotiations on a new deal for Dobbin have reached an impasse. The 18-year-old has represented England at under-16, 17 and 19 level and has attracted interest from other Premier League clubs, whom he could join for a development fee next summer, and clubs in Germany. But Benítez is hopeful of reaching an agreement. “I don’t like to talk too much about that but I think the player is quite happy and our conversations with him have been quite positive,” the Everton manager said. “I have confidence that he will be delighted to stay with us in the future.” Benítez has given Dobbin three substitute appearances in the Premier League this season, including in the recent draw at Chelsea, when five Everton players are believed to have contracted Covid-19, and he would have been involved in the Boxing Day game at Burnley had the match not been postponed. The Premier League initially rejected Everton’s request for a postponement due to their Covid cases and six injuries but “regrettably approved” the request on Friday.Labour has demanded the outlawing of trail hunting on public land, as Boxing Day meets prepare to go ahead. Several licences have been granted by the government for the meetings, despite a growing movement among public bodies to refuse permission for them to take place on their property. In trail hunting, which remains legal, dogs and riders pursue an artificial scent on an agreed route. However, the National Trust suspended licences to trail hunt on its land after a video emerged of a huntsman explaining how to use them as a way of holding an illegal foxhunt. Since then, both Natural Resources Wales and the National Trust have announced an end to trail hunting. Campaigners opposing the events said that they still expected more than 240 hunting days to have taken place on Ministry of Defence-owned land alone this year. Labour said the department had allowed 21 licensed hunts by mid-December. Other public bodies continue to have a suspension of licences in place, including some national parks, the Church Commissioners and Forestry England. An exemption to lockdown rules allowed trail hunts to take place last Christmas. Labour now wants a tightening of the rules this year. It follows the case of Mark Hankinson, the director of the Masters of the Foxhounds Association, who was convicted in October of encouraging others to hide the illegal hunting of live foxes behind a “smokescreen” of trail hunting. Hankinson was convicted of encouraging or assisting others to commit an offence over comments in two web seminars. “We need to have clear, visible, plausible trail laying being done throughout the day,” he was recorded saying. He added: “It’s a lot easier to create a smokescreen if you’ve got more than one trail layer operating, and that is what it’s all about – trying to portray to the people watching that you’re going about your legitimate business.” Jim McMahon, the shadow environment secretary, said allowing trail hunts to go ahead on public land was “completely irresponsible”. He added: “The government must do more to close the loopholes that allow people to break the law, and must consign hunting to the history books, where the vast majority of us believe it belongs.” With Boxing Day falling on a Sunday, some hunts have been moved to Monday. Polly Portwin, director of the campaign for hunting at the Countryside Alliance, said last month that the hunting world was “looking forward to showcasing their lawful trail-hunting activities again this year and welcomes the return to village greens and town centres across the country”.There is, the statswallahs tell us, no such thing as new-manager bounce. Our brains, attuned to spotting patterns, spy a regression to the mean and attribute it to the arrival of a new manager. And probably in the long term that is largely true. But it does seem to ignore the way the replacement of one manager by another can lead players to reset and refocus; a project that had gone stale can, at least temporarily, be refreshed. It also ignores Antonio Conte. Five Premier League games since he took over at Tottenham have yielded 11 points and, while beating Leeds (narrowly), Brentford and Norwich may not seem like much, the performance in last week’s 2-2 draw against Liverpool represented a clear upturn. There was an energy and intensity that has not been seen since the Mauricio Pochettino era – and not even really in the final few months of that. At which point, before anybody gets too excited, it probably is worth remembering where Spurs were at Christmas last year. Then, too, Tottenham had just reached the League Cup semi-finals and although they were sixth in the league, a place better off than this season, they were only six points behind the leaders, Liverpool, and two points off second, rather than 18 points behind the leaders, Manchester City, and 15 off second as they are now (albeit they have three games in hand on many of the sides above them). It had been only two league games earlier that a win at Anfield would have taken them top, and there had even been a thought that in a weird Covid-affected season, with empty stadiums, a truncated pre-season and a compacted calendar, José Mourinho’s vision of football might again be successful, the ancient king returning to bestride the ravaged world. As it turned out, his negativity at Anfield after Spurs’ equaliser invited pressure that brought a Liverpool winner, precipitating the doom cycle of seven wins from 19 league games. So while Tottenham’s position may look ostensibly similar to how it appeared last Christmas, the direction of travel looks very different. Taking over mid-season should make it difficult for a coach who specialises in pressing. Really, he needs a full pre-season to get the players fit enough and to instil those patterns. At Tottenham, there had been a sense, under Mourinho and then Nuno Espírito Santo, that fitness levels had dropped from where they were under Pochettino: his pressing demanded it; their more reactive approach did not. And yet Tottenham have gone from running 100km a game under Nuno, the lowest figure in the Premier League, to 115km a game under Conte, the highest. Although being without a number of players must have complicated things, it may be that the three postponed matches have helped, giving Conte a little time to work with his squad without the immediate pressure for results. But still, the upturn is remarkable. Football is an increasingly complicated game, but maybe all they needed was to get off the ketchup. The condiment prohibition is easy to mock, but it is important for what it represents: Conte cares about details, he demands self-sacrifice and he is changing the wider culture of the club. Whether that improvement is sustainable is another issue. Jürgen Klopp took over at Liverpool in October 2015 and, after an initial uplift, results were patchier towards the end of that season as injuries and fatigue took their toll. But that the possibility of tiredness is even an issue is a marked improvement; it’s only a month ago that this was a squad that looked in need of wholesale replacement. And that is down to Conte. There is a danger that focusing on his personality and energy neglects the detailed work he does in terms of structuring programmes of pressing – and this is a coach, it should not be forgotten, who when in charge of Italy refused to allow any but his most-trusted assistants to attend his sessions on pressing so that details couldn’t leak out to opponents – but equally the biggest change so far has been one of tone. When Daniel Levy appointed Mourinho, he was looking for somebody who could administer a jolt of electricity to a moribund squad. Perhaps a decade earlier he could have done. But this is weary, cynical, late-period Mourinho and he soon took to pointing out the limitations of his players to deflect blame from himself. That squad is even more beaten down now, and yet Conte has given them renewed life: Dele Alli, Harry Winks, Steven Bergwijn and Davinson Sánchez, who all looked shot, suddenly look like footballers again. Ryan Sessegnon has been rediscovered. Suddenly it’s not just about Son Heung-min and Harry Kane. (Although Kane is another issue; he may not yet be as lethal in front of goal as he is at his best, but at least he has looked re-engaged recently.) The monster, this ungainly hybrid squad cobbled together from previous visions of the club, has awoken again. Conte, notoriously, always wants more players and always ends up falling out with his board because of it. He will, surely, be demanding investment in personnel and probably wouldn’t have taken the job without certain assurances, no matter what the club may have said in public. But he is good with imperfect materials: when he took over Juventus in 2011, they were not the super-club they became but in transition after Internazionale’s treble. When he led Chelsea to the title in 2016-17, they were recovering from what he dubbed the “Mourinho season”. He made Inter title winners despite the seeming dominance of Juve (aided, it’s true, by Juve’s oddly self-destructive leadership) against the backdrop of financial meltdown. Among the elite-level coaches, Conte is probably the best manager of less-than-elite-level players. Which should give Tottenham hope. This is a squad that requires work, but Conte’s arrival, his intensity and his energy have been enough to arrest a year of decline, which itself followed 18 months or so of drift. Perhaps it’s true that the average manager makes only a limited difference, but Conte is not an average manager.Aaron Rodgers surpassed Brett Favre to become Green Bay’s all-time leader in touchdown passes and the Packers intercepted Baker Mayfield four times in a 24-22 victory over the Cleveland Browns on Saturday. Rodgers went 24 of 34 for 202 yards with three touchdown passes to increase his career total to 445. Favre threw 508 touchdown passes during his Hall of Fame career, 442 of them with Green Bay. Until the Browns (7-8) produced a second-half threat, the day belonged to Rodgers, who broke Favre’s record by throwing an 11-yard TD pass to Allen Lazard in the first quarter. Rodgers spent his first three NFL seasons backing up Favre before taking over in 2008. Favre sent a message to Rodgers in a video that aired on the Lambeau Field scoreboard after the record-breaking touchdown pass. “Hey, 12, congratulations, man, on passing my touchdown record,” Favre said. “I have one request. Go get us another Super Bowl. Congrats.” Rodgers later threw two touchdown passes to Davante Adams, who had 10 catches for 114 yards. Adams has caught at least 10 passes for 100 yards and two touchdowns in eight career games, the most of anyone in NFL history. The Packers already have clinched the NFC North title and are seeking the conference’s top playoff seed as they chase their first Super Bowl berth since their 2010 championship season. They have lost in the NFC championship game each of the last two seasons. Green Bay’s defense sealed this victory by sacking Baker Mayfield five times and forcing him into his first career four-interception performance. All three of the Packers’ touchdowns came after Mayfield interceptions. The Packers (12-3) sealed the victory when Rasul Douglas picked off his second pass of the day with 43 seconds left. Nick Chubb ran for 126 yards and a touchdown to lead the Browns’ 219-yard rushing effort that kept them in the game. Cleveland was missing at least eight regulars because of complications related to Covid-19. Indianapolis Colts 22-16 Arizona Cardinals Carson Wentz threw a pair of touchdown passes, Jonathan Taylor ran for 108 yards and the banged-up Indianapolis Colts continued their late-season surge with a gritty 22-16 win over the Arizona Cardinals on Saturday night. The Colts (9-6) have won three straight and six of their past seven. They earned the road win despite missing 2020 All-Pro linebacker Darius Leonard – who was put on the reserve/Covid-19 list earlier Saturday – and four starting offensive linemen. Wentz made the game’s biggest play midway through the fourth quarter, when he bounced around in the pocket for a few seconds before hitting Dezmon Patmon for a 14-yard touchdown on a perfectly placed ball in the back of the end zone. That gave the Colts a 22-13 lead. The Cardinals (10-5) failed to clinch a playoff spot for a third straight week and are 3-5 since starting the season 7-0. Kyler Murray threw for 245 yards and a touchdown while also running for 74 yards. Arizona’s Matt Prater missed two field goals, including a potential go-ahead try early in the fourth quarter, and an extra point. The Cardinals grabbed a 13-12 lead early in the third quarter when Murray hit Antoine Wesley for a 24-yard touchdown, which was the first of Wesley’s NFL career. Suddenly, the onus was on the Colts’ patchwork offense to produce. That wasn’t easy for a unit that came into the game missing three starting offensive lineman. By the end of the first half, left tackle Eric Fisher and tight end Jack Doyle were also on the sideline with injuries. The Colts managed to cobble together a drive late in the third quarter capped by a 37-yard field goal for a 15-13 lead. Indianapolis caught a break a few minutes later in the fourth quarter when Prater’s 41-yard field goal bounced off the right upright. That set up a seven-play, 69-yard Indianapolis drive that ended with Wentz – who completed 18 of 28 passes for 225 yards – connecting with Patmon. The Colts got off to a great start when Taylor broke free for a 43-yard run on the team’s first offensive play. The 226lb back sliced through the middle of the line before bouncing to the outside and rumbling down the right sideline. Five plays later, Wentz had plenty of time to find TY Hilton for a one-yard touchdown and a 7-0 lead. Taylor came into the game as the NFL’s leading rusher by a wide margin with 1,518 yards on the ground. That’s more than 400 yards ahead of Cincinnati’s Joe Mixon, who sits at No 2. The Cardinals bounced back quickly after the Colts scored. Murray faked a handoff to Jonathan Ward, made a nice cut and ran 57 yards before being knocked down at the Indy 2. Two plays later, Chase Edmonds burst through the line for a 2-yard touchdown. Prater missed the extra point and the Colts kept a 7-6 lead. The Colts added a safety late in the second quarter when Murray couldn’t handle a low snap. The quarterback picked up the ball and flung it out of the end zone and was called for intentional grounding in the end zone, which is an automatic safety.