Hospitalisations from Covid could pose major problems for the NHS as Omicron surges in the winter despite the acceleration of the booster programme, leading scientists have warned. In a preliminary study, researchers led by Prof Neil Ferguson at Imperial College London found that vaccines are substantially less effective against Omicron than Delta and saw no evidence that Omicron is intrinsically milder than Delta. Their analysis of data provided by the NHS and the UK Health Security Agency showed that antibodies were 4.5 times less potent against Omicron than Delta. As a result, vaccine protection against symptomatic Omicron infection dropped to between zero and 20% after two doses, and between 55% and 80% after a booster. But the early data suggests vaccine effectiveness against hospitalisation from Omicron may hold up better after a booster, with protection falling from more than 95% against Delta to between 80% and 86% against Omicron 60 days after the shot, depending on how fast booster protection wanes. It came as data revealed that half of adults in the UK had now received a booster jab, with over 930,000 people having a vaccination on Friday. Prof Azra Ghani, chair in infectious disease epidemiology at Imperial, said while 80% protection against hospitalisation was good from an individual perspective, at the population level, the drop in protection could still mean “a large number of people requiring hospitalisation” given how many people are expected to become infected. “If you have enough cases per day, the resulting number of hospitalisations we think could still pose potentially major challenges for any health system,” Ferguson added. In the report released on Friday, the scientists say booster doses would be “critical” to mitigate the impact of future Omicron waves in countries with high levels of circulating virus. Worst-case scenario modelling by the team, which assumes no change in people’s behaviour and no other interventions being brought in, suggests the UK could experience more than 5,000 deaths a day at the peak of the Omicron wave, but Ghani said this was “an illustration of the need to act rather than a prediction”. Further data released in a second report shows Omicron is doubling every two days in England, with people more than five times as likely to be reinfected with the variant compared with Delta. Based on early data, any change in the intrinsic severity of Omicron is “at most limited” compared with Delta, the researchers find. Intrinsic severity refers to whether a variant itself causes milder or more serious illness, rather than people’s levels of immunity due to past infection and vaccination. “There’s no strong signal of an intrinsically reduced severity of Omicron versus Delta, but it is really very early days to make definitive judgments on that,” Ferguson said. Dr David Strain, a senior clinical lecturer at the University of Exeter medical school, said waning immunity after a booster meant the jabs were “quite literally buying us a few months” until an Omicron-specific jab becomes available, although he noted it was hoped the body’s T-cell response would stop people getting seriously unwell even if antibodies waned. However, he said a key concern with Omicron was the impact on NHS staffing, noting that even healthcare workers who had had boosters had tested positive. “If the healthcare workforce decides to follow the prime minister’s advice and continue with all of the Christmas parties, some models suggest as many as one in eight healthcare workers will be either infected or isolating because of a close family contact within the next month,” he said. Meanwhile the NHS is expanding its use of vaccination centres that are open around the clock in a bid to help reach the target of delivering 1m booster jabs a day that Boris Johnson has set. The first 24/7 centre for the vaccine rollout opened at the Artrix theatre in Bromsgrove in the West Midlands. It delivered 500 top-up shots overnight on Wednesday and will continue offering an open-all-hours service until Christmas Eve. “The night slots are popular with shift workers and people who want to avoid crowds,” said an NHS source. But this weekend three other 24/7 sites will also be open, though each only for 36 hours: Morris House group practice in Haringey, north London; The Pharmacy in Shady Lane, Birmingham; and the Etihad Stadium, home of Manchester City football club.Omicron is having a significant impact on staff at a large hospital trust with hundreds off work due to illness, leading to the cancellation of non-essential services to tackle a surge in admissions driven by the variant. Guy’s and St Thomas’ trust (GSTT) in London is preparing to redeploy staff to work in its A&amp;E and intensive care units to cover for the growing number of staff who are off work sick. It has seen the number of hospitalised patients with Covid it is treating jump by a third over the last week and is bracing itself for worse to come in the days ahead. Rising Covid cases have also left London fire and rescue services with “unprecedented” staff shortages, the Fire Brigades Union (FBU) said, with almost a third of London’s fire engines out of action at points in the last week. In a memo sent on Friday to staff in the emergency departments of the two hospitals it runs in south London, GSTT said: “Omicron is now having a significant impact on the work we are doing. “This is being felt not only with the increase in patient attendances (Covid admissions have increased a third over the last week) but also on staff sickness and subsequent absence from work. “Omicron is now the dominant variant, with over 60% of positive cases locally being due to this new strain and with a doubling rate of two days in the local community. “London is once again at the eye of this current storm,” the memo said. Hospital bosses across the NHS are finalising details of how they will deal with a potentially huge increase in the number of people which the new strain leaves seriously ill with Covid. Some doctors and scientists fear that the coming wave of hospitalisations could be even bigger than the peak of 39,000 cases seen UK-wide in January. The UK reported record Covid cases for a third day in a row on Friday, with 93,045 new cases, up 39% on the week. A further 900 people were hospitalised with the virus and 111 people died. The UK Health Security Agency confirmed another 3,201 Omicron cases, bringing the UK total to 14,909. GSTT also told A&amp;E staff that “as of yesterday there were more than 350 staff members off work and isolating across the organisations due to Covid – a 25% increase on the previous day.” Amanda Pritchard, the chief executive of NHS England, ran GSTT until 2019. Boris Johnson said that staff in the intensive care unit at St Thomas’s had saved his life when he was hospitalised there with Covid in April 2020, during the first lockdown. Omicron is forcing the trust to take action in order “to reduce the risk to all services and continue to deliver essential care to our patients”. As a result “all non-essential services have been stood down or reduced” and “staff are being identified for redeployment to core services such as ours.” The memo also said that GSTT was already seeing “significant shortages” and had asked for personnel to be redeployed there “to ensure safe staffing levels are maintained over coming weeks”. Chris Hopson, the chief executive of the hospitals group NHS Providers, said: “With over 93,000 new cases of Covid confirmed today, trust leaders are understandably anxious about the weeks ahead as the Omicron variant takes hold in the community and, inevitably, within the health and care workforce. “We are already seeing NHS staff shortages in hotspots like London with worrying increases in the number of staff having to take time off work due to Covid-19 self-isolation or sickness. This is expected to rise in the weeks ahead. “The knock-on effect on the workloads of remaining staff – who are already working incredibly hard given the huge demands on the service – is a major concern.” There were similar issues with the London fire brigade, with almost 10% of operational firefighters either having tested positive or self-isolating, according to LFB statistics for Thursday. The LFB said 141 firefighters had tested positive and 283 were self-isolating. The FBU London regional secretary, Jon Lambe, said: “The new Omicron variant is having a devastating impact on the London fire brigade.” According to London fire brigade statistics, 40 fire engines were unavailable for the day and night shifts on Thursday. There are 142 fire engines in London. Up to 130,000 NHS staff in England could be off sick with Covid by Christmas Day, unless ministers take new steps to tackle Omicron’s rapid spread, the British Medical Association is warning. A new analysis by the doctors’ union found that on current trends anywhere from 32,000 medics, nurses and other personnel will be infected by 25 December, and that “in the worst case scenario” more than 130,000 staff – one in 10 of the total – may be off sick. • This article was amended on 19 December 2021. The absences at Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS trust are across multiple hospitals in the trust, not a single hospital as an earlier headline implied.Before Rosa Cienfuegos opened her two venues – the Tamaleria in Dulwich Hill and Itacate in Redfern – it would have been a good bet that most diners in Sydney, even the adventurous ones, hadn’t tried a tamal. Tamales are a traditional Mexican dish usually eaten for breakfast. Parcels of masa de maíz, a dough made of alkaline-treated cornmeal, are made with various fillings of meat, cheese, vegetables, or sauce; the dough is wrapped in banana leaves or corn husks then steamed. Cienfuegos is originally from Mexico City, and came to Australia 12 years ago. Her father opened a Mexican restaurant on Enmore Road, but found customers were not receptive to the cuisine. “Unfortunately, I think Australia wasn’t ready for Mexican food, for proper Mexican food. We would be facing a lot of people going there and reviewing us, [saying], ‘This is not Mexican’. I was super disappointed, because this is the most Mexican you can eat!” Cooking Mexican food in Australia has sometimes been frustrating for Cienfuegos: “On the menu we have the Mexican side and the not-so-Mexican side. So we still have the street tacos, the burritos, the quesadillas. [But] everything that sells is either burritos or nachos … because it’s what [people] know.” Despite some initial doubts about how tamales might be received, the food she is best known for has become a local favourite. “I’m happy to at least have the tamales still on [the menu] and they’re already super popular … I’m very proud and very happy to see all the locals coming – they’re just like, ‘Can I have my green tamal?’ They already know them – it’s part of their diet.” The process of producing tamales is labour intensive, and there are no shortcuts. Even when Cienfuegos is mass-producing them for her stores, everything is done by hand, she says. “There is no way you can make them with machinery. We don’t use a mixer or anything, because unfortunately, if you use a mixer, the consistency is not the same. [The dough] kind of doesn’t fluff up.” Each tamal is also hand-wrapped and weighed individually both before and after steaming. As far as easier Mexican breakfasts go, Cienfuegos says chilaquiles are widely popular and can be found everywhere in Mexico City. Eating chilaquiles, a dish of corn or tortilla chips covered in salsa, is a little bit of a race against time – unless you don’t mind a slightly soggy corn chip. Cienfuegos says the dish is often a way to use up leftover corn tortillas, which are cut into triangles and fried before becoming chilaquiles. She also shares a recipe for barbacoa tacos: lamb is steamed for three hours until it is as tender as it can get, then served on corn tortillas with coriander, lime, salsa, onion and cactus salad. Cienfuegos recalls that, while visiting her mother, who lives in Sweden, she was asked to make barbacoa. “I was surprised that in the shops in Sweden, they didn’t have lamb meat! They had bear, and reindeer – I didn’t know what to make with that! Reindeer tacos, I guess? That was a funny one. I ended up making something vegetarian.” Rosa Cienfuegos’ chilaquiles Prep 10 min Cook 15 min Serves 4 For the sauce 2 large tomatoes, quartered ¼ onion 2 garlic cloves 2-3 red chillies Small bunch of coriander, about 25g 1 tsp table salt To serve 4 eggs 400g plain corn chips 80ml thickened cream Queso fresco or feta, crumbled In a blender, combine tomatoes, onion, garlic, chillies, coriander and salt and blitz until smooth and homogenous. Thin the sauce with water, starting with about 150ml and adding more if necessary – it should be quite liquid. Fry the four eggs however you like, then set aside. Warm the corn chips in a large saucepan over medium heat, then add the sauce; stir until chips are just coated with sauce and everything is warmed through. You may have to do this in two batches depending on the size of your pan. Plate chilaquiles on a large platter, then drizzle with cream and scatter crumbled cheese over the top. Add the fried eggs on top and serve immediately, while the corn chips are still crunchy. Rosa Cienfuegos’ lamb barbacoa tacos Prep 45 min Cook 3 hr Serves 4-5 For the salsa borracha, or drunken salsa 1 tbsp vegetable oil ½ white onion, diced 10 green chillies, such as jalapeno, serrano or cayenne, finely chopped 3 tomatoes, diced 1 garlic clove, minced or grated 2 tsp salt 1 x 330ml bottle of Mexican lager For the lamb 1kg boneless lamb shoulder or shank, cut into 3-4cm chunks 50g salt 1 tbsp grated or minced garlic, about 4-5 cloves Banana leaves (available frozen at Vietnamese grocers and some specialty grocers) For the cactus salad 200g cactus strips (optional; look for them in Mexican delis, specialty grocers and some supermarkets) 1 tomato, cut into thin wedges ⅓ white onion, cut into thin wedges To serve 12-15 corn tortillas (choose the 14.5cm or 16cm diameter kind) 1 lime, cut into wedges ⅔ white onion, finely diced Small handful of coriander, roughly chopped Place the lamb in a medium bowl, then add the salt and garlic. Combine the ingredients with your hands, rubbing the seasoning in and making sure everything is evenly distributed. Line a steamer insert or basket with two or three long pieces of banana leaf, crossing them over each other in the middle and allowing for a generous amount of overhang. Place the lamb inside the steamer, then use the overhanging sections of banana leaf to wrap the lamb into a parcel, tucking the ends under. Fill a large saucepan with two litres of water; bring to a simmer over medium heat, then turn heat to low. Steam the lamb for three hours, or until the meat is tender and easy to shred; check the saucepan at around the halfway mark and top the water up if necessary. To make the salsa, heat the vegetable oil in a frying pan over medium heat. Add the onion, chillies, garlic, tomato, coriander and salt and cook, stirring frequently, for 7 minutes or until you have a thick salsa. Pour in the beer and continue to cook for another 5 minutes. Remove from the heat, transfer to a bowl and set aside to cool. Once the salsa is no longer hot, blitz half of it in a blender until smooth, then return it to the bowl and stir through. Combine the ingredients for the cactus salad and set aside. Warm your tortillas. You can do this one at a time in a hot pan or directly over a gas flame, heating each side 30-60 seconds and keeping warmed ones wrapped in a clean tea towel on a plate. This will colour and slightly char the tortillas beautifully. Alternatively, you can wrap the whole stack in foil and place in the oven at 180C for 9-10 minutes. To serve, set out the lamb, onion, cactus salad, lime wedges, coriander and salsa; each breakfaster can then assemble and eat their tacos one by one. Note: This recipe makes a large amount of salsa, but it will keep in the fridge in an airtight container for up to a week. Alternatively, you could halve it and enjoy the remaining half a beer on the side of your breakfast.That’s all from me today. Here’s some of what we covered this evening: Another Covid surge has sparked cancellations as the Omicron quickly variant spreads. NFL games this weekend had to be postponed due to a spike in player infections and the Rockette’s “Christmas Spectacular” was put permanently on pause. The CDC is trying out a new plan to keep kids in school, issuing a “test to stay” strategy. Unvaccinated students will be able to go to class if they test negative twice, even after an exposure. The Biden administration policy requiring large businesses to vaccinate workers or issue testing and mask-mandates is likely headed to the supreme court after being upheld in a federal Appeals court. San Francisco mayor London Breed declared a state of emergency and pledged to crackdown on crime, alarming advocates and constituents. Also, this happened: Thanks for reading along! Have a great night. On Friday San Francisco mayor London Breed declared a state of emergency in the Tenderloin district — an area near the heart of the city with high levels of homelessness and devastating numbers of drug overdoses — in a pledge to crack down on crime. New plans to aggressively address issues on what she called the “nasty streets” in her city, including bolstering the budget for policing, were also accompanied by a stunning shift in rhetoric for a leader of one of the country’s most liberal cities. “We are in a crisis and we need to respond accordingly,” she said at a news conference on Friday. “Too many people are dying in this city, too many people are sprawled on our streets.” The emergency declaration, which is intended to last 90 days and must be ratified by the Board of Supervisors within 7 days, was issued to limit red tape around zoning and planning codes and enable funds to flow to the mayor’s plan more freely. But the move targets more than drugs. The crackdown also comes weeks after San Francisco was targeted by coordinated thefts, where groups of people raided high-end stores armed with crowbars and hammers. In response, the city deployed police to the downtown area in full-force, bumping officer overtime to roughly 8,000 hours. California governor Gavin Newsom has also responded to the incident — and the national attention it sparked — with a $300 million plan to target organized crime. “We recognize this moment requires us to do more,” Newsom said during a news conference. “These organized efforts have created tremendous fear and anxiety to many Californians.” But experts have highlighted larceny and the overall property crime rate have fallen in the city. Before the pandemic crime rates in many categories were also falling across the state. Once a vocal champion of criminal justice reforms and a reducing the reliance on police in favor of stronger social programs, Breed is now embracing an approach she acknowledges is at-odds with what her progressive constituents have long-advocated for. “It’s time that the reign of criminals who are destroying our city, it is time for it to come to an end,” Breed said, joined by the city’s Police Chief Bill Scott. “What I’m proposing today and what I will be proposing in the future will make a lot of people uncomfortable,” she added, “And I don’t care.” The first two parts of a three-phased approach, described in a press release issued Friday, is already underway, and includes a significant increase in police presence instructed to target both drug sellers and users. Breed said that more than two people are dying per day to drug overdoses, mostly to fentanyl. Fatalities are on the rise and outpaced Covid deaths in the city last year by 2 to 1. “We are collectively committed to a long term solution that includes law enforcement, redeploying resources, and including our @SheriffSF to assist with mitigating challenges with access to support and services” Supervisor Ahsha Safai wrote on Twitter this week after joining Breed in the announcement of the new plan. Safai added that one part of the plan will focus on unlicensed vendors selling goods on the streets and another will focus on drug-use. “We must have cleaner safer streets” he said. “Enough is enough.” But statistics collected by the San Francisco Police Department show many types of crime, including larceny, are actually down from where they were in 2019. Breed’s plan also includes an expansion of police surveillance, a point that has sparked concerns from privacy experts and advocates that the mayor is attempting to circumvent San Francisco’s privacy laws. “The Mayor’s proposal to massively expand police presence in San Francisco is regressive and harmful to those who are already underserved and overpoliced,” Public Defender Mano Raju said in a statement issued Tuesday, noting that Breed made promises to divest in policing after the murder of George Floyd. He added that an increase in policing won’t help address the root causes of crime, including poverty, addiction, disease, and trauma. “Piling more resources into policing and punishment” he said, “— strategies that have consistently succeeded only in creating intergenerational trauma — have never been the solutions to public health crises, in the Tenderloin or elsewhere” A Biden administration rule that employers with more than 100 workers must require vaccinations or have to undergo weekly Covid testing and mask mandates was upheld by a federal appeals court today, overturning a lower courts ruling. “The record establishes that Covid-19 has continued to spread, mutate, kill and block the safe return of American workers to their jobs. To protect workers, Osha can and must be able to respond to dangers as they evolve,” Judge Jane B Stranch wrote in an opinion. The new ruling is expected to be appealed to the supreme court, the Washington Post reports: More than two dozen Republican-led states, private businesses and conservative legal groups challenged the policy. Before the legal challenges filed in courts throughout the country were consolidated at the 6th Circuit, a different appeals court temporarily halted Biden’s plans. The Louisiana-based 5th Circuit Court of Appeal said the Labor Department exceeded its authority and ordered the OSHA to not take any further steps to implement or enforce the rules.” Citing “increasing challenges from the pandemic” the producers of the famed and beloved Radio City Music Hall show starring the Rocketts called it quits on the rest of the season. The “Christmas Spectacular” was scheduled through 2 January, with several shows on each day. On Friday, producers announced that there had been breakthrough cases and that the day’s performances were off. By the evening, they’d canceled all remaining shows. “We regret that we are unable to continue the ‘Christmas Spectacular’ this season,” they said in a statement. “We had hoped we could make it through the season and are honored to have hosted hundreds of thousands of fans at more than 100 shows over the last seven weeks.” They aren’t alone. Several Broadway shows have had to shut down due to the surge in cases impacting New York City again, the New York Times reports. New York state has also experienced the highest single-day spike in new infections — with 21,027 cases reported Friday — breaking a previous record set on 14 January. From the NYT: The decision comes as Broadway has had to endure a raft of cancellations unlike any in its history. Several shows, including “Tina,” a jukebox musical about Tina Turner, “Harry Potter and the Cursed Child” and “Hamilton” have all had to cancel at least one performance in recent days. On Thursday, six of the 32 current shows canceled performances, including “Moulin Rouge!,” where many patrons were already in their seats when the decision was made. In a sign of the increasing level of concern over the Omicron variant, the Metropolitan Opera on Wednesday became the first major performing arts institution in New York to unveil a booster mandate: Beginning Jan. 17, all employees and audience members eligible for booster shots will be required to show proof that they have received them in order to enter the opera house.” In an attempt to keep kids in the classrooms in the face of the fast-spreading Omicron variant, the Biden administration released a new strategy to increase Covid testing. Rather than sending children home, schools can now employ the CDC’s “test to stay” strategy, enabling unvaccinated students to remain in class if they test negative at least twice even if they have been exposed to the virus. “If exposed children meet a certain criteria and continue to test negative, they can stay at school instead of quarantining at home,” CDC director Rochelle Walensky said during a press briefing on Friday. Omicron is quickly gaining speed and could soon become the dominant variant in the US, surpassing Delta. Vaccines are still a strong line of defense against the virus but only 18% of kids between the ages of five and 11 have received one dose, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics. Roughly 61% between the ages of 12 to 17 have gotten a shot. But studies done by the agency show that the new strategy is effective at stopping transmissions and limits school days missed. The CDC cited how the program, used at 90 schools in Illinois was able prevent 8,000 missed school days, NBC News reports. In Los Angeles county, where the strategy wasn’t used, students lost 92,000 school days. “The studies demonstrate that ‘test to stay’ works to keep unvaccinated children in schools safely,” Walensky said. Gabrielle Canon here in Los Angeles to take you through the rest of Friday’s news. Three NFL games planned for this weekend had to be rescheduled due to a Covid outbreak among players, the New York Times reports. With the season winding down, the quick-spreading Omicron variant is having an impact on the important games leading up to the Super Bowl and more than 130 players have tested positive. The NFL said in a news release that the games will be postponed due to the “new, highly transmissible form of the virus this week, resulting in a substantial increase in cases across the league.” New protocols have also been issued, including mask mandates and limitations placed on in-person activities. From the NYT: If the outbreak worsens, the NFL has little room to maneuver. Only four more weeks of its regular season remain, and there are no breaks in the schedule besides the week before the Super Bowl, which is scheduled for Feb. 13. Games cannot be played in rapid succession, like in other leagues, because of the necessary recovery time for teams between games. And with just 17 regular season games, a forfeit or game that cannot be rescheduled could drastically affect who qualifies for the playoffs.” That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Gabrielle Canon, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden once again underscored the urgent need to pass national voting rights legislation, which has stalled in the Senate due to Republican filibustering. “This battle is not over,” Biden said at South Carolina State University’s commencement ceremony this morning. “We’re going to keep up the fight until we get it done, and you’re going to keep up the fight, and we need your help badly.” Omicron is expected to soon become the dominant strain of coronavirus in the US, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said. “Although Delta continues to circulate widely in the United States, Omicron is increasing rapidly, and we expect it to become the dominant strain in the United States, as it has in other countries, in the coming weeks,” Dr Rochelle Walensky said at a press briefing today. A Capitol insurrectionist was sentenced to more than five years in prison for attacking police officers on 6 January. The punishment of Robert Palmer represents the longest sentence given to a Capitol rioter so far. Palmer told the judge overseeing his case, “I’m really, really ashamed of what I did.” Roger Stone invoked his fifth amendment rights against self-incrimination today, when he appeared for his deposition with the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. “I did invoke my fifth amendment rights to every question – not because I have done anything wrong, but because I am fully aware of the House Democrats’ long history of fabricating perjury charges,” the Trump ally and political operative said. A report suggests that former Texas governor and energy secretary Rick Perry was the author of a controversial text sent to Mark Meadows, the former chief of staff to Donald Trump, on 4 November 2020. The text was revealed as part of the documents that Meadows turned over to the select committee investigating the insurrection, and it reads, “HERE’s an AGRESSIVE (sic) STRATEGY: Why can t (sic) the states of GA NC PENN and other R controlled state houses declare this is BS (where conflicts and election not called that night) and just send their own electors to vote and have it go to the SCOTUS.” Gabrielle will have more coming up, so stay tuned. A new report suggests that former Texas governor and energy secretary Rick Perry was the author of a controversial text sent to Mark Meadows, the former chief of staff to Donald Trump, on November 4, 2020. The text was revealed on Tuesday night as part of the documents that Meadows turned over to the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection, before the former Trump aide ended his cooperation with investigators. The text reads, “HERE’s an AGRESSIVE (sic) STRATEGY: Why can t (sic) the states of GA NC PENN and other R controlled state houses declare this is BS (where conflicts and election not called that night) and just send their own electors to vote and have it go to the SCOTUS.” CNN reports: A spokesman for Perry told CNN that the former Energy Secretary denies being the author of the text. Multiple people who know Rick Perry confirmed to CNN that the phone number the committee has associated with that text message is Perry’s number. The cell phone number the text was sent from, obtained from a source knowledgeable about the investigation, appears in databases as being registered to a James Richard Perry of Texas, the former governor’s full name. The number is also associated in a second database as registered to a Department of Energy email address associated with Perry when he was secretary. When told of these facts, the spokesman had no explanation. Democrats had warned that the text message indicates Trump and his allies were working to overturn the results of the 2020 election even before a winner was declared in multiple battleground states. One House progressive suggested he felt betrayed by the Senate’s failure to pass the Build Back Better Act after he supported the bipartisan infrastructure bill. “The House acted in good faith and passed the infrastructure bill, on the promise that the Senate would do the same with Build Back Better,” congressman Ro Khanna said. “It’s time for the Senate to hold the vote that the president promised.” It’s worth noting that six House progressives – Jamaal Bowman, Cori Bush, Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, Ilhan Omar, Ayanna Pressley and Rashida Tlaib – opposed the infrastructure bill out of concern that its passage would slow momentum for the Build Back Better Act. And indeed, since the infrastructure bill passed last month, centrist Democrat Joe Manchin has raised more objections to the Build Back Better Act, leaving a deal out of reach as the end of the year approaches. Set the DVR: Joe Manchin will be speaking to Bret Baier on Fox News this Sunday, as the centrist senator’s talks with Joe Biden over the Build Back Better Act drag on. The interview comes as Biden has acknowledged that Democrats’ $1.75tn spending package will not pass this year, largely because Manchin is not yet on board. Manchin’s reluctance is enraging progressives, who have warned that the party will suffer widespread losses in the midterm elections next year if Congress cannot deliver. “It is actually delusional to believe Dems can get re-elected without acting on filibuster or student debt, Biden breaking his BBB promise, letting [the expanded child tax credit] lapse, 0 path to citizenship, etc,” congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez said on Twitter today. “We need to act now.” Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell has said the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection is seeking facts that “the public needs to know”. Speaking to Spectrum News yesterday, the Republican leader said of the select committee, “I think the fact-finding is interesting. We’re all going to be watching it.” McConnell did not offer any review of the committee’s performance so far, but he acknowledged the importance of the investigators’ work. “It was a horrendous event, and I think what they’re seeking to find out is something the public needs to know,” McConnell said. The Kentucky senator made similar comments earlier this week, telling reporters on Capitol Hill, “We’re all watching, as you are, what is unfolding on the House side, and it will be interesting to reveal all the participants who were involved.” It should be noted that Senate Republicans blocked the creation of a 9/11-style commission to study the insurrection earlier this year. Caroline Wren, one of the organizers of the January 6 rally that culminated in the attack on the Capitol, also met today with the House select committee investigating the insurrection. Wren did not respond to questions when a CBS News reporter approached her earlier today: Wren was a top fundraiser for Donald Trump’s campaign, and she was listed on the permit paperwork for the January 6 rally as a “VIP adviser”. The select committee issued subpoenas to Wren and other organizers of the rally in late September. Meanwhile, Brandon Straka, who spoke at a “Stop the Steal” rally the day before the Capitol insurrection, appears to have provided the government with information that may impact his sentencing after he pleaded guilty to disorderly conduct during the riot. Politico reports: It’s an indication that Straka, one of the few Jan. 6 defendants who is also of interest to congressional investigators, has cooperated with prosecutors in a substantive way. Straka, who describes himself as a ‘former liberal,’ became a relatively prominent figure in Trump-world in 2018, when he founded the ‘WalkAway campaign’ to encourage liberals to abandon Democrats. He was one of just two speakers at pro-Trump events on Jan. 5 and 6 criminally charged for their roles in the Capitol attack. Owen Shroyer, an InfoWars broadcaster and ally of Alex Jones, also faces misdemeanor charges in the case. Straka pleaded guilty in October to a single misdemeanor charge and was set to be sentenced next week. But prosecutors have asked for a 30-day sentencing delay so that his new evidence ‘can be properly evaluated.’ The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection has also asked the National Archives to provide all Trump White House documents related to Straka. Roger Stone confirmed that he did invoke his Fifth Amendment rights against self-incrimination this morning, when he appeared for a deposition before the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. “This morning, in fulfillment of a federal subpoena, I did my civil duty, and I responded as required by law,” the Trump ally and political operative told reporters on Capitol Hill. “I did invoke my Fifth Amendment rights to every question -- not because I have done anything wrong, but because I am fully aware of the House Democrats’ long history of fabricating perjury charges.” Stone challenged the legitimacy of the inquiry, attacking the investigation as “witch hunt 3.0”. “I stress yet again that I was not on the Ellipse. I did not march to the Capitol,” Stone said. “I was not at the Capitol and any claim, assertion or even implication that I knew about or was involved in any way whatsoever with the illegal and politically counterproductive activities of January 6, is categorically false.” According to the statement the committee issued when it subpoenaed Stone, investigators are interested in his movements on January 5 and allegations that he used members of the far-right group Oath Keepers as personal security guards while he was in Washington. Stone claimed his actions on January 5 amounted to “constitutionally protected free speech” and were thus not a legitimate avenue of inquiry for the committee. One of the participants in the January 6 insurrection at the US Capitol has been sentenced to more than five years in prison for attacking police officers during the riot. The AP reports: Robert Palmer, 54, of Largo, Florida, wept as he told U.S. District Judge Tanya Chutkan that he recently watched a video of his actions that day and could not believe what he was seeing. ‘Your honor. I’m really really ashamed of what I did,’ he said weeping. Palmer was one of a few rioters sentenced on Friday in District of Columbia court for their actions on Jan. 6 when the angry mob descended after a rally by then-President Donald Trump to disrupt the certification of Joe Biden’s victory. Scores of police were beaten and blooded, five people died and there was about $1.5 million in damage done to the U.S. Capitol. Palmer is the 65th defendant to be sentenced overall. More than 700 people have been charged. Palmer’s punishment represents the longest prison sentence given to a Capitol rioter so far. That unwanted record was previously held by Jacob Chansley of Arizona and Scott Fairlamb of New Jersey, both of whom received 41 months in prison. Leading progressive Democrat Pramila Jayapal is voicing the frustration felt by many as the year looks set to end with a legislative whimper not a bang for Joe Biden and his administration. The Washington state congresswoman just tweeted: Liberals tweeted their support, including this cartoon of the bill metaphorically bearing down on Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema on a bicycle made for two (centrist Democrats), who thus with the shakiest of platforms, hold it at bay: New data analysis has revealed that if US Democratic voters were to make up their own country, it would have one of the world’s most vaccinated populations, with over 91% of adults having received at least one shot. Meanwhile, only approximately 60% of Republican adults have received their first shot, according to data research by the New York Times. And the gap in Covid’s death toll between blue and red states that voted mostly Republican this fall widened more quickly than at any previous point of the pandemic. A total of 25 out of every 100,000 residents in counties that voted for Donald Trump died of Covid in October, compared to the 7.8 per 100,000 in counties that voted heavily for Biden, according to the data analysis from the Times. October marked the fifth consecutive month that the percentage gap of death rates in red and blue counties widened. Charles Gaba, an independent health care analyst, said that in October, the “reddest” tenth of the US saw death rates from coronavirus six times higher than the “bluest” tenth. “Those numbers have dropped slightly in recent weeks,” he told National Public Radio. “It’s back down to 5.5 times higher.” Counties where Trump received over 70% of the vote experienced an even higher average of Covid-19 deaths compared to counties where Trump won at least 60 percent, the new data research revealed. On the contrary, Covid-19 deaths in heavily Biden counties and swing counties did not rise over the past two months, despite the nationwide surge in cases. The US Postal Service (USPS) and NAACP have reached a settlement in a lawsuit over election mail. USPS agreed for the 2022 mid-term congressional election to take the same extraordinary measures used to deliver ballots in the November 2020 election, Reuters writes. The agency further reports: The Postal Service also agreed for elections through 2028 to post guidance documents publicly reflecting its “good faith efforts to prioritize monitoring and timely delivery of Election Mail. The NAACP president, Derrick Johnson said in a statement, “With the NAACP’s ability to now monitor the performance of the USPS during national elections, we will ensure that the right to vote is protected for of all citizens, including those often suppressed.” Johnson also reiterated the need to pass national voting rights legislation, saying, “While this is an unprecedented victory, we are now laser-focused on passing federal voting rights protections through the Senate.” Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden once again underscored the urgent need to pass national voting rights legislation, which has stalled in the Senate due to Republican filibustering. “This battle is not over,” Biden said at South Carolina State University’s commencement ceremony this morning. “We’re going to keep up the fight until we get it done, and you’re going to keep up the fight, and we need your help badly.” Omicron is expected to soon become the dominant strain of coronavirus in the US, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said. “Although Delta continues to circulate widely in the United States, Omicron is increasing rapidly, and we expect it to become the dominant strain in the United States, as it has in other countries, in the coming weeks,” Dr Rochelle Walensky said at a press briefing today. Roger Stone appeared on Capitol Hill for his deposition with the House select committee investigating the January 6 insurrection. Stone’s lawyer had previously indicated that his client would invoke his Fifth Amendment rights against self-incrimination to avoid complying with the committee’s subpoena, which was issued last month. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Major US companies are now pulling back on plans to return to in-person work in light of the Omicron variant’s rapid spread across America. Employers planning to call remote workers back into the office in the new year are now pausing those efforts, and they are wary of setting new return dates only to push them back once again in the face of continued uncertainty and risks from the pandemic. The pandemic is also driving changes in how in-person employees work, with a renewed push for strikes and unionization across several industries where workers have frequently faced long hours and unsafe conditions. Alphabet’s Google, Meta, Apple, Uber, Lyft, Ford, DoorDash, DocuSign and Fidelity are among the companies that have delayed returns to the office. “It’s warranted, given the uptick that we’ve seen in cases,” Bradford Bell, director of the Center for Advanced Human Resource Studies at Cornell University’s ILR School, said. The delays also depend on where the offices are located, he said. “They’re very much looking at this on a location-by-location basis.” The White House pandemic response team coordinator, Jeff Zients, reassured vaccinated Americans that, if they contract Omicron, their case will “likely be asymptomatic or mild”. “We are intent on not letting Omicron disrupt work and school for the vaccinated. You’ve done the right thing, and we will get through this,” Zients said. But the White House official issued a dire warning to unvaccinated Americans, saying Omicron poses a serious risk to them and their communities. “For the unvaccinated, you’re looking at a winter of severe illness and death for yourselves, your families and the hospitals you may soon overwhelm,” Zients said. “Our message to every American is clear: there is action you can take to protect yourself and your family. Wear a mask in public indoor settings, get vaccinated, get your kids vaccinated and get a booster shot when you’re eligible.” Joe Biden issued a similar warning yesterday, saying the unvaccinated face “a winter of severe illness and death”. The White House pandemic response team held a briefing this morning to provide an update on the spread of the Omicron variant of coronavirus in the US. Dr Rochelle Walensky, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said at least 39 states and more than 75 countries have now reported confirmed cases of the Omicron variant. “Although Delta continues to circulate widely in the United States, Omicron is increasing rapidly, and we expect it to become the dominant strain in the United States, as it has in other countries, in the coming weeks,” Walensky said. The CDC director noted that the agency is seeing cases of Omicron among people who are both vaccinated and boosted. But Walensky added, “We believe these cases are milder or asymptomatic because of vaccine protection.” During South Carolina State University’s commencement ceremony this morning, Joe Biden also received an honorary doctorate of humane letters from the historically Black college. In his remarks at South Carolina State University’s commencement ceremony, Joe Biden also addressed Congress’ failure to pass the George Floyd Justice in Policing Act. Biden noted he has gotten to know George Floyd’s family well in the year and a half since the Black man was murdered by a Minneapolis police officer in May 2020. The bill bearing Floyd’s name has passed the House, but it has stalled in the Senate, after bipartisan negotiations over policing reform broke down earlier this year. “On police reform, I share the frustration,” Biden said. “It’s not been passed in the Senate, but the fight’s not over.” Joe Biden is now speaking at South Carolina State University’s commencement ceremony, and he once again underscored the urgent need to strengthen voting rights. “We have to protect that sacred right to vote, for God’s sake,” Biden said. “I’ve never seen anything like the unrelenting assault on the right to vote.” The president’s comments come as Senate Democrats are discussing potential changes to the filibuster to allow voting rights legislation to advance in the evenly divided chamber. Senate Republicans have used the filibuster to block multiple voting rights bills, as Democrats do not have the 60 votes necessary to overcome a filibuster. “This battle is not over. We must pass the Freedom to Vote Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Act. We must,” Biden told the graduates of the historically Black university. “We’re going to keep up the fight until we get it done, and you’re going to keep up the fight, and we need your help badly.” House majority whip Jim Clyburn noted that his wife, Emily Clyburn, graduated from South Carolina State University as well. Emily was the person who encouraged her husband to endorse Joe Biden in the 2020 Democratic presidential primary. That endorsement was crucial to Biden’s victory in the South Carolina primary, which was the start of his successful comeback campaign. “When I looked among those 20-some odd candidates running for the Democratic nomination, several of whom were very close friends of ours, I remembered what she said to me,” Clyburn said. “And I followed her directions, just as I did for the 58 years that we were married.” Emily passed away a few months before the South Carolina primary, so she did not live to see Biden’s victory and inauguration. The commencement ceremony at South Carolina State University is now underway, and Joe Biden is expected to soon begin his remarks. Prior to the president’s speech, House majority whip Jim Clyburn, a graduate of the historically Black university, delivered remarks as well. Clyburn encouraged the students to never give up on their goals, recounting how he lost three races for Congress before being elected to the House. “If at first you don’t succeed, try and try again,” Clyburn said. “No matter how many times you attempt, you keep trying until you get it right.” During the commencement ceremony, Clyburn will walk across the stage because he never got the opportunity to do so when he graduated from the university in 1961. The Washington Post explains: In December 1961, James E. Clyburn was a 21-year-old at South Carolina State University who had completed all his credits and was set to graduate. However, because the school at the time allowed only one commencement ceremony a year — usually in the spring — Clyburn received his diploma in the mail instead of marching alongside his classmates. He could have returned to walk in the 1962 ceremony, but by then he was busy with a new teaching job in Charleston. Sixty years later, Clyburn, now an 81-year-old Democratic congressman from South Carolina and the House majority whip, will get the opportunity to experience the pomp and circumstance of the college graduation ceremony he never had. And a special guest will hand him his diploma: President Biden, who is giving the commencement address at the school on Friday. ‘It means a great deal to me,’ Clyburn said Thursday on MSNBC’s ‘Morning Joe.’ Trump supporters and members of far-right extremist groups who took part in the violent insurrection at the US Capitol on 6 January are raising hundreds of thousands of dollars from online crowdfunding sites by portraying themselves as maligned American patriots, martyrs and “political prisoners”. Several of the highest-profile participants in the “stop the steal” insurrection which attempted to disrupt Joe Biden’s certification as US president are raising substantial sums on fundraising sites. They include members of the far-right Proud Boys and many of the 6 January individuals being detained in a Washington DC jail, awaiting trial for allegedly attacking police officers. In their donations appeals they are drastically rewriting history. Their scripts transform 6 January from what it was – a violent attempt to overthrow the democratic results of the 2020 presidential election on behalf of Donald Trump – into the fantasy that it was a peaceful and patriotic protest to uphold voter integrity. “It’s shocking to say, but America now has legitimate political prisoners, en masse,” says the fundraising page titled American Gulag for Jan 6 Political Prisoners which has so far raised $41,000. The page, created by Jim Hoft, founder of the conspiracy site Gateway Pundit, claims that there are “scores of political prisoners wrongfully imprisoned as a result of the protest on January 6th”. Meanwhile, Trump ally and political operative Roger Stone has arrived on Capitol Hill for his deposition before the House select committee investigating the January 6 insurrection. Stone declined to comment as he entered the Capitol, per Politico: Stone is expected to invoke his Fifth Amendment rights against self-incrimination in an attempt to avoid complying with the committee’s subpoena, which was issued last month. According to CNN, Stone’s lawyer, Grant Smith, wrote in a letter to the committee last week that “pursuant to the rights afforded him by the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution, he declines to be deposed or to produce documents”. Joe Biden is now en route to South Carolina, where he will be delivering remarks today at South Carolina State University’s 2021 fall commencement ceremony. The White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, gaggled with reporters aboard Air Force One during the flight, and she gave an update on the Build Back Better negotiations. “The president’s going to get this done and we’re going to get it across the finish line,” Psaki said. “And yes, it’s going to take more time than we anticipated.” The press secretary argued Biden was the right leader to navigate his party through these complicated negotiations, pointing to his experience in helping major legislation like the Affordable Care Act advance through Congress. On the issue of families not receiving checks from the expanded child tax credit program next month, Psaki suggested families may receive double payments in February if Democrats can pass their bill in time. However, the president and Joe Manchin remain far apart in the talks, so it’s unclear whether the party can pass the bill next month either. In his statement yesterday, Joe Biden also provided an update on the state of Senate Democrats’ negotiations over amending the filibuster to advance a voting rights bill. “We must also press forward on voting rights legislation, and make progress on this as quickly as possible,” Biden said. “I had a productive conversation today with several Senators about how we can get this vital legislation passed. Our democracy is at stake.” A group of moderate Democratic senators has been trying to determine what filibuster changes could win the support of Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema and thus allow a voting rights bill to move forward. Senate Republicans have successfully used the filibuster to block multiple voting rights bills because the rule requires a 60-vote majority to advance legislation, and that is an extremely high bar in a 50-50 chamber. However, Sinema has signaled she is still staunchly opposed to amending the filibuster, stifling Democrat’s hopes of getting a voting rights bill to the president’s desk anytime soon. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. Joe Biden has acknowledged what many in Washington have known for at least several days at this point: the Build Back Better Act will not pass Congress this year. In a lengthy statement released yesterday evening, Biden said he has updated congressional leaders about his recent talks with centrist Senator Joe Manchin, the key swing vote in the negotiations. “In these discussions, Senator Manchin has reiterated his support for Build Back Better funding at the level of the framework plan I announced in September,” Biden said. The president pledged that Democrats will “advance this work together over the days and weeks ahead” and bring a final bill to the Senate floor “as early as possible”. “My team and I are having ongoing discussions with Senator Manchin; that work will continue next week,” Biden said. “It takes time to finalize these agreements, prepare the legislative changes, and finish all the parliamentary and procedural steps needed to enable a Senate vote.” For millions of American families, the slow pace of the negotiations means they will not be receiving a check next month from the expanded child tax credit program, which has become a lifeline for many working parents. (The bill was supposed to extend the expanded program for another year.) And the longer the talks stretch on, the more unlikely it seems that Democrats will ever be able to pass any version of the bill at all. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.The mayor of San Francisco has declared a state of emergency in the Tenderloin district, an area with high levels of homelessness and devastating numbers of drug overdoses, in an effort to crack down on crime and reduce overdose deaths. “We are in a crisis and we need to respond accordingly,” said London Breed at a news conference on Friday. The plan will aggressively address issues on what she called the “nasty streets” in her city, including bolstering the budget for policing. The announcement marked a stunning shift in rhetoric for a leader of one of America’s most liberal cities. Once a vocal champion of criminal justice reforms and reducing the reliance on police in favor of stronger social programs, Breed embraced an approach she acknowledged is at odds with what her progressive constituents want. “What I’m proposing today and what I will be proposing in the future will make a lot of people uncomfortable,” she said. “And I don’t care.” “Too many people are dying in this city, too many people are sprawled on our streets,” she said, citing the fact that about two people a day are dying of overdoses, mostly from fentanyl. “It’s time that the reign of criminals who are destroying our city, it is time for it to come to an end.” The first two parts of a three-phased approach, described in a press release issued Friday, is already underway, and includes a significant increase in police presence instructed to target both drug sellers and users. Drug-related fatalities are on the rise and outpaced Covid deaths in the city last year by 2 to 1. The emergency declaration will allow the city to cut through red tape that delays the public response to deteriorating conditions in the Tenderloin and quickly provide shelter, counseling and medical care to people suffering from addiction, Breed and other city officials said. The crackdown also comes weeks after San Francisco was targeted by coordinated thefts, where groups of people raided high-end stores armed with crowbars and hammers. In response, the city deployed police to the downtown area in full-force, bumping officer overtime to roughly 8,000 hours. But Breed’s plan is likely to draw some backlash. Statistics collected by the San Francisco police department show many types of crime, including larceny, are actually down from where they were in 2019. The plan also includes an expansion of police surveillance, a point that has sparked concerns from privacy experts and advocates that the mayor is attempting to circumvent San Francisco’s privacy laws. “The mayor’s proposal to massively expand police presence in San Francisco is regressive and harmful to those who are already underserved and overpoliced,” said Mano Raju, public defender, in a statement issued Tuesday, noting that Breed made promises to divest in policing after the murder of George Floyd. He added that an increase in policing won’t help address the root causes of crime, including poverty, addiction, disease, and trauma. “Piling more resources into policing and punishment – strategies that have consistently succeeded only in creating intergenerational trauma – have never been the solutions to public health crises, in the Tenderloin or elsewhere,” he said. San Francisco is home to an estimated 8,000 homeless people, many of whom pitch tents in the Tenderloin and are struggling with chronic addiction or severe mental illness, often both. Also on Friday, California’s governor Gavin Newsom announced a $250m proposal to help police fight organized retail theft, which would create a team dedicated to prosecuting such crimes. The Associated Press contributed reportingAfter months of criminal proceedings that have gripped Silicon Valley, the fate of Theranos founder Elizabeth Holmes now rests in the hands of 12 jurors. A group of eight men and four women will consider whether to convict or exonerate Holmes, 37, on nine counts of fraud and two counts of conspiracy to commit fraud. Deliberations are expected to begin on Monday. Holmes faces a maximum of 20 years in prison and has pleaded not guilty. Throughout the trial and in closing statements on Thursday, the prosecution sought to prove Holmes knowingly lied to investors and patients, arguing she purposely oversold the capabilities of the company’s devices to attain wealth and fame. Calling more than 30 witnesses including investors, patients, and former employees, lawyers for the prosecution painted a picture of a founder hell-bent on making her technology succeed despite mounting evidence that her claims were largely baseless. Prosecutor Jeff Schenk presented to the jury a recap of arguments that Holmes knowingly lied about the capabilities of Theranos testing, saying the evidence shows “she made the decision to defraud her investors and then to defraud her patients” “She chose fraud over business failure. She choose to be dishonest with investors and patients,” he said. “That choice was not only callous, it was criminal.” Holmes founded the company at the center of the case in 2004 after dropping out of Stanford, seeking to revolutionize the health care space with a machine that could perform a vast range of tests from just one drop of blood. As a female founder in the male-dominated tech space, Holmes quickly soared to fame, attracting funding from big name investors like the former US secretary of state George Schultz and media mogul Rupert Murdoch. The company had amassed more than $9bn in value when reports from the Wall Street Journal revealed major concerns in its revolutionary claims. During the trial, multiple lab directors testified they warned Holmes about shortcomings of Theranos technology and were told to downplay such concerns. Meanwhile, Holmes told investors the technology was working as planned. In one particularly damning piece of evidence, Holmes doctored paperwork with pharmaceutical logos, implying the firms had endorsed her technology. Holmes admitted to doing so, saying, “I wish I had done it differently.” Holmes, meanwhile, has maintained her innocence, claiming she relied on the word of scientists and other employees and believed the technology worked as advertised. She also alleged that her co-president and former lover Sunny Balwani had emotionally and physically abused her, influencing her to commit fraud. Balwani has denied these allegations and faces his own fraud trial in 2022. In closing arguments on Friday, her lawyer Kevin Downey compared Holmes’s final days at Theranos to the experience of a captain valiantly trying to save a sinking ship. Had Holmes committed any crimes, she would have been scurrying to jump overboard like a scared rat, Downey told jurors as he wrapped up roughly five hours of closing arguments. “Did she leave?” he asked the jury. “No, she stayed. Why? Because she believed in this technology. She believed she was building a technology that would change the world.” In late November, Holmes stunned those following the trial when she unexpectedly took the stand in her own defense. The move was a gamble on her part, opening Holmes up to cross examination from prosecutors eager to fact check her public statements against internal documents that contracted them. For more than four days the prosecution grilled Holmes on her initial testimony, implying Balwani was not abusive but warm and loving towards her and that she made decisions regarding the business on her own accord. The jury could hand down a decision at any time, and it is speculated it will do so next week.Seattle socialist Kshama Sawant has narrowly avoided being ousted from her seat on the city council, following a widely watched recall election. By Friday afternoon, just over 41,000 ballots had been counted, with the no recall vote leading by 310. Though a recount request is possible, it is considered unlikely. “For us to have overcome that in this spectacular manner really speaks to not only the organizational strength of our campaign, of Socialist Alternative, of working people in general, but also the political ideas on which this victory has been based,” Sawant told the Guardian on Friday. The recall result for Sawant – who became the first socialist on the Seattle council in nearly a century after she beat out a Democrat and 16-year incumbent in 2013 – was viewed as a win for progressives and a rebuff of big business. The recall attempt was one of hundreds across the US this year in response to covid 19 and racial disputes. In September, California governor Gavin Newsom, a Democrat, defeated a recall bid. But with a significant subsection of residents in Sawant’s district voting to remove her, the result also clarified just how much of a polarizing figure she has remained. The recall effort was based on claims that she opened city hall to demonstrators during a protest, disregarding Covid-19 restrictions, used city resources for a “Tax Amazon” effort, and led a march to Seattle mayor Jenny Durkan’s home despite the address being protected under state confidentiality laws. The Kshama Solidarity Campaign has pushed back on the charges, and Sawant said the recall was rather an “attempt to have a do-over of the election result in 2019 which big business did not like”. She added: “In reality if the rightwing, if big business was allowed to win in this recall [then] they would only be emboldened to go after progressive movements both in Seattle and nationally.” The election drew widespread national attention and both sides have seen substantial financial contributions, some coming from states away. Two groups in support of the recall, Recall Sawant and A Better Seattle, raised just over $1m combined, while the Kshama Solidarity Campaign has raised almost $1m, according to the Seattle ethics and elections commission. Henry Bridger II, campaign manager and chairman of Recall Sawant, said in statement Friday: “While this election will not end with removing councilmember Sawant from office, her narrow escape sends a clear message: Seattle voters are yearning for constructive representation and will not tolerate slash-and-burn politicians who shirk accountability and divide the city. Sawant is supposed to represent all of us, not just those who agree with her, and we hope that this election leads her to see that.” On election night, 7 December, the recall had the lead, but as more votes were counted in the following days (Washington state runs a vote-by-mail system that means final results may take days to appear), the no recall side soon took a slight lead. Eva Metz, 29, who lives in Sawant’s district and works as a nursing assistant and restaurant host, said she was motivated to volunteer in support of the councilmember because of her work for renters’ rights. She said she spent virtually the entire weekend before the vote going door-to-door and speaking to voters from a table on the street. “The goal was to make it so that you couldn’t really walk around District 3 and miss the campaign,” she said. “So, I think we did that job pretty well.” Sawant, now in her third term, has helped to increase Seattle’s minimum wage to $15 an hour – a first for a major US city – and helped to secure more rights for renters, while pushing for the city’s police budget to be slashed. But after seven years in office, some of her constituents have grown increasingly tired of what they view as more talk than actual results. “It’s like she represents District 3, but we don’t see her, we don’t hear from her,” said Victoria Beach, 62, chair of the Seattle police department’s African American Community Advisory Council. “She has not done anything. I just don’t like the way she handles her job.” The recall effort was initiated by a Seattle resident within a year after Sawant clinched her latest re-election victory, in 2019, overtaking an opponent with unprecedented financial support from Amazon.New South Wales has recorded Australia’s highest ever daily Covid case tally as the Omicron variant, combined with a wave of Delta cases spread at Christmas gatherings, has caused the number of infections to spike. The spike comes just days after the NSW government decided to go ahead with removing almost all remaining Covid restrictions, including the requirement to wear masks in crowded retail settings. It is an approach that has baffled some epidemiologists, who say it is too early to base public health decisions on the assumption that the Omicron variant will be more mild than previous strains. “Everybody is banking on [Omicron] being mild but it would have to be extremely mild for it to not be a problem given the significant increase in cases,” said Prof Nancy Baxter, the head of the school of population and global health at the University of Melbourne. NSW recorded 2,482 cases on Saturday, more than quadrupling its daily case tally in just five days, resulting in a spike in cases that is steeper and taller than recorded during the Delta outbreak in the middle of the year, when Sydney was put into lockdown for more than three months. There are currently 206 people in hospital, and one person died overnight. In the five days between Sunday and Friday, the reproduction number in NSW – which represents how many people the average positive case will infect – increased from 1.37 to 2.12, meaning case numbers could double every four days. Victoria recorded 1,504 new cases on Saturday, none of which were reported to be the Omicron variant. Seven people died and the number of people in hospital increased to 384. South Australia recorded 73 new coronavirus infections amid a growing outbreak, posting record numbers for the second consecutive day. It brought the total number of active Omicron cases in the state to eight. Twenty-nine cases were locally acquired in South Australia and have been linked to a positive case, and four more acquired the infection locally but were unlinked. Two more were linked to infections interstate and 37 acquired the infection somewhere in Australia, with no known source. One was a person who acquired the infection overseas. Tasmania also reported one new case of Covid-19, bringing the total number of active cases in the island state to four, four days after the state reopened to visitors. The NSW department of health on Saturday said it would no longer undertake genomic sequencing for all potential cases of Omicron, only those where it may make a difference in treatment. There are early signs that monoclonal antibody treatments, which are used against other variants of the coronavirus, may not be as effective against Omicron. There have been 226 cases of the Omicron variant recorded in NSW to date. Baxter said it was sensible, if resources were stretched, to reserve the genomic sequencing capability for those cases where it may affect the treatment options. In two weeks, she said, it may not matter at all – Omicron will be the dominant variant. On Wednesday, the NSW government went ahead with a plan to scrap mask mandates in some indoor settings such as supermarkets and cinemas, and dropped QR check-in codes for all except high risk venues like gyms, aged and disability care facilities, hospitals, pubs and clubs, and large outdoor music festivals. Density limits were also dropped. The Victorian government also eased some restrictions, particularly around the requirement to show proof of vaccination status, but the planned easing of mask rules did not take place because of the risk posed by the Omicron variant. The Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, said on Saturday that the national plan was “not about case numbers”. “What matters is hospitalisations, ICU, people on ventilators, and severe illness,” he said. “We have been planning for this. We planned to live with the virus. We didn’t plan to remain shut in.” Baxter said it appeared that many Australian governments had decided to “hope for the best and plan for the best” despite the lack of data around the impact of Omicron on hospitalisations and long Covid. “You can hope for the best, I don’t have a problem with people hoping for the best, she said. “But planning for the best is not generally what you do in a pandemic, because if you’re wrong …” Australia may be at particular risk from Omicron, she said, because the AstraZeneca vaccine does not appear to be effective against transmission of this variant. There is very little data on whether it is effective against severe illness or hospitalisation. AstraZeneca was widely used in Australia, particularly among older Australians. The Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation has reduced the interval for booster shots – of either Pfizer or Moderna mRNA vaccines – from six months to five, and Guardian Australia revealed on Friday that NSW was considering reducing that interval to four months given that many people in that state received the AstraZeneca vaccine, often on a condensed timeline. “I had a double AZ and I am nearly four months along going into the holidays,” Baxter said. “I feel completely unprotected.” Baxter said that early indications the Omicron variant was more mild than the Delta variant were tempered by the fact that it appears to be much more infectious. Because even if fewer people are seriously ill or hospitalised, the case load could still, with higher infectivity, be enough to put significant pressure on the health system. “You can’t turn your back when the tsunami is coming, you can’t say ‘I don’t care about the tsunami’,” she said. “[Government] had a plan and they are sticking to the plan, but Omicron does not care about your plan. Covid does not care about your plan. What Australia is doing is completely contrary to what everyone else is doing.” At the very least, Baxter said, governments should be requiring people to wear masks indoors. She also said the cloth masks that became ubiquitous in 2020 may not protect against Omicron, and recommended people wear a well-fitted P2 mask. “A cloth mask will protect other people from you if you have Covid – you need to protect yourself from other people,” she said. “Masks do not stop you from doing anything. Unless we are a country of babies, unless we are a country of total whiny babies, we can still wear masks.” This article was amended on 19 December 2021. An earlier version stated masks were no longer mandatory on public transport, at airports or for unvaccinated hospitality staff in NSW when they are still required in those circumstances.A road out of the village goes down a notorious dip, known as Pebble Hill or Devil’s Arch. There is no arch as such, but ancient trees squeeze the high banks with knuckled roots. It is always damp and darkly atmospheric, and the first to be closed by fallen trees in storms. It is also a place with a sad story about a ghostly horse. It is here at dusk that my rattly 20-year-old car stops rattling. Something dings behind me with a flash in my rear-view mirror as it hits the road with a spark, the way a horse’s shoe strikes tarmac on a dark winter morning. I keep driving my newly quiet car with something like reckless glee. Problem solved! But later on, on the way home, I am troubled by the place’s old stories and pull over to look for the part. Tawny owls call and the chalk bank gleams like a warning of approaching headlights. All is quiet. A dry leaf tickets down the road and my breath forms will o’ th’ wisps. I can almost hear the frost forming. On this spot, 126 years ago, Thomas Tilling, a rakemaker, was returning home with a fully loaded timber cart, pulled in tandem by two horses, when a piece of the harness snapped. The weight of the load listed against the wheel horse he was leading. It panicked, and leaped up the bank. Tilling was fatally injured by the wagon and he died, his wife beside him, the next morning. Ghost stories often begin as a form of warning. Tilling’s good grey horse is said to turn towards those who see it. My phone torch catches a white feedbag hung from a tree by the gamekeeper to deter foxes. Tar spot fungus on sycamore leaves and a fermented, split bale of haylage, lost from a trailer, smell like worked leather and horse sweat. There is a warm, close presence in the darkness, and – I am sure – I hear the muffled “clop” of shod hoof on leaf mould. I get back in the car, leaving a day-old apple core on the bank, as a poor offering. And I promise the good grey horse that I will fix this car. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryThe Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, has laid flowers at the Tasmanian primary school where five children died in a jumping castle accident on Thursday. Morrison, who was accompanied by his wife, Jenny, laid flowers at the Hillcrest Primary School memorial to pay respects to the five children who died in the incident – Addison Stewart, 11, Zane Mellor, 12, Jye Sheehan, 12, Jalailah Jayne-Maree Jones, 12, and Peter Dodt, 12. Media were asked to stay back to allow Morrison to pay his respects. Earlier in Hobart, the prime minister pledged $800,000 in funding to provide counselling and mental health support to the tight-knit Tasmanian community. Some $250,000 will go to first responders involved in the aftermath of the accident and $550,000 to the broader community. The money will be paid to Tasmania’s Primary Health Network over 18 months and will also add to $500,000 the Tasmanian government announced on Friday. “I want to extend our deepest sympathies to the five families in particular who have lost those precious young ones and we think also of the families of the three who are still in a terribly critical condition,” Morrison said. “We think of the entire community that is just heaving with sorrow. “There are no words, only prayers, for our fellow Australians in Tasmania, and for the community that will carry this burden. And it will be a heavy burden. It will weigh them down. He said “support won’t just be needed in the next few weeks, it will be needed for many, many, many months, to try and begin that process of healing”. On the last day of the school term on Thursday, close to 40 year 5 and 6 students were taking part in end-of-term activities when the jumping castle and Zorb balls were hurled into the air by a gust of wind, killing five children and injuring four more. Three remain in hospital in a critical condition. WorkSafe Tasmania is conducting an investigation into whether the jumping castle was tethered to the ground and if proper operating procedures were followed. SafeWork Australia says devices can become airborne during strong wind gusts if jumping castles aren’t set up and operated correctly. Inflatable devices should be secured and anchored with anchor points provided according to the manufacturer’s instructions, it says. Inflatable equipment such as jumping castles has been banned from all state school sites by Tasmania’s education department until the outcome of the investigation is known. The website for the company that provided the play equipment remains disabled. Local retired primary school teacher Maree Watts visited the scene of the tragedy on Saturday to pay respects to the lives lost. Her thoughts were with her teaching colleagues, and the brothers and sisters waking up with presents under the Christmas tree and siblings not there to receive them. “As a teacher you feel totally responsible for every child in your care,” she said. “To hear of this, my heart was broken. The only way to heal was to come here myself and lay flowers.” Financial support for grieving families is being collected by local teenager Zoe Smith, who set up a GoFundMe page after hearing about the accident. Smith had hoped to raise $1,000 – donations total $1.1m so far. A central bank account has been set up in conjunction with Smith, the school and the council to collect the funds and ensure transparency. “I can’t imagine that happening or my friends, you can’t begin to imagine what the kids are going through,” she said. “The support will be needed later on as these kids grow up. This tragedy will stay with them, and the school knows that.” On Saturday morning, participants in a weekly park run in Devonport held a minute’s silence before setting out in honour of one of the victims, a regular participant. Locals have also organised food drops to grieving families, while Christmas lights at local homes were switched off in a mark of respect. Responding to suggestions families have not been kept properly informed of the inquiry’s progress, the Tasmanian premier, Peter Gutwein, called for patience. “I can absolutely understand their frustrations but there needs to be a proper investigation into this,” he said. “WorkSafe is working with Tasmania police and we do need to let that take its course.”Toxic PFAS “forever chemicals” in the ocean are transported from seawater to air when waves hit the beach and that phenomenon represents a significant source of air pollution, a new study from Stockholm University has found. The findings, published in Environmental Science &amp; Technology, also partly explain how PFAS get into the atmosphere and eventually precipitation. The study, which collected samples from two Norwegian sites, also concludes that the pollution “may impact large areas of inland Europe and other continents, in addition to coastal areas”. “The results are fascinating but at the same time concerning,” said Bo Sha, a Stockholm University researcher and study co-author. PFAS are a class of chemicals used across dozens of industries to make products resistant to water, stains and heat. Though the compounds are highly effective, they are also linked to cancer, kidney disease, birth defects, decreased immunity, liver problems and a range of other serious diseases. The study highlights the chemicals’ mobility once they’re released into the environment: PFAS don’t naturally break down, so they continuously move through the ground, water and air and their longevity in the environment has led them to be dubbed “forever chemicals”. They have been detected in all corners of the globe, from penguin eggs in Antarctica to polar bears in the Arctic. The Stockholm research team collected aerosol samples between 2018 and 2020 from Andøya, an Arctic island, and Birkenes, a city in southern Norway. It found correlating levels of PFAS and sodium ions, which are markers of sea spray. The chemicals’ transfer occurs when air bubbles burst as waves crash, and the study found that PFAS can travel thousands of kilometers via sea spray in the atmosphere before the chemicals return to land. Some regulators and the chemical industry have long claimed that dumping PFAS into the ocean is an appropriate disposal method because it dilutes the waste to a safe level. The study concluded that the approach isn’t safe because the chemicals are returned to land, which can pollute drinking water sources, among other issues. “The common belief was that PFAS would eventually wash off into the oceans where they would stay to be diluted over the timescale of decades,” said Matthew Salter, a co-author of the study and researcher at Stockholm University. “But it turns out that there’s a boomerang effect, and some of the toxic PFAS are re-emitted to air, transported long distances and then deposited back onto land.”Sandwiched between Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Tanzania, Malawi, Mozambique and Zimbabwe, the landlocked nation of Zambia sits on a high plain, which mainly ranges from 500 to 1,500 metres (1,650-4,900ft) in altitude. This keeps the climate more equable than some parts of the African tropics, with the higher-altitude areas enjoying warm but not overly hot temperatures all year round. The capital, Lusaka, at 1,280 metres above sea level, is typical: year-round maxima range from 24C to 31C (75F to 88F), while at night temperatures fall to the mid-teens celsius, far lower and more comfortable than you might expect. Like much of tropical Africa, Zambia experiences two distinct seasons: hot, wet and humid between November and March, and dry and slightly cooler from April to November. During the winter months of June to September there is hardly any rain. The highest rainfall occurs in the northern part of the country, closer to the equator; the driest areas are in the south-west, in the disputed province of Barotseland. One exception to the high-altitude climate is around the Zambezi River, which cuts through Zambia at a much lower altitude, down to 330 metres above sea level. Here, daytime temperatures can reach as high as 40C (104F).THEATRE 10 Romeo and Juliet Sky Arts Does Simon Godwin’s hybrid creation count as film or theatre? Who knows. Shot on the National Theatre’s Lyttelton stage turned studio, this was one of the most astounding mashups of lockdown. Infused with intelligence and beauty, it contained both the intimacy of cinema and an overt sense of theatricality. Jessie Buckley and Josh O’Connor were inspired as the star-crossed couple, with a powerhouse of an accompanying cast. Read the review. 9 Gin Craze! Royal and Derngate, Northampton Lairy, carousing and flamboyantly bawdy, April De Angelis’s giddy musical revealed a lesser-remembered slice of 18th-century social history and the nation’s prohibitive gin laws. Putting working-class women centre stage, it combined vivid storytelling with pin-sharp satire and silliness. Enormous, rip-roaring fun. Read the review. 8 Hairspray Coliseum, London Laying aside its white saviourism, this musical still resonated in its critiques of racial prejudice and conventional femininity. It also had the most magnificent songs, high-energy choreography and ingenious sets that kept getting bigger and better. Marisha Wallace, as Motormouth Maybelle, blew the roof off with her gospel number. Read the review. 7 Four Quartets UK tour This audacious and uncompromising co-production by Theatre Royal Bath and Northampton’s Royal and Derngate took a big risk in staging TS Eliot’s intellectually challenging, interconnected poems about mortality, faith and the meaning of life. But it played a blinder by casting Ralph Fiennes, whose transformative performance was vulnerable, intense and full of a certain grandeur. Read the review. 6 Hamlet Young Vic, London Two remarkable Hamlets came along this year: Ian McKellen’s age-blind prince, let down by Sean Mathias’s patchy production for Theatre Royal Windsor, and, at the Young Vic, Cush Jumbo’s androgynous antihero. Greg Hersov’s production had its bumps, but if there is a play defined by its lead it is this one: Jumbo’s sublimely clear, charismatic performance pushed everything else into the shade. Read the review. 5 Harm Bush theatre, London, and BBC Phoebe Eclair-Powell’s serrated satire about a social media influencer and the jealous obsession her posts inflame was performed on stage by Kelly Gough and filmed with Leanne Best for the BBC. Both versions were sensational, encapsulating the queasy extremes of online voyeurism and toxicity, but so gripping that it became impossible to look away. Read the review. 4 Constellations Vaudeville theatre, London This staging of Nick Payne’s beekeeper-meets-physicist love story from 2012 extended the frontier on how to stage a revival. A non-linear drama that explores time in all its dimensions and draws a cubist perspective of a single moment, it was performed by four pairs of actors across its run, and felt like a different play each time. Theatre at its most whimsical, profound, romantic and tragic. Read the review. 3 The Invisible Hand Kiln, London Written by Pulitzer winner Ayad Akhtar, this edge-of-the-seat thriller connected the venal workings of the global banking market with terrorism. Directed by Indhu Rubasingham, it was set in a grubby cell in Pakistan with an American banker held to ransom. The fantastically clever, complex and nervy script felt even more relevant now than at its 2016 UK premiere. Read the review. 2 Wuthering Heights UK tour How on earth did Emma Rice manage to stage Emily Brontë’s gothic love story in a way that was irreverent, innovative and yet supremely faithful in spirit? This co-production by the National Theatre, Wise Children, Bristol Old Vic and York Theatre Royal captured all the sharp edges of the book, from its outsider identities to its violence and dangerously toxic masculinity. A funny, moving, meta-theatrical experience: Rice at her very best. Read the review. 1 Indecent Menier Chocolate Factory, London This stunning revival of Paula Vogel’s Tony award-winning play-about-a-play explored hefty themes, from censorship in theatre to sexuality and antisemitism. It was witty, beautiful and still utterly shocking. Placing a queer Yiddish love story from 1907 at its centre, it followed the ensuing spiral of controversies and folded stories-within-stories in the most intricate of ways. Rebecca Taichman’s production divvied the play’s 42 roles between seven agile actors to bewitching effect. Exquisitely performed with entrancing music and movement, this felt like a precious jewel of a play that showed us just how dangerous, seductive and liberating the theatre can be. Read the review. AA COMEDY 10 Tim Key Online Key’s live stream for Angel Comedy, with sidekick Ed Easton, was a rare instance of a comic finding an online format that let their (diffident, supercilious, mickey-taking) persona flourish. His nuggets of absurdist verse captured lockdown weirdness like nothing else. Read the review. 9 Mo Gilligan UK tour Playing the everyman observational comic, volunteering yourself as a cipher for all of us, is harder than it looks. Its current master is the all-conquering Mo Gilligan, who delivered his new show with heart, great performing flair and easy boy-next-door charm. Read the review. 8 Patti Harrison Soho theatre, London One of a generation of acts fashioning cute, acute comedy from the cult of self-salesmanship in the age of social media. Harrison’s beady send-up of Gen Z entitlement came with a side order of loopy musical pastiche. Read the review. 7 Working from Home Online The live comedy club is, at best, an anarchic affair: democratic, interactive, a bit anything-goes. It is not easy to replicate via Zoom – but this online cabaret from Just the Tonic came closest, with (at the performance I logged into) Boris Johnson burlesques, Jason Byrne playing a trumpet on the toilet and sozzled quizmaster Johnny Vegas touching himself up with a robot claw. Read the review. 6 Megan Stalter Soho theatre, London Anti-comedy – being hilariously bad at the art of making people laugh – is tricky to pull off. Online sensation turned sitcom star Megan Stalter made it look easy, laying bare on stage – with cringeworthy humour but lovable dottiness – the gulf that separates curated self-image in the age of social media from actual accomplishment. Read the review. 5 Alfie Brown UK tour In these polarised times, it’s often only rightwing or retro comics who will probe faultlines in the progressive worldview. More’s the pity: when a comic as skilled, thoughtful – and mischievous – as Brown has a go, it’s worth seeing. His show Sensitive Man may be his best set yet: interrogating, in good faith and with good jokes, the discourse around gaslighting, white privilege and mental health. Read the review. 4 Diane Chorley Soho theatre, London Context isn’t everything, but it’s a lot – and Diane Chorley’s Modern Love could hardly have found a better context than summer 2021, as audiences gratefully re-engaged with live performance after months housebound. “I’m here, you’re here / And we’re going nowhere,” sang Canvey Island diva Chorley – AKA David Selley – in a musical-comic paean to unmediated togetherness that couldn’t help but raise the roof. Read the review. 3 Bridget Christie UK tour Could there be a better subject for Bridget Christie’s comedy than the menopause? In Who Am I?, the 50-year-old’s scatty rhythms and hot flushes of comical rage were applied to her recent experience of that midlife rite of passage – a liberating one, she claims, in a show notable for its campaigning zeal, hilarious stories and loads of new ways to make us laugh, usually at Christie’s expense. Read the review. 2 Bo Burnham: Inside Netflix The year’s global comedy sensation, no question: a beautifully produced, teasing and tricksy chronicle of Covid captivity beamed from the home – and inside the collapsing ego – of musical-comedy super-brain Burnham. Awards ensued, the songs became earworms of the summer, and lockdown found its most indelible black-comedy memorial. Read the review. 1 Liz Kingsman Soho theatre, London Bo Burnham’s Inside was going to take a lot of beating as the comedy event of 2021. But, however good a Netflix special gets, it can’t rival the exhilaration of being in a room with the very best of live comedy. And it doesn’t get much better than former Massive Dad sketch comic Liz Kingsman’s lethal – and lethally silly – takedown of the Fleabag-influenced female solo show. With affection, but with sharp claws too, One-Woman Show mercilessly sends up “messy woman” cliches. It also renders its audience punch-drunk with gags, meta-theatrical tricks – and with the excitement that comes when a bold voice, beautiful show-construction and a brilliant sense of humour combine. Read the review. BL DANCE 10 Dancing Nation BBC In the gloomy depths of January’s lockdown, the BBC brought us a three-hour festival of dance recorded at Sadler’s Wells. Highlights included a mesmerising duet for Akram Khan and Natalia Osipova; political bite from brothers Kel and Anthony Matsena; and Shobana Jeyasingh’s prescient Contagion, about the Spanish flu epidemic. Read the review. 9 The 7 Fingers: Passagers UK tour The Montreal circus-dance group captivated with this show on the theme of train travel. It was a dreamy, whimsical piece that became emotionally engrossing as bodies flew through the air in an awe-inspiring manner, and it sometimes seemed as if these amazing acrobats had the power to stop time. Read the review. 8 Matthew Bourne’s The Midnight Bell UK tour An unexpected source of inspiration – Patrick Hamilton’s booze-soaked novels of 1930s Soho – made for one of Bourne’s meatier works, harking back to his Play Without Words from 2002. A set of finely tuned character studies were brought to life by an experienced cast including Michela Meazza and Richard Winsor. Read the review. 7 Rambert: Rooms Online A brilliantly executed piece of livestreamed performance that turned a three-room set and 16 dancers into an endless parade of dramas, as if we were looking through the lit-up windows of a block of flats with voyeuristic glee. From farcical comedy to eerie thriller, Rambert’s dancers pulled off the switches between style and characters with skill. Read the review. 6 Romeo and Juliet Royal Opera House, London The Royal Ballet is on top form (proof, perhaps, that major companies better survived the pandemic). Kenneth MacMillan’s Romeo and Juliet is one of the Royal’s most-performed works, but it felt genuinely fresh this time round, and real-life couple Francesca Hayward and Cesar Corrales made a particularly sizzling central duo. Read the review. 5 Samskara Yard theatre, London A searing and hilarious picture of black British masculinity in the 21st century – part-play, part-dance – from polymath choreographer/director Lanre Malaolu. His light touch, keen observation and willing experimentation give him the ability to tell stories with clarity while finding deeper textures within. Great performances, too. Read the review. 4 Giselle Royal Opera House, London Ballet is full of fantasy and shaky suspension of disbelief. However, when it comes to the Royal Ballet’s Natalia Osipova playing Giselle, you believe her. No way would a young girl die of a broken heart after her first romantic betrayal, but you were absolutely with Osipova for the tragic ride. Read the review. 3 Kyle Abraham: When We Fell Online A beautiful, cool and meditative film, directed by pop video cinematographer Ryan Marie Helfant and choreographer Kyle Abraham. New York City Ballet’s dancers carve out satisfying lines and curves against the architecture of the Lincoln Center’s vast lobby, giving viewers the opportunity to muse on time, scale and perspective. Read the review. 2 William Forsythe: The Barre Project Online We embraced dance on film during lockdown, but never expected it to match the pleasure of live performance. Yet in The Barre Project, the medium became irrelevant because the dancing was so damn good. A perfect half-hour, set to the music of James Blake, driven by the hypersonic speed and precision of ballerina Tiler Peck. Read the review. 1 Royal Ballet: Balanchine and Robbins Royal Opera House, London The Royal Ballet’s dancers came back from their Covid-enforced break at the start of the year looking revivified, and there were three great standout performances in this mixed bill, all very different. First, Vadim Muntagirov’s divine Apollo, his purity of line worthy of a god. Then Natalia Osipova, taking Balanchine’s Tchaikovsky Pas de Deux by the scruff of the neck, tearing across the stage and daredevil-diving into partner Reece Clarke’s arms, bringing a level of thrill you rarely see in ballet. And finally William Bracewell dancing on instinct and musicality, at one with Chopin in Jerome Robbins’ Dances at a Gathering. Gorgeous. Read the review. LWGoing Out: Cinema Spider-Man: No Way Home Out now Zingers and web-slingers abound in a further slice of expanded universe, this time involving various Spider-villains – dating back to the Sam Raimi era of Spider-Man – colliding with Tom Holland’s iteration of Spidey. Zendaya returns as MJ. The Story of Film: A New Generation Out now In 2011, through a framework prioritising formal innovation over fame, the film-maker Mark Cousins explored the story of film so far, across 900 minutes of provocative video essay. Ten years on, he is adding a new chapter, with films covered including Parasite, Cemetery of Splendor and Lovers Rock. The Lost Daughter Out now Based on the novel by Elena Ferrante, Maggie Gyllenhaal’s debut as a director stars Olivia Colman as an academic holidaying alone in close proximity to a large, loud – and possibly criminal – family. An exquisite and suspenseful drama, well worth seeking out on the big screen. The Matrix: Resurrections Out 22 December Of all the franchises that feel like they merit a comeback, The Matrix is surely top of the pile. Keanu Reeves is still well liked; the tech-dystopia concept still feels relevant; and the novelist David Mitchell (Cloud Atlas) has been enlisted to co-write the script of this fourth film in he series. What’s not to like? Catherine Bray * * * Going Out: Gigs Supergrass O2 Academy, Glasgow, 19 December; 02 Academy Brixton, London, 20 December Now two years into an understandably faltering reunion, the Britpop veterans close out a successful live return with two more shows. Last year’s double live album is a good primer of what to expect – some filler, mostly killer. Michael Cragg Heath Quartet Wigmore Hall, London, 28 December While most musical life goes into hibernation across Christmas, the Wigmore Hall promises a premiere: framed by Haydn and Beethoven, the Heath Quartet give the first European performance of Helen Grime’s String Quartet No 2, composed during lockdowns before and after the birth of her second child. Andrew Clements Liane Carroll’s Cold Turkey Ronnie Scott’s, London, Boxing Day &amp; 27 December A post-Christmas regular at Ronnie’s, the witty and bluesily eloquent singer-pianist Liane Carroll’s cruise through her varied back catalogue and remarkable remakes of road-weary old classics is a constant reminder of what a class act she remains. Any seasonal favourites are liable to get a wry tweak or two. John Fordham Love Unlimited NYE 02 Academy Brixton, London, New Year’s Eve Celebrating house and disco while also paying homage to the inclusive roots of club culture, Love Unlimited launches with a New Year’s Eve blowout. Helping you ease into 2022 will be the Blessed Madonna, German electronic connoisseur Hunee and disco modernist Jayda G. MC * * * Going Out: Art Bridget Riley The Lightbox, Woking, to 10 April If you crave light in the winter darkness, or just want the high of a Christmas party without the hangover, the mind-opening art of this great British modernist is just the thing. In Riley’s 90th year her passionate intelligence and experimental courage are captured decade by decade. Sample the sublime. Summer Exhibition Royal Academy of Arts, London, to 2 January Midwinter may seem a strange time to see a “Summer Exhibition”, but this fun-filled epic survey of world art, masterminded by artist Yinka Shonibare, is an all-ages holiday treat. A genuinely inclusive, humorous feast, with great works by Frank Bowling, Rose Wylie and Shonibare himself. Sickert Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool, to 27 February Perhaps one to see when you have had enough seasonal jollity, for there is nothing cosily Dickensian about Walter Sickert. His vision of London around 1900 is cold and alienated, from baying music hall audiences to sex and death in seedy flats. His dark genius makes this one of the year’s unmissable exhibitions. Gold of the Great Steppe Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, to 30 January There are golden reindeer in this exhibition and you can’t get more seasonal than that. Not all of it glitters. There are ghosts here, too: the burials of ancient Scythian nomads excavated in the last few years in Kazakhstan. Their world is brought to life by an intense, beautiful show. Jonathan Jones * * * Going Out: Stage Force Majeure Donmar Warehouse, London, to 5 February Tim Price has adapted Ruben Östlund’s award-winning film, a deliciously twisted tale about the aftermath of an avalanche and a father’s failure to look out for his family. It stars the mighty Rory Kinnear. The Strange Undoing of Prudencia Hart Royal Exchange Theatre, Manchester, to 15 January As snow falls outside, an academic leaves a conference and embarks on a wild night of seduction and sambucas. David Greig’s fizzing comedy stars Joanne Thomson and features live music from Michael John McCarthy and folk musician Malin Lewis. Miriam Gillinson No More Jockeys Live Soho Theatre, London, 20 December Early on in the pandemic, comedians Alex Horne, Tim Key and Mark Watson brought their self-invented parlour game to YouTube. The giddy, digression-filled videos were a joy; now the trio revive the format in a live, late-night show. Rachel Aroesti The Nutcracker Royal Albert Hall, London, 28 December to New Year’s Eve Birmingham Royal Ballet’s festive extravaganza comes complete with Sugar Plum Fairy, live orchestra, vast video projections by 59 Productions, and a voiceover from Simon Callow. Lyndsey Winship * * * Staying In: Streaming The Great Christmas Bake Off Christmas Day, 8pm, Channel 4 Following 2020’s Derry Girls x Bake Off special, another giant of the Channel 4 schedules cross-pollinates with the cooking phenomenon: this year, the cast of It’s a Sin – Russell T Davies’s 80s-set drama – take to the tent. Expect much inter-contestant banter and a fair amount of cake-based disaster. The Amazing Mr Blunden Christmas Eve, 7pm, Sky Max Anything involving Mark Gatiss is well worth a watch, especially if he is wearing enormous fake teeth. Which he most definitely is in his action-packed remake of the 70s children’s film: a tale of ghosts, murder and time travel set between the wars. A Very British Scandal Boxing Day to 28 December, 9pm, BBC One The stonking first outing of this anthology drama series saw Hugh Grant and Ben Whishaw re-enact the Jeremy Thorpe affair; the second enlists another stellar cast – Paul Bettany, Claire Foy and Julia Davis – to bring to life another mid-century press obsession: the Duke and Duchess of Argyll’s deeply exposing divorce. Stay Close New Year’s Eve, Netflix The latest instalment in the thriller writer Harlan Coben’s whopping 14-book Netflix deal returns to the author’s favoured setup: a suburban idyll simmering with disturbing secrets. Starring Cush Jumbo, James Nesbitt and Eddie Izzard, this UK-set adaptation is certain to be packed with Coben’s typically wild plot twists. RA * * * Staying In: Games Unpacking Out now, PC, Nintendo Switch, Xbox One Moving house is always emotional, and in this puzzle game you follow a woman through several different homes, arranging her possessions and reflecting on the life story they tell. Among Us Out now, Xbox One, PlayStation If you’ve thus far missed out on one of the quintessential games of the pandemic, this social space skulduggery simulator is newly available on Xbox and PlayStation. Keza MacDonald * * * Staying In: Albums Tierra Whack – Rap? Out now Since announcing herself as one of rap’s new superstars with 2018’s personality-packed debut Whack World, the 26-year-old Philly native has collaborated with the likes of Willow Smith and Beyoncé. After a string of one-off singles – including August’s hypnotic Walk the Beat – she’s back with a new EP. John Dwyer – Gong Splat Out now The frontman of California’s garage rock mainstays Osees (formerly Thee Osees) spent the pandemic working on a series of collaborative, improvisational albums. Gong Splat, the third to emerge, was recorded “in the peak of dope smoke lock down” and, if the wonky title track is anything to go by, was also influenced by Can. Roddy Ricch – Live Life Fast Out now Fresh from guesting on Kanye West’s Donda, the Compton rapper – who scored a huge US No 1 in 2020 with The Box – returns with this second album. The DJ Mustard-produced single Late at Night finds the 23-year-old offering a typically graphic slow jam. Nick Cave &amp; Warren Ellis – La Panthère Des Neiges Out now When Warren Ellis started work on the soundtrack to La Panthère Des Neiges, a documentary about the rare snow leopard, he asked his Bad Seeds bandmate Nick Cave to help out for a day. After watching the film, Cave stayed for four, with the pair crafting a 13-track opus. MC * * * Staying In: Brain food The Waves slate.com/podcasts Slate’s long-running podcast tackling news stories through the prism of gender continues to provide a clear-sighted view of issues that can often be sensationalised in online discourse. Staff writers discuss everything from kitchen politics to Succession. Google Arts &amp; Culture artsandculture. google.com The tech giant’s arts and culture strand is always adding new features to its arsenal of searchable digital content, from immersive online exhibitions to ultra-detailed images of artworks and themed collections on national parks, fashion history and more. Play in a Day Sky Arts, 20 December This three-part docuseries – continuing nightly – poses an ingenious solution for the cohort of actors, writers and directors graduating into a Covid-shutdown theatre landscape: produce a 15-minute play in 24 hours, to be screened on the show. Ammar KaliaThe office party is dead, at least for this year; long live the smaller at-home alternative that involves your best friends or family rather than Barry from accounts (sorry Barry). Of course, you still need an outfit for the occasion. After the sequin drought that was last winter, it’s little wonder so many of us have plans to go all out with traffic stopping-frocks – upcycled sequins anyone? Rental is the dream for those who want to step out of their comfort zone without splashing the cash on something that will never see the light of day again. For a festive look that works for outdoor gatherings too, versatility is essential. Seek out mid-length styles you can wear with boots (tights are great but it’s nice to have a day off) or layer under a jumper if your get-together is a bit more casual. Karen Dacre * * * Buy One-shoulder midi, £95, stories.com Opt for a classic midi with a modern twist. Orange off-the-shoulder, £285, essentiel-antwerp.com Make a statement in a classic cocktail number. Rose sequin, £99, aligne.co Made from deadstock sequinned material. * * * Rent Pink lace by M&amp;S x Ghost, from £16 for four days’ rental at hirestreetuk.com Style a classic lace dress with some cream knee-high boots. Brown satin by Bec &amp; Bridge, from £34, from hurrcollective.com Wear with layered gold jewellery for a nod to the 1990s. Watercolour print by Stine Goya, from £69 for one month at onloan.co This is perfect for the party season: rent it for the office do and beyond. * * * Thrift Red floral by the Attico, £240, sellierknightsbridge.com Add a touch of evening glamour with gold sandals and a satin clutch. Yellow 80s style, from SGH Antique clothing, £108, etsy.com Just add big earrings to this Dynasty-esque style. Navy chiffon maxi, £49.99, revivalvintage.co.uk Nothing shouts party like a classic 70s maxi.Rosie on Ella What were you hoping for? To meet someone interesting, enjoy some nice food and not get roasted in the write up. First impressions? She was really friendly and I could tell it was going to be a nice evening. What did you talk about? Berlin, where we’d both recently been, London, Morpeth, vegetarian cooking, the Blind Date column (meta), Nick Clegg (negatively), queer fantasy novels, drag kings, yellow carrots. Any awkward moments? No, though I dropped a spoon on myself, and a couple at the next table were having a very awkward date. Good table manners? Impeccable. We were both up for three courses and sharing multiple starters. Best thing about Ella? It’s hard to pick just one thing. She’s really open and engaging. We were able to get to know each other well. Would you introduce her to your friends? Definitely, they’d get on well. Describe Ella in three words? A lovely person. What do you think she made of you? I think positive things. Did you go on somewhere? Yes, we found a pub. Ella very kindly bought me a drink, but we left before I could return the favour as we had to catch the tube before it stopped running. (Bring back the night tube!) And … did you kiss? No, it was more of a friendly than romantic connection. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be? I wouldn’t have accidentally ordered a pizza with ham on it! Marks out of 10? 8. Would you meet again? For sure. We might go to some queer venues and events together as friends. Ella on Rosie What were you hoping for? Something along the lines of that famous old Blind Date column: “I left my knickers at a house party we crashed”. Failing that, a fun evening with tasty food. First impressions? Smiley. Immediately put me at ease. What did you talk about? Cooking, recent holidays, coming out stories, lots of wonderful queer stuff. Any awkward moments? Nothing could be more awkward than the hands-on-hips pose I attempted to strike for the pre-dinner picture. Good table manners? I can’t fault someone who suggests ordering two types of cheese as a starter. Best thing about Rosie? Her genuine interest in the world. Would you introduce her to your friends? Sure! Describe Rosie in three words? Engaging, funny and interesting. What do you think she made of you? Adept at finding a semi-decent pub with seats on a Friday night. Did you go on somewhere? A pub in Soho. And … did you kiss? We did not. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be? To have eaten more of the burrata. I thought about it all the way home. Marks out of 10? All 10s. Would you meet again? Definitely, as friends. A trip to She Soho has been suggested. • Ella and Rosie ate at Sycamore, London WC2. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.comConscious consumption is on the rise, with 43% of consumers who buy seafood now saying that sustainability is a key consideration in what they buy, according to recent YouGov research. But until seafood businesses transition towards sustainability, so they can offer us better choices, the Marine Conservation Society’s Good Fish Guide is my go-to when deciding what fish to eat. Another approach to eating seafood sustainably is to eat cuts that would otherwise be wasted, such as in today’s festive-looking, zero-waste recipe. All good fishmongers will sell fish cheeks, or ask for the whole heads, remove the cheeks and make stock, curry or soup with the rest. Monkfish and cod cheek rosemary skewers with guanciale The sustainability or otherwise of seafood is a topic of hot debate, and many fish can be deemed sustainable or not depending not just on the species, but also on where and how it is caught. Monkfish and cod sustainability is notably tricky and varies a lot, but by eating the cheeks, we are eating sustainably because we are saving on waste. In fact, the cheeks are perhaps my favourite part of the fish, and I love pig’s cheeks, too, which in Italy they cure to make guanciale. Here, the two complement each other beautifully to make succulent, deeply flavourful skewers made from the parts that are usually wasted. Woody, homegrown rosemary works best for these skewers, but more delicate, shop-bought rosemary should work fine, too: just make a decent-sized pilot hole for them with a metal skewer first. And after you’ve eaten, save the leftover rosemary skewers for fish stock, or compost them. 6 rosemary sprigs 3 large monkfish and/or cod cheeks (about 100g) 1 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil, plus ½ tbsp extra for frying 1 garlic clove garlic, peeled and cut into six slices Salt and black pepper 6 thin slices guanciale, or 3 rashers streaky bacon, cut in half and stretched out with the back of a large knife Make six skewers by removing the bottom 2cm of leaves from the thick, woody of each rosemary sprig. Put the leaves in a sealable container, addthe oil and sliced garlic, then season generously. Cut the fish cheeks neatly in half, so you now have six scallop-shaped pieces, toss these in the marinade, seal and refrigerate for four to 24 hours; wrap the skewers and refrigerate until needed. Using a metal skewer, pierce a pilot hole through the length of the fish cheeks, then poke a cheek on to the end of each rosemary skewer. Lay out the guanciale (or bacon, lay a garlic sliver on each slice, then wrap tightly around each fish cheek. Put half a tablespoon of extra-virgin olive oil in a frying pan over a medium heat and, once hot, lay in the skewers and cook for two to three minutes, or until caramelised. Turn, repeat on the other side and enjoy immediately. The Guardian aims to publish recipes for sustainable fish. Check ratings in your region: UK; Australia; US.It is a frosty morning and I am standing in the kitchen in bare feet, holding the door open for the cat. The cat dips its head low, studying the world across the threshold. “Faster, pussycat,” I say. The cat sniffs at the cold air swirling in from the garden, but does not move. I begin to close the door very slowly, in a bid to create a shrinking decision window. In the space of two months the kitten has grown into a tall-eared, spooky-looking thing that I sometimes find standing on my chest staring down at me in the dead of night, its nose a millimetre from mine. It doesn’t fear the dog or the tortoise, but it’s still pretty wary of outside. The narrowing of the decision window, accompanied by a prod from my big toe, finally propels the cat into the garden, where it immediately dashes into the dark recesses of the covered side return to cower behind some pots. By the time I put on shoes and return to the kitchen, the cat is looking at me through the window. When I look back it opens its mouth in a silent O. Instead of letting it in, I go outside and lead the cat round the corner, where I get down on my hands and knees on the mossy bricks to demonstrate the action of the cat flap. I push it open, and let it drop back. “Do you see?” I say. I lift the plastic door, glazed to opacity with layers of old mud, to show the square of kitchen that lies beyond. The cat, crouching beneath the barbecue grill, regards me with boundless suspicion. Eventually it creeps close enough to stick its head through the flap, and after a pause of about a minute it slithers through into the house. I don’t see the cat for the rest of the morning. In the afternoon I come in from my office to find the cat on the windowsill, looking longingly at the leaves stirring on the grass. Instead of letting it out I get down on my hands and knees next to the side door, to demonstrate the action of the cat flap from a new perspective. “It swings both ways,” I explain. “Affording both ingress and egress.” I do not demonstrate the lock that allows pets out, but not in. That is another lesson for another time. I hold the flap open again. The cat peers through, unimpressed by the view. My knees hurt. The cats sits. “Just try it, you little prick,” I say. “What are you doing?” says the middle one, who is apparently standing behind me. “It’s cat flap class,” I say. “Somebody’s not progressing.” “Is he struggling with the concept?” the middle one says. “He’s definitely failing this module,” I say. But as I speak the cat dives through the flap into the garden. It tears round the corner to the back door, where the middle one lets it in. Then it comes over to where I’m still kneeling and sits in front of the cat flap. I’ve accidentally invented a game. That night I go to sleep worrying that I’ve revealed something to the cat that I shouldn’t have: it’s too early for him to possess the means of independence. Maybe it’s a good thing he doesn’t get it. Something steps on to my chest in the dark, and sits. The next night I get home from a band rehearsal long after everyone else has gone to bed. I begin to cook for myself, even though it’s nearly midnight. As I drop pasta into boiling water I hear an alarming and pitiful cry, both close to hand and muffled: something trapped in something. I immediately think of the cat. I look in the cupboard under the stairs, and the washing machine. The noise gets louder and more anguished. It’s clearly coming from the other side the front door. I have taught the cat to leave home, I think, and given it a tremendous fright. I rush to the door and open it. The noise is actually coming from two foxes having sex at our front gate. Before I know what’s happening the dog barrels between my feet to break up the party. It chases the male down the street; the female runs in the opposite direction. By the time I catch up with the dog and the fox they’re in a bit of a standoff. Part of me thinks: wow, that fox is huge. Another part of me thinks: I have pasta boiling. The dog turns and runs toward me. The fox gives chase for a few metres, before thinking better of it. “That fox is not your friend,” I say. “Not any more.” When we reach the gate I see the cat through the open front door, sitting on the stairs, just watching me.This is where we’ll leave our live coverage today. Here’s a quick recap of what happened: Australia has recorded more than 4,000 coronavirus cases in one day for the first time ever. New South Wales and South Australia both recorded their highest daily totals since the pandemic began. A new Covid case was reported in Tasmania, bringing the tally to four since the state reopened this week. Queensland, which also reopened its borders this week, recorded 31 new cases. Prime minister Scott Morrison and his wife Jenny paid their respects to five children who died in a tragic jumping castle incident in Tasmania. He also announced an $800,000 support package to fund counselling for those affected by the tragedy. Tasmania has banned the use of jumping castles in schools in response to the incident. The New South Wales government is pushing to narrow the gap between people getting their second Covid-19 vaccination shot and getting their booster to four months in response to the Omicron variant. And a senior public health expert has criticised the NSW government’s decision to remove mask mandates despite the huge spike in cases, saying that unless Australia is “a country of total whiny babies” people can continue to wear a mask with no discernible impact on their lives. And that’s the day. If you are heading out to see family or buy gifts for family, please stay safe. We’ll see you again tomorrow. In feral pig news: the Australian and South Australian governments have pledged $1.2m to fund pig culling efforts on Kangaroo Island for the next two years. More from AAP: Before the devastating 2020 bushfires, which scorched the western half of the island, the feral pig population was thought to number about 5000. But the fires killed off many and destroyed much of their habitat, presenting an opportunity to eradicate the animals completely. Efforts over the past winter involved about 220 hours of flight time using thermal imaging, during which 243 feral pigs were culled, taking the total since the start of the program to 777. Only about 200 pigs are thought to remain. Eradication efforts have been funded jointly by the state and federal governments, with another $1.2 million allocated to continue the work into 2022 and 2023. Environment minister David Speirs said the community on the island, including primary producers and tourism operators, were supportive of the eradication program. “We know how damaging feral pigs on Kangaroo Island are for our livestock and horticulture industries as well as the environment, which is why we are doing everything we can to eradicate this pest,” he said. Here’s more from my chat with public health expert Prof Nancy Baxter: Australia has recorded more than 4,000 cases of Covid-19 on Saturday, the highest daily tally since the pandemic began. It comes just two days after passing the benchmark of more than 3,000 cases in a day. There are currently almost 247,000 active cases in Australia, although only 110 people are in intensive care. The cases were reported in: NSW: 2,482 Victoria: 1,504 South Australia: 73 Queensland: 31 Tasmania: 1 Western Australia has not reported any new cases of Covid-19 in the past 24 hours. This is not surprising — it’s still not letting anyone in. The hard border rules changed again overnight, with NSW upgraded from a high risk category – only permitted people allowed in subject to a negative PCR test, being vaccinated, and 14 days of hotel quarantine – to extreme risk – pretty much no one allowed in except for MPs and necessary government officials. As of Monday, the border will also be tightened against Queensland, which will go from low risk to medium risk, and Tasmania, which will go from very low risk to low risk. That means no travellers from any jurisdiction in Australia will be able to enter WA without quarantining. But, as WA premier Mark McGowan said in a comment that surely doesn’t even track well in Perth after almost two years of isolation, Santa Claus will be allowed in. You may have missed the story about security vulnerabilities in widely used software Log4j – you can read about it here. Now you’re up to speed: it’s affecting kindergartens. More from AAP: The ramifications of recently discovered security flaws in a commonly used piece of software known as Log4j are so widespread, even kindergarten teachers are being warned of the risks. The Apache Log4j Remote Code Execution is used in everything from webcams to navigation apps, but contains a critical flaw which could give cyber criminals password-free access online systems, allowing them to access data and even plant malware. A week ago the Australian Cyber Security Centre (ACSC) issued an alert about Apache Log4j, and on Wednesday it publicly confirmed the vulnerability is being actively exploited in Australia. “We know that malicious online actors are scanning networks in attempts to locate vulnerable servers, so it’s critical that Australian organisations act, and act fast,” Assistant Defence Minister Andrew Hastie said. The vulnerability has sent companies and other organisations scrambling to install patches to protect against malicious intrusions into their IT. Victoria’s education department even had to warn kindergartens and childcare centres, telling them late on Friday to be on the alert “for any strange computer or application behaviour”. The alert may be of particular concern given that early childhood centres store confidential, sensitive information regarding young children. Early childhood centres have been told to notify IT if they notice anything strange - but many do not have their own IT technician, and have been given a department phone number instead. Technicians have been advised to disconnect vulnerable servers and computers from the internet. Kindergartens and childcare centres that have already closed for the Christmas break have been told to contact the department’s hotline immediately. Interestingly — or frustratingly, depending on your perspective — South Australia has not lifted its ban on the use of at home rapid antigen tests. Per the SA Health website: In South Australia, the use of rapid antigen tests by the general public is currently prohibited given the low level of COVID-19 in the community to date and the wide availability of gold-standard PCR testing. This is due to the known inaccuracy of rapid antigen tests when there is not significant community spread of COVID-19, and the risk of false positive and false negative results. The continued restriction of this test in South Australia when it is permitted in other states reflects the different levels of COVID-19 in communities throughout Australia. The Chief Public Health Officer will determine when there is sufficient community spread of COVID-19 to make rapid antigen testing a useful additional public health tool. You can read the full post here. It is the highest ever daily case toll for South Australia – beating the record of 64 cases set just yesterday. South Australia has recorded 73 new cases of Covid-19. It brings the total number of active Omicron cases in the state to eight. Twenty-nine cases were locally acquired in South Australia and have been linked to a positive case, and four more acquired the infection locally but are unlinked. Two more are linked to infections interstate and 37 acquired the infection somewhere in Australia, with no known source. One is a person who acquired the infection overseas. The cases include 11 children, two teenagers, 34 women aged between 18 and 67, and 26 men aged between 19 and 74. Of the 73 cases reported today, 29 were fully vaccinated, four were unvaccinated, and 40 have an unknown vaccination status. WA firefighters are headed out to Marble Bar, which holds the reputation as the hottest town in Australia, to respond to a bushfire burning out of control north of the town. The fire was first reported on Wednesday. There’s a watch and act warning in place for people travelling along Marble Bar Road and surrounds. The alert was upgraded on Saturday morning because the fire was moving fast in a northerly direction along the road. Marble Bar Road is closed from the Great Northern Highway to the Marble Bar townsite. Motorists have been advised to avoid the area and drive slowly and carefully due to smoke. The township itself is under an advice level alert. There is no current threat to lives and homes but people are advised to stay alert and monitor their surroundings, and watch for signs of bushfire. People who are isolating due to Covid-19 infection, or risk of infection, “must do whatever you need to protect your life”. That includes leaving your house. or evacuating if necessary. Police in Western Australia have charged four men with “endangering the life, health or safety of another person” over a disturbance at a Perth cinema on Thursday night. The four men, aged 19 to 20, were allegedly “yelling profanities and throwing items into other people” at a 7.30pm screening of a movie at Karrinyup cinema. In a statement, police said: Security were alerted and the movie was stopped and lights turned on. The group resisted being removed from the complex and both security and members of the public were assaulted. The four men were arrested on Friday and charged with a series of offences including endangering the life, health or safety of another person and disorderly conduct. They were scheduled to appear at Perth magistrates court today. The NSW special minister of state, Don Harwin, and local government minister, Shelly Hancock, have announced they will retire from politics at the next election. Harwin and and Hancock both told NSW premier Dominic Perrottet that they did not want to be considered for re-election in 2023. More from AAP: Perrottet says they have both “been strong advocates for the people of NSW in their respective roles as ministers throughout their careers” and wished them well as they “continue to do what they do best by serving the great people of NSW”, even outside of parliament. Harwin says he has been “giving consideration to whether I could commit to another eight-year term”. “I have now decided I will not recontest my seat and therefore, this is the right time to end my ministerial service,” the longstanding MP said in a statement on Saturday. Harwin was first elected to the state’s upper house in 1999 and has held ministries including energy and utilities, resources, public service and employee relations, Aboriginal affairs, heritage and the arts. He has also been special minister for state since 2017 and leads the government in the upper house. Harwin says “at this stage” he plans to finish the remainder of his term in the upper house and bow out at the next election. Hancock first joined parliament in the legislative assembly in 2003, where she later served as speaker for close to eight years before her current ministry role. Hancock says “challenging family circumstances” and the departure of Gladys Berejiklian, who resigned as premier in October ahead of appearing before the Independent Commission Against Corruption, influenced her decision to step down. She described the former premier’s resignation as “a loss for New South Wales and a personal loss for me, and something that I have found difficult to move past”. Hancock says the premier who replaced Berejiklian needs to have more women in his cabinet. “It is often difficult being the only woman in the room, or one of a handful, therefore it is essential that women make up a larger part of the cabinet to provide our views and perspectives,” Hancock says. The soon-to-be-shuffled cabinet includes five women, including Hancock, across 21 positions. Prime minister Scott Morrison and his wife Jenny Morrison have visited the memorial to the five children who died in the Hillcrest Primary School jumping castle tragedy in Devonport, Tasmania. Prof Nancy Baxter, the head of Melbourne University’s school of population and global health, says Australians should keep wearing face masks to protect against the spread of Covid “unless we are a country of total whiny babies”. It comes as NSW has this week abolished rules requiring people to wear face masks on public transport, at airports and if they are unvaccinated front-of-house staff in a restaurant or cafe. That was the wrong call, says Baxter. Masks protect you and others without affecting your life. Masks don’t stop you from doing anything. Unless we are a country of babies, unless we are a country of total whiny babies, we can still wear masks. They do not cost us a thing. If you are still wearing your mask and intend to keep doing so, Baxter says consider swapping out the cloth mask you made and/or purchased in 2020 for a well-fitted P2 mask. You can buy them at the hardware store. Cloth masks will protect others if you are sick, she says, but will not protect you from breathing in the Omicron variant. You need to protect yourself. Get a P2 mask. Good afternoon folks, I will be your guide on this (where I am at least) warm and windy afternoon. Thank you to the indomitable Steph Convery for taking us through the past few hours. I’ll get to some other news in a minute but first off, I had a chat with Prof Nancy Baxter a short time ago about the Omicron variant and Covid risk going into Christmas and wanted to share her thoughts. I’m going to hand over the reins of this blog to darling Calla Wahlquist now, who will take you through the news of the afternoon. Be well, be safe, wear sunscreen! The New South Wales government has committed to outlawing the historically overlooked form of intimate abuse known as coercive control following an inquiry. The attorney general and domestic and sexual violence prevention minister, Mark Speakman, released the government’s response on Saturday, indicating support for 17 of the inquiry’s 23 recommendations. The remaining six have “been noted as further consideration continues”. Some of the recommendations being adopted include the introduction of a new, stand-alone offence for coercive control as well as amendments to existing laws. “No person deserves to live in fear, and it is part of our responsibilities in government to uphold the safety and human dignity of all of our citizens,” Speakman said. Victoria’s department of health has released its detailed daily Covid data, which shows that 94.3% of Victorians aged 12 and over have now had at least one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine and 92.4% have had two doses. There are 384 people with Covid-19 in hospital in Victoria – 84 in ICU, with 43 of those on a ventilator. Of those people in hospital yesterday, 62% were not fully vaccinated. 92% of those in ICU were not fully vaccinated, while 87% had received no vaccination dose at all. There were no new confirmed cases of Omicron identified in Victoria yesterday. There are 19 known cases of Omicron in the state. There are 30 confirmed Covid-19 cases linked to the Peel Hotel, Collingwood (16 cases), and Sircuit Bar, Fitzroy (14 cases). One of these cases was confirmed as the Omicron variant. NSW Health has apologised to singer Delta Goodrem for the Instagram post that included a picture of her face with syringes pointing to it as a stand-in for the Covid variant Delta. “NSW Health was attempting to convey an important public health message but recognises it made an error of judgement and sincerely regrets the offence caused to Delta Goodrem,” a NSW Health spokesperson said. “The message has now been removed by NSW Health.” In the wake of New South Wales breaking its own and the country’s daily case record today, you might find this piece from Caitlin Cassidy illuminating. Tony Blakely, a University of Melbourne epidemiologist, said the dramatic easing of restrictions in NSW as case numbers spiked was consistent with a strategy to build resilience to the virus. But although worrying, the arrival of the new Omicron variant might well be the pathway out of the pandemic, he said. Thunderstorms incoming for New South Wales; watch out for wind gusts, hail and heavy rain. Erm, so it appears singer Delta Goodrem has taken NSW Health to task on Instagram for using a picture of her face as a stand-in for Covid variant Delta in its factcheck story series yesterday. NSW Health appears to have deleted that particular story. Online age verification for alcohol purchases is being trialled in Australia, new documents reveal, as the federal government considers whether similar technology could be applied to gambling and adult sites. The Morrison government has tasked the eSafety commissioner, Julie Inman Grant, with developing a “roadmap” for an age verification system for adult content by the end of 2022, but documents released under freedom of information laws reveal options are already being trialled. Draft talking points and a slide deck from early August released on the transparency website Right to Know this week, show the Digital Transformation Agency has been preparing for age verification and digital ID trials from September this year. According to the talking points, the trial was to be conducted with online retailers in Australia, using external ID providers Australia Post and Mastercard. The beta trials had been expected to run for between three and six months, with 100 users per use case, starting first with online alcohol purchases in September, and then gambling websites at a date to be determined. Read the full story: Another reminder to get your booster shot as soon as you are eligible. If you’re aged 12 or over and are severely immunocompromised, you are encouraged have a third primary dose of vaccine (as distinct from a booster) from two months after your second dose, NSW Health says. Talk to your GP! Further to the below, NSW Health has said a total of 226 cases of Omicron have been confirmed by the required additional testing in NSW. However, they believe that Omicron likely accounts for the majority of today’s cases. The death recorded today in NSW was a woman from south-western Sydney in her 90s who died at the Gillawarna Village Aged Care Facility in Georges Hall – also where she acquired Covid-19. She had received two doses of a vaccine and had underlying health conditions. This is the fourth death linked to an outbreak at this facility. New South Wales Health has just announced that it’s only going to do genomic sequencing for Omicron “where it will make a clinical difference to the care of a patient”. The humble bogong moth is in trouble. Not very long ago, they would carpet Canberra in their annual 1,000km migration from southern Queensland to the mountains of Victoria – including Mount Bogong, the state’s highest peak. But in 2019, after decades of gradual decline in the population, scientists reported a sudden catastrophic drop: mountain caves that were once dense with mind-boggling numbers of the insects – as many as 17,000 moths per square metre – now contained so few that they could be counted on just one hand. Read the full story here: Something Christmassy! That’s what we need. The lovely Caitlin Cassidy has a great story today about people who love Christmas and Christmas decorations. Here’s a lil glitter taster with the full story chaser: A search has resumed for a swimmer missing overnight at Lennox Head on the NSW north coast. Police were called to Seven Mile Beach by a woman reporting she had seen a swimmer in difficulties in the surf about 6pm on Friday, AAP reports. Officers immediately began a search involving local lifesavers, the force’s marine rescue command, ambulance personnel and the Westpac rescue helicopter. Personal belongings were found unattended on the beach near the surf club before a man approached police with concerns his 19-year-old son had not returned from a swim, around 7pm. The search continued until 10pm without success and resumed at 6.30am on Saturday. Water police and Marine Rescue NSW are currently conducting sweeps off the coastline. More on those Covid cases in Tasmania, from AAP: Recent arrivals from Newcastle are being contacted after the first three cases were linked to superspreader events there. Positive wastewater samples have been collected from Norwood in Launceston, where there are no known cases. Anyone in the area is advised to get tested immediately if they experience any symptoms, no matter how mild. Tasmania requires people arriving from high-risk areas to return a negative test in the 72 hours before they travel. Tasmanian premier Peter Gutwein said on Friday the state government was considering a mask mandate at indoor venues and would have more to say in coming days. Tasmania had no active cases when the state reopened. A fourth person has tested positive for Covid-19 in Tasmania, four days into the island’s reopening. AAP reports the latest case is a teenager who flew to Launceston from NSW on Thursday. He was tested after NSW Health notified him he had been at an exposure site, but before the notification arrived he visited a cafe and a JB Hi-Fi store on Thursday afternoon. Those two venues are now exposure sites, along with Launceston airport’s baggage carousel. Close contacts on board the man’s flight and people who checked in to the venues he visited around the same time have been contacted by Tasmanian public health services. Two other confirmed cases are linked to an early Wednesday morning Qantas flight from Sydney, one of the first planes to land after the border reopened. Another person who was confirmed positive on Friday flew from Melbourne on Wednesday afternoon. There are three people in hospital but nobody in intensive care or on ventilators. 98.3% of ACT residents aged 12 and over are fully vaccinated. More from Morrison on our Covid response – I can’t hear the questions but I presume they are touching on NSW’s record case numbers: Living with the virus under the national plan is not about case numbers ... I’m not going to alarm people on case numbers. What matters is hospitalisation, ICU, people on ventilators and severe illness. That’s what matters ... We’re past the time where we just talk about case numbers. We planned to live with the virus, we didn’t plan to live shut in. Back to the PM in Hobart (sorry to give you all press-conference whiplash). He’s talking about our Covid response. “Australia is not the UK, it’s not North America,” Scott Morrison says. He’s emphasising that policy settings “have to protect lives and livelihoods”: You don’t jump at shadows, you wait for the best information ... Australia can’t go back. We have to go forward. We have to live with this virus. We have to live with it safely. The $500,000 from the state government will be rolled together with the money from Smith’s GoFundMe – more than $1m has been raised there so far – and Rockcliff says people who want to help the Devonport community should direct donations to that newly established community public fund. ABC News has just cut to the mayor of Devonport, Annette Rockcliff, who is speaking live now, with Zoe Smith, the woman who established the GoFundMe page that was gathering donations for the Hillcrest primary school community yesterday. I just want to announce this morning that council, together with [the] state government, and with Zoe as well, have launched the Hillcrest community public fund. This fund will help the families directly, the directly affected families, as well as the whole Hillcrest community. It’s been set up by the state government and my state will support it. It will support the families, it will go directly to those families and that community. It will be overseen by a group of people, including Zoe Smith here, the principal of the school, myself, a representative from MyState, and Craig Limkin, who works for the premier. The Tasmanian premier, Peter Gutwein, is speaking now, thanking Morrison for his support after the Devonport tragedy and the offers of support from state leaders around the country. He says the financial contribution from the federal government is building on a financial support package that his state government announced yesterday: We’ve put in place the Regional Social Recovery Committee under our State Emergency Management Act to deal with matters like this, and that committee has already met. It has members including the Devonport City Council, and others from across our departments. And one of the recommendations from that committee was that the government should immediately make a first-stage ... $500,000 to support counselling and other supports in the community. Morrison is announcing a financial support package for the community after the jumping castle tragedy. We are providing $800,000 to support the families and communities affected in counselling support, $250,000 for first responders, $550,000 for the broader community. This will be paid to Tasmania’s Primary Health Network. It will be provided over an 18-month period, because we know support won’t just be needed in the next few weeks, it will be needed for many, many, many months, to try and begin that process of healing. There’s additional trauma counselling in the $250,000 for those involved, and training for those services in trauma, of informed care and psychological first aid to assist in recovery. The $550,000 includes $200,000 for additional trauma counselling in the community. There’s $200,000 for the local Headspace trauma care and training, and expanded supports for young people. There’s $100,000 to support return-of-school in 2022, including training and counselling for teachers and staff, and $50,000 in community mental health and wellbeing grants to support the community. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, is speaking in Hobart now about the Big Ship (that’s the RSV Nuyina). He’s acknowledged, though, that the timing is not great, given the tragedy at Hillcrest Primary in Devonport this week: I’m very pleased to be here in Hobart today for this very important event ... But, sadly, the events of the last few days mean it’s a terribly, terribly awful time for Tasmanians. And, on behalf of Jenny and I, and all Australians, I want to extend our deepest sympathies to the five families in particular who have lost those precious young ones, and we think also of the families of the three who are still in a terribly critical condition. We think of the entire community that is just heaving with sorrow. As I said yesterday, there are no words, only prayers, for our fellow Australians in Tasmania, and for the community that will carry this burden. And it will be a heavy burden. It will weigh them down. But I want to say to them, whether they’re the first responders, the teachers, the friends, the family, the P&amp;C at Hillcrest – the whole community – that Australia is one with them. And we grieve with them and we mourn with them, and we want to do everything we possibly can to help them through this terrible, terrible, unthinkable, unimaginable tragedy. The Queensland chief health officer, Dr John Gerrard, has just been speaking about the latest case numbers: We expect the Omicron strain to become dominant in Queensland in the coming weeks. In addition, I can say that there have been some cases in the healthcare setting. Because we are aware that the virus is widespread, it is inevitable that people in the healthcare setting will develop infection, and that is going to happen more and more in the coming weeks and months. So, there are a number of venues, healthcare venues across the state, where there have been either staff or visitors with Covid-19 in them. These include: the North West Private Hospital in Brisbane, Toowoomba Hospital, Princess Alexandra Hospital, BlueCare Homefield Residential Aged Care Facility in Mackay, and at least one general practice in Brisbane. This will continue to occur in the coming weeks and months. Queensland health authorities are providing an update now: eight of the cases are contacts of known cases. Five are linked to interstate travel. One case caught the virus in Queensland community. Queensland sports administrators Tracy Stockwell and Rebecca Frizelle will join the organising committee for the 2032 Brisbane Olympics and Paralympic Games, AAP reports. Sport minister Richard Colbeck and special envoy for the Games Ted O’Brien have also been nominated by the federal government to be on the organising committee. Prime Minister Scott Morrison said both women will bring years of experience and understand what’s needed behind the scenes to create success on the field and in the pool. “The Brisbane Olympics Games in 2032 will showcase the best of Queensland, providing our athletes with the ability to thrive on the world stage on home soil,” he said on Saturday. “But it will also provide economic opportunities for many and create a legacy for generations of young sporting Aussies, so we must get it right.” A successful US Olympian before settling in Australia, Stockwell is vice president of Swimming Australia and a member of the Committee for Brisbane Advisory Council. She is also a founding member and past president of Womensport Queensland. Frizelle was appointed to the board of the Gold Coast Titans NRL club in 2014, going on to be appointed the first female chair in the NRL. She is a director of Paralympics Australia and a member of the Griffith University Council. The Brisbane Olympic and Paralympic Games Arrangements Bill 2021 passed the Queensland parliament earlier this month and provides for the organising committee to be established. Others already selected for positions include Australian Olympic Committee president John Coates, AOC chief executive Matt Carroll, Paralympics Australia president Jock O’Callaghan and athlete representatives Bronte Barratt and Kurt Fearnley. This is a really interesting graph, illustrating daily case numbers in New South Wales against the number of people in hospital. The National Disability Insurance Agency’s (NDIA) spending on private law firms to battle participants appealing its decisions rose 30% last financial year, new figures show. Data released under freedom of information laws shows the agency paid about $17.3m in 2020-21 to firms representing the agency in “external matters” such as legal challenges at the administrative appeals tribunal. The figure is an increase from $13.4m the previous financial year, the data shows. It underlines how the rapidly increasing number of national disability insurance scheme (NDIS) participants challenging decisions to cut or deny them support can create a windfall for law firms paid by the taxpayer. While spending on fees to law firms has increased, community law centres funded to represent people with disability have told Guardian Australia they are at capacity and struggling to take on new clients. Read the full story here: Here’s a picture of the big ship from back in October, when it first arrived in Hobart. In 2010, an Indian mining company bought some tenements over a giant and untapped coal basin in the west of Queensland. That purchase, by the conglomerate Adani Group, kickstarted one of the most controversial and politically divisive resource projects in Australia’s history – the Carmichael coalmine and rail project. Before the year is out, and about eight years behind schedule, Adani says it will finally export its first coal, destined to be burned in a power station. The moment will be celebrated as a victory by its supporters, including many regional Queensland MPs and senators and conservative commentators. But for its opponents, including climate change activists and some traditional owners, the Carmichael project always meant danger and it became the focus of a campaign with an uncompromising two-word slogan: Stop Adani. So as the first coal waits to wind its way through the Great Barrier Reef’s shipping channels, what now for that campaign? Read more from Graham Readfearn and Ben Smee: The environment minister, Sussan Ley, is at the launch of Antarctic research ship the RSV Nuyina. The ship is heading off to Antarctica on Monday. Ley made some comments on ABC TV just now, saying the ship – which cost $1.9bn – is: ... the most advanced polar research platform in the world, giving scientists the ability to study the ocean depths, the sea ice, and the upper atmosphere for climate science. Today’s Covid figure in New South Wales is the highest daily total of any state in Australia since the pandemic began. Victoria recorded 2,297 cases on 14 October, which was at the time the grim national record. Today’s 2,482 cases in NSW also exceeds the state’s own previous peak – the 2,213 cases recorded only yesterday. The chainsaws outside my window have now been replaced by leaf blowers. Who authorised this?! Ahead of the prime minister’s appearance in Tasmania today, I highly recommend reading Katharine Murphy’s latest analysis of Morrison’s strategy so far in the lead-up to next year’s election: When he’s not trialling new made-for-TV grabs (a new “shake and bake” analogy, which I think was invoked first in relation to emissions reduction, and now has morphed into something broadly economy adjacent, or “jabs and jobs” which was Friday’s innovation), the prime minister has taken to listing things. Morrison’s current list includes saving lives during the pandemic. Shoring up the health system “with more than $33bn from the federal government in additional investment”. Saving livelihoods with “the single largest economic rescue package in our history”. Presiding over economic recovery after the waves of the pandemic – “more than 350,000 jobs created in a five-week period after the lockdowns were lifted, and through the crisis, we have maintained that AAA credit rating”. At the risk of stating the obvious, prime ministers don’t have to list their achievements if they are confident voters have already logged them. Seven people have died in Victoria with Covid-19 since yesterday. One person has died and 26 people are in intensive care. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, is in Tasmania today. He’ll be attending the launch of the RSV Nuyina in Hobart this morning. The RSV Nuyina is a great big ship – an Antarctic icebreaker, to be precise. Morrison is also understood to be heading to Devonport later today. It’s also going to be hot and gusty in New South Wales today, with fire warnings for southern and northern Riverina areas. My colleague Nino Bucci has been covering this fascinating case in the NSW supreme court over the last few weeks: Sydney man Raymond McClure was as wealthy as he was lonely. But in the final months of his life he became closer with his GP, Dr Peter Alexakis, the court heard. Alexakis spoke fluent greek like McClure and was the only person who regularly visited the 83-year-old in hospital. And because McClure was suspicious about other medical professionals and lawyers, he became increasingly reliant on Alexakis for more than just social interaction, Alexakis said. The extent of this reliance, and whether it unduly influenced McClure’s decision to leave 90% of his $30m estate to Alexakis, is central to the court case over the will. It’s going to be a hot and windy day in Victoria today. Stay hydrated, wear sunscreen, water your plants early, make sure your bird baths are full. Shout out to the two gardeners doing some hedge maintenance outside my window this morning, love a good double-chainsaw grind at 8.15am on a Saturday. New South Wales health officials are considering breaking with commonwealth advice by shortening the Covid vaccine booster interval to four months, amid concern about spread of the Omicron variant. Guardian Australia understands that NSW health department officials were meeting with vaccine providers in the state on Friday and canvassing the prospect of how they would cope with an influx of people eager to be vaccinated ahead of schedule. A source familiar with the vaccine rollout in NSW told Guardian Australia health authorities in the state were concerned about record transmission levels this week as well as a potential waning of protection, given that a large number of people in the state received AstraZeneca. Read the exclusive story here: Good morning, I’m Stephanie Convery with you on this, the last Saturday before Christmas (DON’T PANIC). It has been a helluva week, and yesterday we capped it off with a huge rise in Covid-19 cases in New South Wales and Victoria, jumps in Queensland and South Australia too, plus a fair bit of general anxiety about what the surge might mean and how much case numbers might grow. The rises came as Covid-19 testing sites came under strain ahead of the busy Christmas period. Tennant Creek in the Northern Territory went into lockdown after four Covid cases were found there. Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk announced yesterday that mask mandates would be returned to retail settings over Christmas and the New Year while Western Australia announced it would tighten travel rules for arrivals from Queensland and Tasmania arrivals. NSW and Victoria scrapped their three-day isolation requirements for international arrivals. (They will now need to get a PCR test within 24 hours of arrival and isolate until they get a negative result.) Australia also passed a vaccination milestone: 90% of over-16s are now double-dosed. Australia’s chief medical officer moved to reassure people that the vaccine is still effective against severe disease, urging those who are eligible to get their booster shot. Still, it remains to be seen how much havoc Omicron will wreak on our Christmas holidays. We’ll bring you all the Covid news of the day as it comes our way. We also learnt the names of the five children who died in the awful jumping castle incident in Tasmania. The Tasmanian education department announced a ban on the use of jumping castles at all state schools late on Friday. Schools were told the ban on “all jumping castles and inflatable amusement equipment” would be imposed indefinitely. All right, someone bring me a coffee, please! Let’s get stuck in.Year-long waits for driving licences, long delays to register a property purchase, or gain a tax rebate a birth certificate – 2021 could well go down as the year government systems stopped working as they should. Maybe it was inevitable in a pandemic that service levels would suffer. However, the failure of successive governments to properly invest in technology has been horribly exposed over the past 12 months. This is where it went most wrong. Months to get a driving licence back To say Jo Makinen is frustrated is an understatement. The account manager, who lives in rural West Sussex, has been trying to renew her driving licence since February but says she has no confidence that it will be processed any time soon. “Dealing with DVLA is so frustrating and much of it is completely unnecessary. I recently had to fill in a form online and then print it off and put it in the post,” she says. “Why couldn’t it have been sent electronically? There are thousands of people like me who have been cleared by their doctors to resume driving but can’t get their licence back.” Arguably, the biggest government services failure during the Covid-19 pandemic was by the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency. Outbreaks of Covid at its Swansea HQ, and subsequent strikes by staff, have led to long delays for anyone whose paper application requires some kind of manual intervention. People in Makinen’s shoes – needing to show medical clearance – have suffered the longest delays. However, plenty of young people applying for their first provisional licence have told Guardian Money that they have been waiting in excess of eight months. The problems have contributed to the shortage of truck drivers. People who sent the DVLA their passports to show their ID had to cancel long-awaited holidays as their documents were waiting to be processed. The fact that so little of the process is done electronically has been a huge source of frustration. Ironically, basic licence renewals carried out online have never been quicker. Ministers could have allowed those with a licence revoked for medical reasons, but subsequently cleared by their doctor to drive, to resume driving but have so far decided not to. A DVLA spokesperson says driver licence transactions should be back to normal in the spring. He also revealed that DVLA has been told not to contact GPs over the coming weeks. “This year we have recruited more staff, increased overtime and secured extra office space in Swansea and Birmingham to help reduce waiting times for customers and are issuing about 200,000 driving licences each week,” he says. For Makinen, who is now fully recovered after having a seizure, it means more months of lifts, taxis and public transport. “After my MP got involved, I was told that DVLA had sent my GP the form to fill in again. But they haven’t received it, and everything is now being put on hold to allow the booster push. If I don’t get this processed in four months, it expires again, at which point, I suspect I will have to start all over again. I don’t know whether to laugh or cry,” she says. If you want a driving test the first one available is next May As if young people haven’t had a bad enough pandemic, those hoping to drive face further months of waiting just to get a test. The Driver and Vehicle Standards Agency is another government service where there has been a big backlog because of the shutdown of services. Prospective drivers are facing waits of between three and six months to get the all-important practical test – depending on where they are in the country. Those who do manage to get a test are under intense pressure to pass because if they fail, it could mean another six-month wait for a retest. Things have been so bad that some learner drivers have had to retake their theory test because these expire after two years if you have not passed a practical test. Meanwhile, a whole industry has grown up selling drivers cancelled tests using bots to check the web for slots as they come up. Plans to make testers carry out more tests each day resulted in strike threats. The DVSA chief executive, Loveday Ryder, said: “We are doing all we can to provide as many tests as possible so we can get our services back to normal. With more than half of candidates failing, and demand currently extremely high for tests, learners should only take their test when they are confident they can pass. This will help them to avoid a lengthy wait for a retest and help us by not adding to the driving test waiting list.” Waiting for tax rebates: don’t hold your breath Taxpayers are reporting that they have been kept waiting up to six months for rebates normally completed within 10-12 weeks because of severe delays at HM Revenue and Customs. HMRC staff arguably deserve the most sympathy, not least because there has been a massive increase in workload as a result of the pandemic and, in particular, the introduction of the various government schemes to help businesses and individuals get through the past 20 months. However, having to wait months for rebates is causing real hardship for some. Consumers have been taking to the HMRC’s own forum to report delays – in some cases, up to nine months – for rebates to be processed. An HMRC spokesperson says: “We are sorry to any customers who have waited longer than they expected. We are now working through the stocks of post that built up over the past year. We are doing this while keeping our helpline service levels and processing stable.” Need a new passport? Apply at least 10 weeks before travel This week the Passport Office advised anyone whose passport has expired that it is currently taking five weeks for renewals, and six to apply for a first one. Overall, it advises people to allow at least 10 weeks. While the processing of the passports has been working pretty well, given what is going on the world, the same cannot be said of the Passport Office’s chosen courier, TNT, part of FedEx. The TNT deliveries are “fast-tracked”. But, as Guardian Money revealed, TNT’s service has been bedevilled with problems, with deliveries repeatedly postponed. Since then, the problem appears to have worsened. An online petition has been started demanding an investigation into HMPO’s £77m three-year contract with TNT, signed in 2019. A FedEx spokesperson says: “We fully understand the importance of these shipments to our customers and are taking additional steps to provide timely delivery by adding additional resources to the operations in the UK.” Waiting months to register lease extension with Land Registry Even before Covid hit there were delays of between six and eight months to register a house, or other property-related purchases with the official Land Registry. Today it is taking up to a year, according to Jennie Curtis, an associate with the London-based real estate advisers Brecher. She says long processing times have been “wreaking havoc in the property market”. When a person or company buys a freehold or leasehold title, they do not become the legal owner of the property until it is officially registered with the Land Registry. Until that time, the purchaser is merely the owner in equity, she says. “The Land Registry was already operating a significant delay prior to the coronavirus pandemic,” she says. “What lawyers affectionately refer to as the ‘registration gap’ has become a gaping sinkhole swallowing properties.” The Land Registry launched a digital registration service in April but this has seemingly done little to bring down waiting times. One solicitor told Guardian Money this week that the industry has been working with the delays for many months. “When you tell clients that it could take a year for Land Registry to process their purchase, they can’t believe what they are hearing. It’s a conversation that has been happening for too long. The matter needs to be addressed urgently,” he says. Hari Black says he and his brother have been waiting almost 18 months for a “completely standard” leasehold extension to be registered. “Our solicitor completed the agreement with Southwark council back in June 2020 and has been waiting on the Land Registry ever since. Our solicitor has been putting pressure on, and we have written to our MP to see if they can be of any help. Every time we ask what’s going on, we are told that it is still in the queue – 18 months on. This has been a great inconvenience as we are trying to add my parents to the leasehold as owners so that they can access Southwark housing services. It’s ridiculous that it has taken so long,” he says. “HM Land Registry has continued to deliver all of its services, prioritising time critical services that are essential for property transactions to continue uninterrupted. It has been an extremely busy year for the property market, we received over 900k more applications in April-Nov 2021 than the same period in 2019,” says a spokesperson, who added that Black’s case should be completed in 10 days. Probate hold-ups go on A few years ago, anyone going through probate was told it should take 10 working days for an application to be processed. Now, changes to the system followed by a pandemic mean some bereaved families are waiting months for cases to be resolved. In the meantime, they are trapped in limbo, unable to sell properties or distribute their loved ones’ assets. Probate is the legal process that allows executors of a will to take charge of a deceased person’s estate. It is usually required for estates where there are assets other than cash and personal possessions to be dealt with, unless they are jointly owned with a surviving partner. After the death certificate has been obtained and the estate has been valued, an application for probate is registered with a local office and any necessary paperwork provided. A scheme to centralise the process seems to have slowed things down, with solicitors already complaining about delays before the pandemic hit. But things have been exacerbated by changes to working practices. A warning on the government website tells applicants that because of Covid, “it’s taking longer to process paper applications than online applications. Use the online service to apply for probate if you can.” According to official figures, the average time from application to the grant of probate stood at 9.3 weeks in October – down from 10.4 weeks in September – but otherwise the highest figure all year. Digital applications were taking an average of 7.8 weeks, while paper applications were taking an average of 13.7 weeks. Those figures are for cases that have gone through without a request for further information – for those that have been stopped for any reason, which could include missing details or names that don’t quite match up, it was taking 17 weeks online and 21 for paper applications. “We have repeatedly said the probate service already faced delays before the Covid-19 pandemic, and while some of these delays have been addressed with the new online system, there are still issues with the service,” says a spokesperson for the Law Society, whose members include solicitors dealing with applications. Although commending efforts to keep the service going during the coronavirus crisis, the spokesperson adds: “These delays can have an emotional and financial impact on users of the probate service – regardless of whether they have legal representation – who are being left in limbo, unable to execute a loved one’s estate. “Our solicitor members have told us that they’re unable to get sufficient updates on the status of an application, meaning they’re unable to communicate effectively with their clients on how their application is progressing.” HM Courts and Tribunals said that waiting times have come down and straightforward applications were taking an average of four weeks to process. A spokesperson said: “We hired extra staff in response to unprecedented demand for probate during the pandemic, and correctly completed online applications are now taking less than a month to process. “Due to a focus on tackling a backlog of complex cases over the last quarter, average wait times increased, but over the same period 6,000 more cases were completed than received.” Other departments In August the Home Office was accused of causing “turmoil for families” after a failure in its online system for registering births, deaths and marriages – contravening the government’s 42-day limit. Laura Mogford, a veterinary nursing assistant from south Wales, told the Observer she had been trying to register her son Arthur’s birth for almost three months. Want to get a Disclosure and Barring Service check to allow you to work or volunteer with children? Although straightforward checks are being completed quickly, people who have moved recently or have a non-standard application are reporting long delays in being approved, in many cases holding up them from starting jobs.It took the judge more than three hours to read out his damning judgment at the end of one of the longest, most expensive and toxic divorce cases of the 20th century. Margaret, the Duchess of Argyll, was, he declared with contempt, “a highly sexed woman” who was not “satisfied with normal relations and had started to indulge in disgusting sexual activities to gratify a debased sexual appetite”. Margaret was in Paris with her married lover at the time, breezily convinced she would win. Her lawyer phoned to give her the bad news, adding it was the cruellest judgment he had ever heard. In 1963, the cruelty – and misogyny – was perhaps not surprising. Ian Campbell, Duke of Argyll, had petitioned for divorce on grounds of adultery, and Margaret’s life was laid bare. Campbell alleged Margaret had slept with 88 men, provided diaries purporting to show dates of her liaisons, and most salacious of all, provided Polaroid photographs, including of Margaret giving an unknown man oral sex. That Campbell had stolen her private property and had committed his own adultery – theirs was an open marriage – was deemed largely irrelevant. The court found Margaret, who turned 50 during the long proceedings, had not behaved as a woman should, and particularly perhaps not as an older woman should. And she was punished for it. The BBC’s new three-part drama, A Very British Scandal, might provide, hopes Lyndsy Spence, the author of a biography of the duchess, the “justice that Margaret deserves: to be understood and seen in a different light”. What happened to the duchess then – she became known as the “dirty duchess” – would be described as “slut-shaming” or revenge porn now, but at the time it was scandalous, not least because of the tales of her sexual appetite and speculation of who the “headless man” in the photograph was. The Conservative government was already in crisis over the Profumo affair, and when Duncan Sandys, the minister of defence, was rumoured as possibly the person in Margaret’s photograph – as were Hollywood actors and royalty – he offered his resignation. All these things were converging, says Robert Lacey, a historian and royal biographer. It was all part of “the upper-class excess, that led to the Labour [victory] the following year”. It was also a time, he says, when the media were willing to report salacious stories. Viewed today, she was a vibrant, sexually liberated woman, ahead of her time. “The wealth of her father and of her first husband enabled her to live by another set of rules, which then became everybody else’s set of rules,” says Lacey. The swinging 60s were about to start, and the pill – made available for single women the following decade – signalled the start of the sexual revolution. Then, though, says Spence, “it was scandalous because women weren’t expected to behave like that”. But Margaret was defiant. She was a formidable woman who had come through many traumatic experiences – during her first marriage, she had eight miscarriages and gave birth to a stillborn daughter. She also suffered a head injury and broke her back when she fell 40ft down a lift shaft, spending three months in hospital. Margaret was complicated. “Some people found her snobby, and self-publicising,” says Lacey. “She was a name-dropper and had an attitude of entitlement.” Nothing was ever her fault. As Spence notes in her book, The Grit in the Pearl, Margaret “rarely, if ever, cast herself in an unfavourable light”. It was partly personality, but mostly her upbringing, says Spence. Born in 1912, she was the only child of a Scottish textile millionaire and his wife, who brought Margaret up in New York. “She was very spoilt,” says Spence. “She said when she was young her father taught her how to argue and get her own way.” At 15, on holiday in the Isle of Wight, she met a 17-year-old David Niven and he had sex with her; she became pregnant and her father sent her for an abortion. Her family had moved to London not long before, her mother having worried about how louche 1920s New York was becoming. “She was of the jazz and cocktails age,” says Lacey. In London, things were not much quieter: this was the Bright Young Things era. When Margaret became a debutante in 1930, her father – desperate to make a name for his daughter – spent vast sums on her coming out ball. “In those days [that] was a way of buying status,” says Lacey. The newspapers were obsessed with her, and as a society beauty – with money – she had several engagements, before marrying Charles Sweeny, an Irish-American stockbroker in 1933. The Guardian described it as the “media event of the decade”. “It was only with her second marriage that she became an aristocrat,” says Lacey. The Duke of Argyll was impoverished by gambling debts; he was also violent and was addicted to alcohol and amphetamines. He was drowning in death duties and his Scottish castle was crumbling; Margaret brought wealth to the marriage, and paid to update and repair the castle. It was when she stopped paying the duke’s bills that he reportedly started divorce proceedings. Throughout it, her society circle largely sided with the duke, says Spence, although “I think privately a lot of people, especially women, sympathised with her”. Lacey met Margaret in her later years “when she was rather sad”. The damage to her reputation came at huge personal cost, as well as financial. She had become estranged from her daughter, though remained close to her son, and had become a bit of a joke. “The Duke of Argyll took so much off her,” says Spence, even before the divorce, “and she had to pay his legal costs. She lost her home. She lived in a hotel for a while and then she got evicted for unpaid bills.” None of it broke Margaret, who died in 1993 aged 80, says Spence. “Obviously she was humiliated, but anybody else would have been devastated and probably gone into hiding. Margaret moved past all of that. She carried on, and kept living the good life. I think that’s quite something, even for today, to have that courage.” A Very British Scandal is on BBC One at 9pm on Boxing DayThere are only a few weeks left to apply for a UK government grant to help with the cost of getting an electric vehicle home charging point installed if you own your house. The Electric Vehicle Homecharge Scheme is an official grant that provides a 75% contribution – up to a maximum of £350 – towards the cost of a charging point and its installation. The main requirements are that the applicant owns, leases or has ordered a qualifying vehicle and has appropriate off-street parking. From April 2022, the scheme will no longer be open to homeowners living in “single-unit properties” – in other words, detached, semi-detached and terrace houses and bungalows, so the charging point will need to be installed by 31 March and probably booked by February. However, the scheme will remain open to homeowners who live in flats, and people in rented accommodation. The cost of installing a home charging point varies, depending on the type you go for, although quotes typically come in at between £500 and £1,000. Many drivers need to act now or they will miss out, says Steve Tigar, the chief executive of loveelectric, a company that helps employers provide staff with electric vehicles via salary sacrifice. To take advantage of the grant, drivers for whom the scheme is closing must order their charging point by the start of February, he adds. Bear in mind that once you have found an installer you are happy with, you may have to wait five or six weeks for the work to be done. “Installers are currently very busy, and often they will want to do a site survey before they get to work. But they are vital to the process, as it is they who apply for the EVHS grant on your behalf,” Tigar says. The government says that any necessary third-party permission for the work – such as from a freeholder or managing agent of a block of flats – must be obtained by the applicant before the installation is done. “This will be needed for rented or leasehold properties where it’s the renter or the leaseholder applying,” it adds.On the morning of 29 December, eight days before hundreds of Trump supporters and far-right extremists stormed the US Capitol in the worst domestic attack on American democracy arguably since the civil war, the White House chief of staff Mark Meadows fired off an email to the head of the justice department. It was a strange message for Donald Trump’s right-hand man to send to Jeffrey Rosen, acting US attorney general, given that the material in it was written entirely in Italian. It attached a letter addressed to Trump from an Italian named Carlo Goria who said he worked for a US aerospace company and then went on to regurgitate a conspiracy theory that was doing the rounds, known as “Italygate”. Three days later, Meadows sent Rosen another email containing a link to a 13-minute YouTube video titled “Brad Johnson: Rome, Satellites, Services, an Update”. In the video, Johnson, a retired CIA station chief, gave further details of Italygate, which he described as a secret plot to overturn the US presidential election and stop Trump from gaining a second term. In Johnson’s account, an Italian defense contractor, Leonardo, had joined forces with the CIA to carry out the dastardly scheme. Together, they had hacked into Italian military satellites, beaming them down on to US voting machines in battleground states and remotely switching votes from Trump to Joe Biden. Rosen politely replied to Meadows that he had received the video, then sent a copy of it to his deputy Richard Donoghue. Later that day, Donoghue told his boss what he thought of Johnson’s video. “Pure insanity”, he said. *** Meadows’ Italygate emails, highlighted in a 51-page report released this week by the House select committee investigation into the Capital insurrection, are some of the more memorable elements of his vast campaign to advance Trump’s big lie that the presidential election had been rigged. It’s not every day that the chief aide to the most powerful person on Earth bombards the top law enforcement official in the country with lurid tales of vote-switching military satellites, composed in Italian. But that is just the start of it. As the select committee descends ever deeper into the murky waters of Trump’s efforts to subvert the 2020 election, Meadows is fast surfacing as a character of supreme interest. Between election day on 3 November and 6 January, when Trump’s exhortations to his supporters to scupper the certification of Biden’s victory climaxed in violent scenes that left five people dead and more than 140 law enforcement officers injured, Meadows was a whirlwind of activity. Not only was he frantically busy propagating Italygate and other conspiracy theories, not only did he try to influence the actions of the Department of Justice in flagrant violation of White House rules barring any such interference, but he was also in direct contact with the organisers of the 6 January rally that preceded the violence, and he was there too by his master’s side when the insurrection at the US Capitol kicked off. In short, Meadows is honing into view, in the Washington Post’s phrase, as the “chief enabler to a president who was desperate to hold on to power”. That role has now landed Meadows in a great deal of legal trouble. The hard-right Republican from North Carolina, who was one of Trump’s cheerleaders in Congress before being airlifted to the White House as his final chief of staff, initially defied a subpoena to appear before the select committee, then changed his mind after Steve Bannon, Trump’s former White House adviser, was indicted for similar lack of cooperation. A little over a week ago he did a U-turn on his U-turn, announcing he was no longer playing ball with the congressional investigators after all. Some reports have suggested that his second change of heart was motivated by Trump’s furious reaction to what he read in the Guardian. The Guardian revealed Meadows had disclosed in his new book, The Chief’s Chief, that Trump had tested positive for Covid before going on stage with Biden last September in the first presidential debate. That inconvenient truth had previously been kept secret, and conflicts with the official line peddled at the time. On Tuesday the full House of Representatives voted to hold Meadows in contempt of Congress after he failed to turn up for a deposition, referring the decision to the Department of Justice for possible prosecution. He faces a maximum sentence of a year in prison and a fine of up to $100,000 for every count with which he may be charged. Meadows’ renewed non-cooperation will make the select committee’s job harder, but he has already presented them with a treasure trove of documents that has supercharged their investigation. It includes no fewer than 9,000 pages of records, among them 2,000 text messages. Those texts are beginning to divulge golden nuggets of information that expose members of the Trump inner circle as having been intimately involved in pressing for the election to be overturned. One text from an as yet anonymous member of Congress sent to Meadows on 4 January advocated for the states of Georgia and Pennsylvania, both of which were won by Biden, to send alternate slates of Trump electors to Congress “and have it go” to the US supreme court for a ruling. Jim Jordan, the former wrestler-turned-Ohio congressman who was a close ally of Meadows in the rightwing House Freedom Caucus which they co-founded, sent a text to his friend a day before the insurrection outlining a plot in which the vice-president Mike Pence could simply refuse to certify Biden’s victory, in blatant disregard for his constitutional duties. The 38-page PowerPoint that laid out in detail a blueprint for a Trump coup was also sent to Meadows, though he denies having acted on the document. As for the insurrection itself, the select committee said that Meadows was in touch with at least some of the main organisers of the “Stop the Steal” rally on the morning of 6 January at which Trump called on his supporters to “fight like hell”. Members of the committee were intrigued to know why the chief of staff chose to use his personal cell phone, as well as the encrypted mobile app Signal, to conduct these conversations. When the violence erupted, Meadows continued to act as a communications hub alongside the president. Text messages sent to him by Donald Trump Jr give a rare glimpse into Trump family dynamics that would be worthy of a Roy family subplot in Succession. As hundreds of Trump supporters were smashing their way into the Capitol building, attacking police officers as they went, Don Jr desperately wanted to get a message to his father. But he didn’t call dad, as might be expected. Instead, he texted Meadows. “We need an Oval address,” the presidential son exclaimed. “He has to lead now. It has gone too far and gotten out of hand.” Similar urgent missives were fired at Meadows by several Fox News stars. Laura Ingraham, the ultra-right host of the Ingraham Angle, told him: “Hey Mark, the president needs to tell people in the Capitol to go home. This is hurting all of us. He is destroying his legacy.” Sean Hannity added his own plaintiff appeal: “Can he make a statement? Ask people to leave the Capitol.” The plethora of texts to Meadows from Trump family members, Fox News hosts and top Republicans underline important aspects of Trump’s coterie in the hours before, during and after the insurrection. The Fox News hosts used language (“hey Mark”, “all of us”) suggesting they viewed themselves as one of the inner team, casting aside any pretense at journalistic integrity. They were also boldly hypocritical. Soon after sending Meadows her text about Trump “destroying his legacy”, Ingraham went on air and talked about “antifa sympathizers” having been “sprinkled throughout the crowd” at the Capitol. The most critical lesson to leap out of the Meadows documents is that behind the scenes, in their private correspondence, Trump’s inner circle had no doubts about the nature and significance of the Capitol insurrection. It was an eruption of violence inspired and instigated by one man alone – Donald Trump – and only he could call it off. Meadows himself presumably has some valuable insights on that point. But at least for now he doesn’t seem to want to share them.If in recent years American politics books have been noted mainly for ephemera, in 2021 the winds of history began to blow open the doors – occasionally to devastating effect. The advent of a new administration loosened tongues and made documents more readily available as some sought redemption, justification or simply fame. Such books illustrate the truth that one cannot keep a thing hidden and generally share certain characteristics that convey the ring of truth. They report bitterly angry outbursts by Donald Trump, staff reeling from dysfunction, chaos and the pressures of a campaign in a pandemic. They frequently recount interviews with Trump himself. They contain sufficient profanity to make sailors blush. And, happily, this paper celebrated its bicentennial in part by scooping many of them, with real consequences in the case of Mark Meadows, who published The Chief’s Chief this month. Some – the former White House chief of staff in particular – may wish they had not written books. But some books are essential to understand the danger in which the country finds itself. The former FBI director James Comey opened the year with Saving Justice, a second book defending the rule of law. Jonathan Allen and Amie Parnes followed with Lucky, a quick but full postmortem of the 2020 campaign, noting: “Luck, it has been said, is the residue of design. It was for Joe Biden, and for the republic.” The heart of the year was a series of blockbusters from prominent reporters, each containing significant new information on aspects of the chaos that was 2020. Michael Bender led off with Frankly, We Did Win This Election, in which Trump’s words, on the record, are unsurprising but nonetheless shocking. In Landslide, Michael Wolff completed his Trump trilogy with a focus on the campaign – including Chris Christie, in debate preparation (as a result of which he tested positive for Covid), earning Trump’s ire for asking hard but predictable questions on Covid response and family scandals – and on a post-election dominated by Trump’s anger as the levers of power, including the supreme court of which he chose three members, failed to overturn his defeat. Wolff is keenly analytic: as he writes, Trump “knew nothing of government, [his supporters] knew nothing about government, so the context of government itself became beside the point”. Instead, Trump was “the star – never forget that – and the base was his audience”. This self-referential and adulatory mode of governing failed in a divided country facing a pandemic and rising international challenges. Landslide is a fine book, though as new evidence from the 6 January committee emerges, Wolff’s conclusion limiting Trump’s own knowledge of and responsibility for the events of that day may come to seem premature. Carol Leonnig and Philip Rucker followed with I Alone Can Fix It, in which Gen Mark Milley said the US was in a “Reichstag moment” on 2 January, four days before the insurrection, and referred to “the gospel of the Führer” poisoning American democracy. Trump’s anger at his pollster, Tony Fabrizio, for being the bearer of bad news on Covid and the electorate is telling too: “They’re tired? They’re fatigued?” Politics as empathy was not the campaign’s theme. Bob Woodward, writing with Robert Costa, likewise completed his Trump series with Peril, whose title sums up its conclusion. The book, notable for revealing Gen Milley’s attempts to reassure the Chinese military in the waning days of the presidency, quotes Trump’s apparent view that “real power [is] fear” and asks, “Were there any limits to what he and his supporters might do to put him back in power?” Adam Schiff’s Midnight in Washington brings a former prosecutor’s eye and perspective of a House intelligence committee chairman to issues surrounding Trump and Russia. His book is both history and warning. Among Trump loyalists, former trade czar Peter Navarro released In Trump Time, in which he criticized Meadows and anyone else he deemed insufficiently loyal. The book’s most memorable line calls Vice-President Mike Pence “Brutus” to Trump’s “American Caesar” – all without irony or, one hopes, knowledge of Roman history. Not all notable books were tell-alls. Some contained real policy insights. Josh Rogin’s Chaos Under Heaven looks at US-China relations from a strategic as well as pandemic perspective, noting US conflicts of both interest and policy as well as Trump’s inability to develop a workable strategy. Rival books on antitrust policy by two very different senators, Amy Klobuchar and Josh Hawley, illustrate Congress’ increased focus on large technology companies. Evan Osnos’ Wildland chronicles the lives and fortunes of billionaires and the growth of the Washington machine – and the effects, including rightward political shifts, on those at the bottom. On a related theme, in Misfire Tim Mak delivers a shocking history of the National Rifle Association and its former leaders. Several books will serve as first drafts of history. Madam Speaker, Susan Page’s biography of Speaker Nancy Pelosi, describes how she “took on the boys club and won” through mastery of legislation and her caucus. Justice, Justice Thou Shalt Pursue compiles the late Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg’s opinions, speeches and other documents, with Amanda Tyler as co-author. Unsurprisingly in the second year of a pandemic, healthcare featured prominently. In The Ten-Year War, Jonathan Cohn recounts the 10-year history of Obamacare. Patrick Radden Keefe’s Empire of Pain tells the sad and painful story of the promotion of opioids in America. On the pandemic, Yasmeen Abutaleb and Damian Paletta in Nightmare Scenario focus on the Trump administration’s response. Leaving responsibility mostly to the states had deleterious consequences, as did chaos, turf wars and giving priority to “the demands of Trump and his base” as he sought reelection rather than an effective response. Scott Gottlieb, a well-regarded former FDA commissioner, takes a broader, more philosophical view in Uncontrolled Spread. Absence of leadership and a “sizeable enterprise devoted to manufacturing skepticism” about the virus and public health solutions meant the US failed the bar of “delay[ing] its onset and reduc[ing] its scope and severity”. But the Operation Warp Speed vaccine effort “proved what government could accomplish when it functions well” and makes one keenly regret the absence of leadership elsewhere as confirmed US deaths, so many among the unvaccinated, surpass 800,000. The pandemic’s broader impact is equally profound. In Gottlieb’s words, “Covid normalized the breakdowns in a global order that it was presumed, perhaps naively, would protect us, just as Covid pierced our own perception of domestic resiliency, cooperation, and fortitude.” Vaccine hesitancy in the face of clear science is only one pandemic effect. With honorable mentions for Wolff, Leonnig and Rucker, Woodward and Costa, and Gottlieb, ABC’s Jonathan Karl produced arguably the year’s most significant book in Betrayal, in which Trump cabinet members “paint a portrait of a wrath-filled president, untethered from reality, bent on revenge”. The attorney general, Bill Barr, decries election-related conspiracies; the acting defense secretary, Chris Miller, seeks to dissuade Trump from attacking Iran by taking (and faking) an extreme position in favour: Oftentimes, with provocative people, if you get more provocative than them, they then have to dial it down. Such was government in the Trump era. Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn wrote in his Nobel Lecture that “one word of truth shall outweigh the whole world”. The amount of newly uncovered truth is already outweighing a fair number of the more than 4,000 exoplanets Nasa has recorded. Yet the vital question remains: what will Americans, in particular Republican officials and independent voters, do with this information? As Karl wrote, “The continued survival of our republic may depend, in part, on the willingness of those who promoted Trump’s lies and those who remained silent to acknowledge they were wrong.” Is it to be Solzhenitsyn’s hope – or his fear that “when we are told again the old truth, we shall not even remember that we once possessed it”?Sandy beaches and a lively buzz, Sicily I spent September travelling around Sicily alone, mostly on foot, and I wanted to flop on a beach before going home. I settled on Cefalù on the north coast, because of its rare combination of sandy beach and medieval town – and it was love at first sight. I had heard that the tiny town gets unpleasantly packed in summer, but by late September there was just a lively buzz. Cefalù seemed a distillation of everywhere else I had been: Sicily in miniature. I gazed up at the mosaic-bright Christ Pantocrator in the twin-towered Arab-Norman cathedral. I came face to face with Antonello da Messina’s enigmatic Portrait of an Unknown Man, a masterpiece in the unassuming (and empty) Museo Mandralisca. I climbed La Rocca, a huge crag that looms over the town, to a fourth- or fifth-century temple and ruined castle. I pottered around the cobbled streets, popping into ceramic shops and a gelateria; joined the passeggiata along the seafront at sunset; and idled in piazzas drinking Campari spritz and eating pasta con le sarde. In fact, it wasn’t until the last afternoon that I finally found time to laze on the beach. Rachel Dixon Bay-hopping in Croatia Looking like a huge misshapen claw, Telašćica nature park dangles from the southern end of the Croatian island of Dugi Otok, near the islands of Kornati national park. But while the Kornatis are scrubby barren dots of sheep-covered land, most of Telašćica is lusciously green – all the better to show off its contrast with the vivid blue of the Adriatic. Within this strange claw are 25 bays and six islets surrounded by olive groves, vineyards and forested hills heavy with the scent of pine. I followed a road up to a viewpoint in an old Habsburg fort, from which I could see glistening pools of the Adriatic flowing between green mounds, and moored sailing boats. Nearby is Mir, a saltwater lake skirted by limestone cliffs. It’s a popular swimming spot for day-trippers from Zadar, so I headed instead to Jaz bay for a swim off the pebbly shore. Here I found the peace that was lacking in Mir, which, ironically, translates as peace. Luckily, here at Telašćica, there’s plenty of that to go round. Mary Novakovich Rousseau’s romantic retreat When an unexpected cold snap descended on Lac Annecy and forced us off the pedalo, we headed into nearby Chambery for a hot chocolate – and discovered the signs for Les Charmettes, the museum and former home of philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau. A teenage Rousseau met Madame de Warens, 13 years his senior, in 1728. He called her “maman” and they moved into Les Charmettes farmhouse together in 1736. With no guards or velvet ropes, visitors are free to wander around Rousseau’s bedroom and Madame’s more romantic quarters (with hand-painted wallpaper). Downstairs, there’s a clavichord, a chaise longue and a table set for lunch à deux. Rousseau wrote that in the five years he spent there, he “enjoyed a century of life and total and complete happiness.” He passed the time devising a numerical form of music notation, hiking in the Chartreuse mountains and advancing his philosophical “storehouse of ideas”. The gardens include rare vines, beehives and an orchard with views that have barely changed since Rousseau gazed across the valley. His philosophy influenced the French Revolution and Charmettes became a place of pilgrimage after his death. Jon Bryant The world’s longest wooden staircase, Norway Spending my summers growing up in Glencoe means I’m constantly carrying the emotional impact of its serene mountains and lochs at the back of my mind. Which is to say that when I’m travelling I’m always assessing nature’s most awe-inspiring sights in comparison, even if that often ends in disappointment. So the first thing that struck me while climbing to the top of the world’s longest wooden staircase, all 4,444 steep steps above the roadless village of Flørli in south-west Norway, was how empty it was. Barring a handful of hikers from Stavanger behind me, I was alone and that was slightly unnerving, if thrillingly welcome in late summer. It was almost unreal. The second thing I’ll never forget was the heart-in-mouth panorama at the top. From the Ternevass dam, the deep-blue Lysefjord and the mammoth cliffs of Preikestolen across its sun-brushed surface jostled for my attention. The landscape was naked and almost Caledonian, and yet it was a Norwegian wilderness to dream on. So, in a salute to my temporary hosts, I indulged in friluftsliv, the Nordic idea of open-air living and outdoor adventure, and came back for more the next day. Mike MacEacheran Wine from Flanders? I nearly spilt my beer French people tend to give you a strange look when you talk about wine from Belgium, a country more readily associated with beer, mussels and frites. But my eyes were opened during a vineyard and foodie tour of the bucolic corner of west Flanders known as Heuvelland, the Hilly Land, not far from the sombre war memorials of Ypres. It is a surprise to discover these hills covered with vines and young, dynamic vignerons opening their cellars for tastings of wines whose quality really impresses visitors. Martin Bacquaert makes some outstanding sparkling vintages at Entre-deux-Monts, following the classic méthode traditionelle made famous by champagne makers. Over at Monteberg, wine lovers can sit out at a panoramic terrace, feasting on cheese, charcuterie and fruit from an organic farm while sipping bubbly, a fruity red or trying artisanal gin. Heuvelland’s tourism office excels at recommending visits. A romantic spot to stay is B&amp;B De Rentmeesterhoeve, an ancient manor house surrounded by a moat and gardens. John Brunton Rambling to Portugal’s mountain villages My visit to Peneda-Gerês, Portugal’s only national park, had been a long time coming, Covid-postponed from spring 2020. But finally, in late August, I found myself rambling around its granite massifs, along shepherd tracks and pilgrim trails – and into Soajo. This little mountain village is one of Peneda-Geres’s most traditional, with tight-knit alleys, an ancient pillory (carved, usually, with a smiley face) and an abundance of espigueiros, the region’s typical stilted, stone granaries. I stayed at Casa do Eiró, an old house by the main square. It has been in owner Rosa Rocha’s family for generations; her photos and knick-knacks are still scattered inside. Each morning Rosa brought a breakfast basket, with fresh bread from Soajo’s bakery and peaches from her garden. In the evenings I ate at restaurant Saber ao Borralho where Rosa – also owner-chef here – cooked up huge portions of carne de cachena (local beef) and fig cheesecake. Sarah Baxter Mosques, minarets and moreish food, Istanbul “As I was going to Üsküdar,” sang Eartha Kitt in the 1950s in her fabulous rendition of the Turkish song Kâtibim. Üsküdar, a neighbourhood on the Asian side of Istanbul, had somehow passed me by … but now I had Eartha’s voice in my head as I boarded the ferry for the short scenic trip from Karaköy on the European side. Two things drew me there: a particular lokanta (restaurant) and a famous waterside mosque. The chestnut pilav and dolma at Kanaat Lokantası, set up by the Kargılı family in 1933, was as good as I’d been told by friends, the setting distinctly old fashioned, the food moreish and rich. Then a five-minute walk back towards the ferry dock took me to Mihrimah Sultan mosque), built in 1548 for the daughter of Süleyman the Magnificent. Strikingly beautiful with its slender minarets and stained-glass windows, it is but one of Üsküdar’s many historic mosques, giving reason to return. Caroline Eden The ‘improbably pretty’ Welsh Marches It was while reading Jan Morris’s book, Wales: Epic Views of a Small Country, during lockdown that it dawned on me how little of this “damp, demanding and obsessively interesting country” I had visited. Previous trips had traced the usual tourist routes from Cardiff’s Millennium stadium and the beaches of Pembrokeshire to Snowdonia. My post-lockdown resolution was to explore a part of the country that often gets bypassed – the drive-through borderlands of mid-Wales. The first surprise was that we arrived in the middle of a heatwave. The second came when we climbed up to the ruins of the Norman castle in Montgomery and took in the view. It was expansive, filmic even: an improbably pretty scene with the church tower of the little town in the foreground, and the green pastures of Powys and Shropshire running out to Corndon Hill in the distance. Another line from Morris came back to me: “To look at, the nature of Wales is deceptive. Within its small expanse the style of terrain changes so often, the mountainous countryside is so constantly corrugated, this way and that … the scene in short is so cunningly variegated.” Andy Pietrasik A navy lark in Puglia, Italy The port city of Brindisi has never bothered much with tourists. In its 2,600 years of history, the doings of soldiers, seafarers and traders in its huge natural harbour were far more important. While in the past decade it has added a smart seafront promenade lined with restaurants, bars and gelaterias, its old town, with all the windy stone streets and churches you’d expect, still sees little in the way of crowds. The archaeological museum next to the cathedral is even free to enter. Its collection of ancient Greek vases and lovely Roman mosaics rivals those in Naples and Sicily, yet we had it to ourselves on a sunny autumn afternoon. The imposing 13th-century castle is not open to the public because – imagine! – it’s still in military use, a base for the Italian marines. There’s plenty of civic life too: Brindisi bursts on to the streets for the early-evening passeggiata, particularly along palm-lined Corso Giuseppe Garibaldi (the 4Erre bar, on the corner of Vicolo Sacramento, does a very generous Aperol spritz). Below the castle, Antica Osteria La Sciabica served us fishy starters and pillowy pizzas on a waterside terrace overlooking moored trawlers – and a big grey gunship. Liz Boulter Glamping and milking cows in Romania I heard about Dobraia – a new glampsite high in the wild Cerna mountains – thanks to Romania Private Tours. The remote camp inside the Domogled-Valea-Cernei national park, in Romania’s little-visited Banat region, is not easy to reach: it’s a seven-hour drive from Bucharest, and then a steep two-hour hike (a rough track reaches the spot, but you need an off-road vehicle). Yet it’s worth every step when you finally see four white bell tents (each costing about £35 a night) gazing at limitless mountains. All meals are homecooked by the self-sufficient owners, the Raduta family – every ingredient is organically grown or produced by them. I went in August with my husband and two young children, who loved helping bring the cows home from foraging in the forests, then milking them by hand; and we swayed in hammocks under plum trees, picnicked in orchards and walked to isolated hamlets strung among the peaks. It’s so bucolic I half expected the Greek god Pan to appear with his flute. Kate Eshelby The best of the Pennine Way Some of the Pennine Way can be miserable. Days are spent trudging across desolate moors. Even when it’s dry, secret bogs lie beneath, hungry for tired legs. Cottongrass is the only thing able to stomach the acid below and gloom above. But there’s ancient majesty in those 268 miles. West of Middleton in Teesdale, the path runs along the river and the shrubs thicken with juniper, a relic of the end of the ice age. Soon, the water gathers pace and becomes High Force, a 22-metre waterfall that plunges over a shelf of dolerite formed 295 million years ago. Two hours west and the skies widen as the river yawns around Cronkley Scar. The grass flows in the breeze, tickling the tummies of the Belted Galloways from Widdybank Farm. Above, curlews and lapwings soar with delight. When I was there, the sun perched above Cauldron Snout. It seemed to wait for hours, as if loath to turn its back on the beauty below. James Gingell The only way is Essex churches It began, like all the best travel discoveries, by chance. I was in Brightlingsea on the Essex coast when someone recommended All Saints Church. There I discovered a dado trail of 211 large square tiles girdling the interior, each recalling a local sailor lost at sea. Starting in 1872 with a father and son drowned off Hartlepool, it continues through terrible winters, giving a few details: Samuel Bridges, for example, was “washed overboard from the Mary Anne of Aberystwith 15 miles north of Bishop Light”. There was even a local man on the Titanic: steward Sidney Siebert, who leaped overboard but died in the lifeboat. Essex churches repay your dedication. Too many are locked, or open rarely, but be persistent: St Clements in West Thurrock, is a flinty-faced 12th-century chapel overshadowed by a soap factory , a visual oxymoron and magnet for film scouts (remember the funeral part of Four Weddings?). Walk down the Thames from Purfleet station past a feast of graffiti art and industrial architecture. Kevin Rushby Going Gothic on Germany’s Baltic coast Flanked by the Baltic Sea with its lively harbour dipping into the Ryck River, I spent two days in the Western Pomeranian city of Greifswald during a blisteringly cold October break. It was the first time I had visited the beautiful Hanseatic city, 50 miles from the Polish border. Around every corner was yet another magnificent piece of architecture with an equally impressive history – from its St Nikolai cathedral, peeping above its central square, to the former Cistercian monastery, Eldena Abbey, on the outskirts. Stood in the centre of its marktplatz you are cocooned within renovated Gothic-style buildings in shades of crimson, sunshine yellow and dusky pinks. These buildings were immortalised in the paintings of its most famous son, the Romantic period artist Caspar David Friedrich. There is an exceptionally lively bar scene due to the city’s 15th-century university and a chance to go on a boat trip to the nearby charming town of Wieck with its traditional salted fish restaurants. Nazia Parveen Surprising safaris on the Isle of Wight Funnelling into the thick canopy of trees at dusk, I felt as though someone suddenly turned out the lights. “Can you see anything?” I whispered to my guide Dave Fairlamb, as my eyes strained, hoping to make out the shape of an elusive and endangered creature. “Not yet,” he replied as we continued to feel our way along the footpath on our nocturnal safari. When it comes to observing and photographing wildlife in its natural habitat – particularly in Britain – my brain automatically wanders north, picturing deer and pine marten in Scotland’s Cairngorms, seal pups on the Isle of Mull, or puffins on the cliffs of Northumberland’s Farne Islands. Yet 2021 was the year I discovered that we have a really wild isle further south – the Isle of Wight. I visited this summer to spy sea eagles at Brading Marsh, red squirrels in Borthwood Copse, wall lizards at Ventnor, stingray at Thorness Bay and, guided only by the light from the moon, elusive dormice in Alverstone. And though some of my safari was spent in the dark, I felt like a light had been shone on the wilder side of this Victorian beachside favourite. Phoebe Smith A monster trip to Loch Ness While there are beautiful parks near us, we do live in the middle of a concrete jungle in east London and I often dream of being in the wilderness. So, in October, in celebration of our third wedding anniversary, we got on a train to Inverness. The eight-hour train journey was one of my favourite parts of the holiday. I loved seeing the distance I was putting between myself and the place I had felt so stuck in for so long and finally having the time to read. We spent a few days driving across different areas of the Highlands, from Loch Ness to the Isle of Skye. In Inverness, I loved visiting Leakey’s secondhand bookshop, and the Culloden Battlefield. The boat ride in Loch Ness is unmissable – even on a rainy October day – as is the wonderful walk we went on in Kinloch Forest and the castle, Eilean Donan. I particularly loved how small I felt driving around the North Coast 500 route. It was an important reminder that after more than a year of feeling my world close inwards, there are so many things much bigger than me. Aamna Mohdin Pigs trotters with prawns in the Pyrenees With Spain under partial lockdown for much of the year, and inter-regional travel off the cards, living here I found it a great relief to have the varied landscapes of Catalonia close to hand: its ragged coastline of long, sandy beaches and hidden bays; the rice paddies of the delta to the south; the crystal-clear mountain lakes and fragrant pine forests to the north. Up here near the border with France, on the roads that wind through the foothills of the Pyrenees, is where you’re most likely to stumble across one of Catalonia’s greatest charms – the random apparition of the sort of restaurant city-dwellers can only dream of. Thick stone walls, garden tables dappled with shade, and a blackboard trumpeting the sticky chargrilled soul food that should always round off a day’s hiking. And so it was with Restaurant Girul, just outside the village of Meranges. Oxtail stew, pigs’ trotters with prawn, and doormat-sized T-bone steaks share the billing with trinxat (a Catalan take on bubble and squeak) and a tray of snails just as they should be: not bland, not rubbery, just the right amount of garlic. Three courses and a bottle of decent local red brought the bill for two to €70. Sally Davies Following Hippocrates into Greece’s therapeutic springs As someone who starts shivering as soon as the mercury sinks below 15C, I’m a firm fan of Greece’s hot springs, which surge out of the ground at blood-warming temperatures. Said to cure everything from eczema to arthritis, they’ve been popular since antiquity: celebrated physician Hippocrates was convinced of the therapeutic properties of thermal water and fifth-century BC historian Herodotus was also a huge fan of balneotherapy, appropriately enough in a country where legend has it that baby Achilles became (almost) invincible after his mother dipped him in the Styx’s spring-fed waters. I discovered the hot spring lake of Vouliagmeni while exploring the Athenian riviera, 30 miles of beach- and tavern-fringed coastline stretching from the chic suburbs of Palaio Faliro to Poseidon’s temple at Cape Sounion. Surrounded by pine forests, the lake is actually a sunken cave fed by thermal springs that bubble up at about 21C. Wallowing in the (slightly stinky) sulphur-rich waters where Greeks have bathed away their aches and pains for 2,500 years was a legendary experience. A day pass is €15-18 and under-fives go free. Heidi Fuller-Love The Clarion call of Britain’s last socialist refuge I came across Clarion House by chance, driving home from Roughlee, in Lancashire. There, by the roadside, was a pretty, single-storey red-and-white building, with a simple trumpet for its logo. It was built in 1912 for mill and factory workers who came up into the countryside around Pendle Hill to escape the grime and noise of increasingly congested towns such as Colne and Brierfield. Inside are posters from the Spanish civil war, a beautiful piece of stained glass and a banner emblazoned with “Workers of the world unite”. Soft sunlight streams in through the windows. Long benches are laid out for chatting over a cup of tea and the Communist Manifesto. During the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Clarion Houses popped up in several rural areas – many linked to cycling clubs – including Halewood in Merseyside and Sheldon in Birmingham. Sadly, the Clarion House I “discovered” in 2021 is the only one still standing. In my dream future, there are Clarion Houses dotted all over the regreened, rewilded UK, serving as waystations and watering holes on “slow ways” that join up all our hamlets and villages, towns and cities. That’s my clarion call for today. Chris Moss Drinking in the atmosphere of Valletta’s back streets Like most of my favourite places around the world, this one was uncovered by accident. Dropped off at the wrong address down a backstreet in the Maltese capital, I scanned the warm limestone walls, balconied and shuttered, and wondered which housed our restaurant. Early for our seating, we climbed a set of steps expecting an empty alley and looked up at what appeared to be a makeshift restaurant cascading towards us. Tables and bright wooden chairs wobbled on the slabs, couples sipped cocktails and shared deep-fried duck rolls and steaming pizza. Waiting staff appeared from wooden shutters in the walls and strings of golden bulbs zigzagged from one side of the street to another. Warm, inviting, quiet enough to chat, noisy enough to blend in, Saint Lucia Street was the perfect spot for a pre-dinner drink, bare shoulders and flip-flopped feet still warm in the salty coastal air. Monisha Rajesh Riverside hike near Belfast In May, I spent a week exploring the wild green spaces around Belfast: the basalt cliffs of Cave Hill, heather-covered Black Mountain, the glens of Antrim and the wooded beaches of North Down. One revelation for me, even in the rain, was the popular 11-mile towpath beside the River Lagan to the neighbouring city of Lisburn, with trains back to Belfast. Walking upstream from the ceramic big fish sculpture, celebrating the river’s 1999 regeneration, I detoured through the clematis-covered arches and 1840s palm house of Belfast’s Botanic Garden. Cows were grazing the flowery Lagan meadows, two miles further on, and a lock-keeper’s cottage stood under pink-and-white apple blossom. My favourite stretch was Minnowburn with its mossy waterside beeches, winding waterways, and van selling tea and cake. There were clouds of cow parsley, clumps of yellow kingcups, herons in the willows, and a swan nesting right by the path. Phoebe Taplin The industrial landscapes of Luxembourg It was an interest in migrants from Cape Verde that took me to the south of Luxembourg. Most visitors to the Grand Duchy make first for the capital and then, if they go anywhere else at all, venture into the hilly Ardennes region in the north. But the former industrial landscapes that nudge up towards the French border are real hidden Europe territory. This southern fringe of Luxembourg is wou dat roud Gold gegruewe gou – Luxembourgish for “where the red gold was dug”. The red gold was iron ore. The foundries and smelters in the Alzette Valley are long gone, and the region around Esch is now the hub of one of Europe’s most-ambitious programmes of regeneration and urban renewal. There’s real visual drama in these erstwhile industrial areas and I fancy we’ll be hearing a lot more about this region in 2022 as Esch-sur-Alzette steps into the limelight as a European Capital of Culture. Nicky GardnerThe sale of peat to gardeners in England and Wales is to be banned by 2024 under plans published by the government on Saturday. Ministers said they also aimed to end peat use in the professional horticulture sector by 2028. The government set a voluntary target in 2011 for compost retailers to end sales of peat by 2020. But peat use fell by only 25% from 2011-2019 and increased by 9% in 2020 as Covid lockdowns boosted gardening as a hobby. Peat is the UK’s largest carbon store, trapping as much as tropical rainforests per hectare, but is routinely dug up for horticulture. This releases carbon dioxide, adding to the climate crisis. Peatlands are also vital habitats for rare species of wildlife, and help filter water and reduce flooding. However, the government consultation also contains measures that fall short of an outright ban, instead including an additional charge on the price of peat compost, or the provision of information on the environmental impact of peat at the point of sale. The government said it did not intend to ban the sale of plants in pots that contained peat and that its plans would not affect current licences for peat extraction. The environment minister Rebecca Pow said: “We are committed to bring forward the ban [on the sale of peat to gardeners] by the end of this parliament – that’s an absolute commitment.” “Our peatlands are an incredibly valuable natural resource,” she said. “There are now more sustainable and good quality peat-free alternatives available than at any other time, so I am confident now is the right time to make the shift permanent.” Sustainable alternatives to peat include compost made from wood fibre and bark, wool, coir, and other plants. Pow said the weaker measures were included because “in a consultation, it is best to be fully informed with as much evidence and data as we can have, and some people in the industry are still pressing for other potential routes”. Craig Bennett, of the Wildlife Trusts, said: “The government has been dithering over this crucial issue for decades and the consultation on the use of peat by gardeners is long overdue. But it’s a damp squib. “It refers to the damaging effects of peat extraction, but this activity is still allowed in England, which is absurd. We need an immediate ban on the use of peat by individuals and the wider horticulture industry and an immediate end to extracting peat.” Prof Dave Goulson, from the University of Sussex, said: “We need to stop kicking the can down the road. The government acknowledges we are in a climate emergency, but isn’t even prepared to stop depletion of a vital carbon store for needless ornamental use in our gardens. We need to stop peat use now.” Pow said “historic” licences allowing the extraction of peat were being reviewed. Alan Titchmarsh, Kate Bradbury and James Wong are among the high-profile gardeners who have backed a ban, and Monty Don has called peat in compost “environmental vandalism”. Peat may become harder to buy in the UK in any case because most is imported from bogs in Ireland, where the state-backed company Bord na Móna ended all peat extraction in 2020, although its reserves are still being sold. Some big retailers of peat have implemented their own bans, including Dobbies and the Co-op in 2021, and B&amp;Q by 2023. About 70% of peat is sold to gardeners and 30% is used by professional growers. The government estimates a ban on both uses would cut CO2 emissions by 4m tonnes in the next two decades. The government also announced £4m to boost 10 peat restoration projects across England, including in the Fens, Dorset, Somerset and Yorkshire. Almost 90% of peatland in England is in a degraded state and it emits 10m tonnes of CO2 a year. In May, ministers announced a £50m plan to restore 35,000 hectares of peatland by 2025, about 1% of the UK’s total. “It’s a really positive start,” said Pow, saying that these investments leveraged other funds focused on water management and increasing biodiversity.The questions 1 Which bird used to be called the ruddock? 2 Whose birthplace at 17 Bruton Street, London W1 is now a Chinese restaurant? 3 Where did New Shepard go in July? 4 Alice Fitzwarren features in which pantomime? 5 Why is Bitrex added to household cleaning products? 6 Which empire had its capital at Karakorum? 7 What is the first line of The Christmas Song? 8 Which team lost four consecutive Super Bowls? 9 Which Norwegian island gives its name to two shipping forecast areas? 10 How did Neil Papworth say Merry Christmas on 3 December 1992? 11 In which film did Madonna make a record 85 costume changes? 12 Which carol is based on a poem by Christina Rossetti? 13 Who devised the “veil of ignorance” thought experiment? 14 The Ngāti Toa tribe are the legal guardians of what ceremony? 15 Where does the clock tower known as Old Joe stand? 16 What were published in 1812 as Kinder-und Hausmärchen? What links: 17 Darcey Bussell; Hale-Bopp; female fox; love god? 18 Louisiana (1803); Gadsden (1854); Alaska (1867)? 19 Magnus Carlsen and Ju Wenjun? 20 Gabriella Benson; Mike Bassett; Ted Lasso? 21 Water vapour; carbon dioxide; nitrous oxide; methane; ozone? 22 Chelsea FC; Barings Bank; Homebase; BHS; Reader’s Digest? 23 Shirley Temple; Rita Hayworth; Audrey Tautou; Salma Hayek? 24 Atomic number 79; olibanum; commiphora abyssinica resin? 25 Elphaba; Mike Wazowski; Princess Fiona; The Grinch? 26 The Tournament; Moneyball; Sitting on a Fortune? 27 Humphrey Chetham; Thomas Bodley; John Rylands; William Gladstone? 28 Champ; Major; Bo; Sunny; Barney; Miss Beazley? 29 Dome of the Rock; Florence Baptistery; Palatine Chapel, Aachen; Tower of the Winds, Athens? 30 The Beatles; Spice Girls; LadBaby? The answers 1 Robin. 2 The Queen. 3 Space (Jeff Bezos). 4 Dick Whittington (they marry). 5 To make them taste bad (child safety measure). 6 Mongol empire. 7 Chestnuts roasting on an open fire. 8 Buffalo Bills (1990-93). 9 Utsira (North and South Utsire). 10 In the first text message. 11 Evita. 12 In the Bleak Midwinter. 13 John Rawls. 14 Ka Mate haka (as used by the All Blacks). 15 Birmingham University. 16 Grimms’ fairytales. 17 Santa’s reindeer: Dancer; Comet; Vixen; Cupid. 18 Land purchases that expanded the US. 19 World chess champions (overall and women’s). 20 Fictional football managers: The Manageress TV series; Mike Bassett: England Manager film; Ted Lasso sitcom. 21 Greenhouse gases (in order of contribution). 22 All been sold for £1. 23 Played title roles in first-name films: Heidi; Gilda; Amélie; Frida. 24 Gifts of the magi: gold; frankincense; myrrh. 25 Green-skinned characters: Wicked; Monsters, Inc.; Shrek; How the Grinch Stole Christmas. 26 2021 quizshows hosted by ex-footballers: Alex Scott; Ian Wright; Gary Lineker. 27 Founded (or gave names to) famous libraries. 28 Recent US presidential dogs. 29 Octagonal buildings. 30 Acts to have three consecutive Christmas No 1s.Having people over for dinner presents a dilemma when Christmas is just around the corner. The season demands a bit of spectacle, but you’ve neither the time nor headspace to make anything too complicated. What you need, then, is something delicious and seasonal, and that looks a lot harder to make than it actually is. This galette is my solution: rich, nourishing and using two of my favourite seasonal ingredients, pumpkin and chestnuts. Pumpkin, chestnut, mascarpone and red onion jam galette This is the time to use the pale, mint green crown prince and deep green delica squash varieties. Prep 15 min Chill 15 min Cook 40 min Serves 4 For the pastry 150g plain flour 100g dark rye flour ½ tsp table salt 125g cold unsalted butter, cut into cubes 2 large eggs, beaten For the pumpkin puree 250g pumpkin flesh, chopped into roughly 2cm chunks 100g mascarpone 100g Greek yoghurt ¾ tsp table salt 1 bunch sage, picked and finely chopped For the topping 500g pumpkin flesh, chopped into roughly 2cm chunks 150g mascarpone 100g roasted and peeled chestnuts – I like Merchant Gourmet’s vac-packed ones 3-4 tbsp red onion jam To make the pastry, blitz the flours, salt and butter in a food processor until the mix resembles breadcrumbs, then pour in the eggs and work until the mixture just comes together (you may not need all the egg). Briefly knead the dough, then wrap and chill in the fridge for 15 minutes. Tip the 250g pumpkin for the puree into the same food processor (no need to wash it out), add the 100g mascarpone, the yoghurt, salt and sage, and blitz to a puree. Once the dough has chilled, lay out a rectangle of greaseproof paper big enough to line a large baking sheet or tray and dust with flour. Roll the dough into a circle around 35cm wide and about 3mm thick. Don’t worry if the circle is a bit bigger or irregular – you can trim it later. Spread the puree mix in a 30cm circle in the middle of the pastry, then scatter over the remaining 500g cubed pumpkin. Fold the edges of the pastry over the filling, then slide the paper on to the baking sheet. Bake at 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6 for 30 minutes, then remove, spoon over the remaining mascarpone, scatter on the chestnuts and bake for 10 minutes more, until the pastry is golden and the cheese melted. Scatter over dollops of the red onion jam and serve hot. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoThe annual telethon for the Guardian and Observer’s charity appeal has been cancelled due to the rise in Omicron cases and renewed advice from the government to work from home. The 2021 charity appeal is focused on the fight for climate justice, supporting four charities that fight to protect the rights and livelihoods of communities hit by extreme weather events caused by the climate emergency. The yearly phone-in, in which readers call in to speak to Guardian and Observer journalists as they make their donations, is one of the high points of the fundraising effort. It traditionally takes place in the Guardian offices, with payment details having to be taken on site for regulatory reasons. This year, readers can still help to make a difference for those whose lives have been severely disrupted by the climate crisis by donating today via the charity appeal website. Since 2015, Guardian and Observer readers have raised just under £10m through the annual appeals. Launching the 2021 appeal, Katharine Viner, editor-in-chief of the Guardian, wrote: “We see the appeal as a statement of intent, a sign of our commitment to a fairer society; a show of solidarity with the victims of climate injustice; and an ovation for those who fight that injustice.” Donations can be made online by credit card, debit card or PayPal, or by phone on 0151 284 1126. We are unable to accept cheques.Countries around the world pushed to accelerate booster vaccination programmes to contain the spread of the Omicron variant as daily Covid case numbers in Australia and New York hit records. French prime minister Jean Castex on Friday likened the spread of the Omicron variant in Europe to “lightning”, adding it would be the dominant strain in France from the start of 2022, according to AFP. Much remains unknown about Omicron, but authorities are concerned it may be more transmissible than the Delta variant, which has already put pressure on hospitals worldwide. Castex said the “fifth wave is here and it is here in full force” as he announced new restrictions. In an effort to stem the rising infections, he said France would also cut the time people become eligible for booster jabs down to four months after their second vaccination, from five months previously. Calls for people to have booster shots intensified in other countries – including the UK, US and Australia – as Covid infections spiked. Half of adults in the UK have now had a Covid-19 booster dose, Boris Johnson has said, after the programme was accelerated this week in the face of Omicron. A total of 26.3 million people aged 18 and over have received a vaccine top-up. Despite the ramp up, the UK is facing rising concern that hospitalisations from Covid may pose major problems for the NHS in the winter. The UK reported record Covid cases for a third day in a row on Friday, with 93,045 new cases, up 39% on the week. A further 900 people were hospitalised with the virus and 111 people died. The UK Health Security Agency confirmed another 3,201 Omicron cases, bringing the UK total to 14,909. Other countries also saw Covid cases climb to record levels. In the US, New York on Friday recorded 21,000 new Covid cases, the highest single-day total for new cases since testing became widely available. “This is changing so quickly. The numbers are going up exponentially by day,” Governor Kathy Hochul said on CNN. US officials intensified calls Friday for unvaccinated Americans to get inoculated, while an appeals court moved to allow president Joe Biden’s Covid-19 vaccine mandate for larger private employers. The decision reverses a previous ruling but Republican officials said they will appeal measure to supreme court. Australia also battled surging Covid infections. The country reported record high new Covid cases on Saturday for a third day, with outbreaks growing in the two most populous states. New South Wales, the country’s most populous state, recorded its highest ever daily Covid case tally on Saturday as Omicron and Christmas gatherings caused infection numbers to jump. Local health officials are considering shortening the Covid vaccine booster interval to four months, amid concern about Omicron. Scientists are racing to discover more about the new variant, specifically how transmissible it is and whether it causes severe disease. In a preliminary study, researchers led by Prof Neil Ferguson at Imperial College London found that vaccines are substantially less effective against Omicron than Delta and saw no evidence that Omicron is intrinsically milder than Delta. At the same time, Pfizer, one of the chief vaccine makers, on Friday predicted the pandemic would last until 2024 and said a lower-dose version of its vaccine for children ages 2 to 4 generated a weaker-than-expected immune response, which could delay authorisation. With Reuters, The Associated Press and Agence France-PresseDostoevsky, it must be said, was no saint. He was famously cantankerous; he had at least one affair during his unhappy first marriage; he was also ruinously addicted to roulette. But he had a brilliant mind, at ease with contradiction, and was determined to use literature to pursue the moral consequences of the ideas that defined his era. To do so, Dostoevsky took inspiration from the real life story of Pierre-François Lacenaire, a charismatic gentleman murderer whose trial had been the talk of Parisian society in the 1830s, fashioning the bones of his life into one of literature’s most compelling sinners: Raskolnikov, the protagonist of Crime and Punishment, a handsome, clever and often kind university student who nonetheless murders two defenceless old women with an axe. The novel set Russian society ablaze on publication, with reviewers recognising it as a work of “unrivalled importance” written “with a truthfulness that shakes the soul”. (It was also prophetic: in late January 1866, just when the first chapters were being readied for publication, a law student named Danilov committed an almost identical crime.) But Crime and Punishment was no ordinary whodunnit. Instead, the book has been called a “whydunnit”, since the reader witnesses Raskolnikov’s crime in vivid detail almost immediately after the novel is under way. Throughout the story, there is a fatalistic sense that Raskolnikov cannot resist his guilt; if he is not caught, he will confess. The real question is: why? Even the murderer sometimes seems at a loss to explain his actions, and we sense that the final answer will expose the moral workings of his whole generation, who have fallen into the trap of utilitarianism, determined to found peaceful utopias by violent means. For modern readers, of course, a third question hovers behind the novel: how did Dostoevsky create a work of such ferocious conviction, whose impact was so immediate and marked? How could this man, who had fallen foul of the authorities but never for any violent crime, have published a novel that asks us to spend so much time inside the mind of a murderer? And can we ever account for works of genius, that so often appear to have sprung into the world fully formed? These are the central preoccupations of marvellous “howdunnit” The Sinner and the Saint by Kevin Birmingham, which intertwines the story of Raskolnikov’s conception with the life of his real life double, Lacenaire. It is the second book by Birmingham, whose 2014 cultural history of Ulysses was a New York Times bestseller and won the PEN New England and Truman Capote literary awards. We first meet Dostoevsky starving in Wiesbaden, having gambled away all his money, writing frantic begging letters to friends, acquaintances and ex-lovers to pay off a hotel bill. His wife and older brother had recently died within months of each other, leaving Dostoevsky with crippling debts from the literary journal the brothers had started together. What was meant to be a relaxing writing trip had now turned into a harrowing attempt to avoid arrest. To distract himself from starvation he scribbled frantically in his notebook, hoping to write his way out of debt. Remarkably, this wasn’t the absolute nadir of his life. Fifteen years earlier, at the age of 28, he had been subjected to the trauma of a mock execution before being sent to Siberia, a weeks-long journey in cold so severe that it could make people’s eyes congeal and encase their mouth and nose in ice. His crime had been to fall in with a group of free-thinking writers, some of whom were unwise enough to criticise the tsar, others of whom were even plotting revolution. He spent almost a decade in exile before returning to St Petersburg determined to stage his literary comeback. Dostoevsky first read about Lacenaire in late 1860 while hunting for material for Vremya, the aforementioned journal. The 32-page account of Lacenaire’s trial he stumbled upon came accompanied by evocative engravings: the murderer well dressed in his top hat, cravat and high collar; someone about to swing an axe; the incongruous detail that Lacenaire had received a good education and wrote poetry. The author of the account speculated that Lacenaire had succumbed to the “ferocious materialism” and “egoism” of the day (referring to the radically amoral doctrine of German writer Max Stirner, whose ideas also inspired Nikolai Chernyshevsky, the hero of the Russian radicals). In his editorial note on the Russian translation he commissioned, Dostoevsky wrote that accounts of criminal trials like this are “more exciting than all possible novels because they light up the dark sides of the human soul that art does not like to approach”. In focusing on Crime and Punishment, The Sinner and the Saint necessarily misses revealing insights from elsewhere in Dostoevsky’s copious work. For instance, one of the purest expressions of egoism is Prince Valkovsky of The Insulted and Injured (“All is for me, and the whole world is created for me … And the more virtuous an act is, the more egoism there is in it. Love yourself – that’s the only rule that I recognise”.) Equally, because the narrative concludes with Dostoevsky’s marriage to his second wife, Anna, we miss the final 13 years. The couple will be exiled by debt and gambling in Europe, have four children and lose two of them, and Dostoevsky will develop his themes further in his three other acknowledged masterpieces, The Idiot, Demons and The Brothers Karamazov. But that is outside the scope of Birmingham’s study, and it would be hard to fault the book on its own terms. Meticulously piecing together the debates that fired Dostoevsky’s imagination, The Sinner and the Saint is filled with arresting details that bring the turbulence of the 1860s to life, such as the government officials, fearful of the youth, who “forced nihilist women to sign pledges that they would grow their hair long and wear crinolines”, or the radical writer, Pisarev, who enjoyed the enforced contemplation of solitary confinement so much he turned up to interrogations looking “as though he had somehow just arrived from a ball”. Birmingham traces the evolution of Crime and Punishment through Dostoevsky’s notebooks, offering a thrilling glimpse of the creative faculties at work as he tweaks dialogue, defers the resolution of Raskolnikov’s motivations, and adds in unexpected twists. As we approach the end of The Sinner and the Saint, and Raskolnikov begins to live and breathe in all his complexity, Lacenaire begins to seem less and less interesting by comparison, a strangely two-dimensional narcissist who revels in the knowledge that his public was “captivated by my latest capers” and wants to wear his blue frock coat to the guillotine. But it would be a mistake to read the title as referring to Lacenaire the Sinner, and Dostoevsky the Saint. Rather, each of us has the capacity for goodness and for cruelty. It is this fundamental insight by which Dostoevsky elevates the story of Lacenaire the unrepentant murderer into Raskolnikov the divided heart, who “might murder not because he was so evil but because he … wants to do good”, and whose actions turn out to be a mystery even to himself. Published 200 years after Dostoevsky was born, The Sinner and the Saint is not just a fitting tribute to one of the great works of world literature, but a dazzling literary detective story in its own right. • Alex Christofi is the author of Dostoevsky in Love: An Intimate Life, published by Bloomsbury. The Sinner and the Saint by Kevin Birmingham is published by Penguin (£25). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Alejandro Agag laughs in his smooth and charming way when I read out a quote which suggests that, as the founder and chairman of Formula E and the driving force behind Extreme E, the new environmentally conscious motor sport venture, he is closer in spirit to Alan Sugar than Greta Thunberg. “I appreciate the important message that activists like Greta Thunberg convey and it makes our life easier because they raise awareness,” Agag says. “But we are a different kind of environmentalist. They are the ones who say that change is needed. We are the ones who make change happen in the real world. You cannot make it in the idealised world.” I will soon ask Agag why his many laudable ambitions are linked to sportswashing in Saudi Arabia, but it seems appropriate to focus initially on Extreme E as it reaches the climax of its inaugural season in Dorset this weekend. Teams created by Lewis Hamilton and Nico Rosberg are in a battle to win the championship in a field which includes an outfit run by a third former Formula One world champion in Jenson Button. “It was not difficult to attract them,” Agag says of Hamilton, Rosberg and Button. “When we showed them the project all three liked it a lot. As we combine motorsport and climate action, it was attractive for them. They also liked our pragmatic approach. We are not activists. We are pragmatic people worried about the environment.” Agag has the charisma to draw significant figures into a form of motor sport which, he says, “is unique because Extreme E is a race which leaves no trace”. Apart from aiming to showcase Extreme E in locations which have been hurt by the climate crisis, their electric cars make zero emissions. Without any crowds, as events are televised and audience engagement is online, the carbon footprint of each race is negligible. But setting up a new sport in the midst of a global pandemic has stretched the 51-year-old Spaniard. A former politician, who at the age of 25 was the personal assistant to the Spanish prime minister, Agag admits: “It’s been a bigger challenge than starting Formula E [in 2014]. I’m fighting every day to survive. It’s incredibly difficult because sponsors are more cautious and executing the race is so complicated. In some places we need a million tests, a million forms, a million regulations. “In Greenland we only got the permits to travel one day before and we already had millions and millions of euros of expenditure over there. We were begging to be allowed in. I didn’t want to go through that again. I said: ‘Let’s wait Covid out and find places where we are sure we can race.’ Most of my day is spent putting fires out.” This final race of the season was meant to be held in Patagonia, with the cars shipped rather than flown across the world, but Covid forced a switch to Dorset. Agag suggests that Extreme E will raise awareness of biodiversity loss in Dorset alongside the sporting drama of whether Hamilton’s team, X44, can catch Rosberg’s drivers. Extreme E is the first sporting entity to place the climate emergency at its heart. This noble mission is deepened by the fact that every team features male and female drivers. So Jamie Chadwick, the 23-year-old British driver who recently won her second W Series, races against men of the calibre of Sébastien Loeb, the nine-times world rally champion who is part of Hamilton’s team. All this makes it even more disappointing that, in April, Agag staged the first Extreme E race in Saudi Arabia. The next races were held in Senegal and Greenland but the credibility of his entire venture was tarnished by a decision to gloss over Saudi’s human rights record in favour of huge financial benefits. What message did he offer female drivers such as Chadwick, and women in general, by accepting Saudi’s invitation? “I’m a big supporter of Saudi, of the current Saudi change, and I always say nobody’s perfect,” Agag says. “But in Saudi they’re making big changes in favour of women. If you ask Saudi women how they feel about the changes happening in their country they are absolutely enthusiastic. The situation is not as we would like it in Europe but it’s definitely a huge change. Look, for example, at the fact women can drive now.” I remind Agag of how Amnesty International highlighted the case of Loujain al-Hathloul who fought for gender equality and women’s right to drive in Saudi. In May 2018 she was detained without charge and Hathloul has since spoken of the torture and sexual abuse she suffered. Last December she was sentenced to five years in prison. Hathloul has now been released, but she remains under a five-year travel ban, while other female activists are still detained. Amnesty reports that 10 of them have made allegations of torture. “I agree with Amnesty and they make the same point about Guantánamo,” Agag says. “So do I not travel to the United States anymore? If we mix sport and politics, we will have very few places where we can race. Of course it’s very difficult to keep them separate but positive change is happening in Saudi. Is it perfect? No. I accept all your arguments. I only make my additional argument – we need to change [Saudi]. And it is changing.” Extreme E emphasises the importance of education and speaking out against the climate crisis. Yet, in Saudi, Agag and his colleagues were silent about the abuse of human rights. “But the first time that male and female Saudis were able to mix together without being with their families and the first time male and female Saudis were allowed to dance in public was at the first Formula E event with concerts by Black Eyed Peas, Enrique Iglesias and David Guetta,” he counters. “Young people in Saudi were coming to me with tears in their eyes thanking me for helping the country change.” How much did Saudi Arabia pay Extreme E to host their event? “You will understand I don’t go into those details. We are not a charity.” What did Agag feel when, before the Jeddah Grand Prix, Lewis Hamilton stressed he was uncomfortable being in Saudi? “Lewis has a very clear position on homosexuality rights. It’s perfectly right to express his views.” There are also public beheadings in Saudi – where feminism and homosexuality are regarded as “extreme” and unacceptable. Does Agag have no misgivings in accepting money from Saudi? “It wasn’t even financial. If I didn’t believe the current regime is changing positively, probably we would not go to Saudi. For me, those young Saudis saying: ‘We never in our life thought we could dance in the streets in Saudi’ makes it worthwhile. If we isolate them, we’re not going to help them. “Go to Saudi and then we have the discussion again. I invite you to the race [next month] with Formula E. Go talk to young Saudis in the streets … when I had my speech in Saudi I had 5,000 females applauding me. I’m not apologising. I am doing exactly what I want to do, which is to help change in Saudi.” Saudi Arabia is the world’s biggest producer of fossil fuels but Agag reiterates his “pragmatic approach to environmentalism. We need an organised transition out of the fossil world and this needs lots of money. Who has the money? The big corporations. BP, Shell, Aramco. The Saudis. We need a clear decision to go towards that transition – and we need to include everybody. That means the oil companies and the oil-polluting states as long as they commit to the change.” Agag admits to being “puzzled” by Mercedes’s decision to leave Formula E at the end of next year in a strategy which follows the withdrawal of Audi and BMW. Mercedes remain committed to Formula One but they will cut ties with Formula E and focus their resources on developing their electric car for mass production. “On the other hand,” he says, “we have great brands coming in that we will announce soon in Formula E. We still have Porsche and Jaguar and Nissan and other big manufacturers on board. I don’t need to put out any fires in Formula E because it’s very strong.” Agag has ambitious plans to forge a bond with F1 which he knows is “in a fantastic position” after the riveting season-long battle between Hamilton and Max Verstappen. “I’m the only one to say this so far but, for me, the future is some kind of convergence with Formula One and Formula E. We would still have separate championships but maybe we do some races together – maybe Monaco, Abu Dhabi, Miami? Maybe Saturday Formula E, Sunday Formula One? Why not?” Has be broached the possibility with F1? “We discuss it all the time.” Perhaps F1 feels it does not need Formula E? “There are different opinions within Formula One. Let’s leave it at that.” That wily politician’s answer chimes with Agag’s personal life. Having married the daughter of his old boss, the former Spanish prime minister José María Aznar, Agag had Silvio Berlusconi and Tony Blair as witnesses at his wedding. He also once part-owned QPR in a consortium which included his old pal Bernie Ecclestone. Agag laughs when I say his friends, and the Saudis, all need some of his positive spin. “I’m also friends with lots of people who have a very good image.” Extreme E and Formula E were the only sporting bodies at Cop26. But in terms of Extreme E’s current position, Agag agrees that “we still have lots of work to do. Extreme E is still in the baby phase. We had some good results and when people see it they like it a lot, but still they don’t know when it’s on. Extreme E has huge potential and the purpose is even bigger. Christiana Figueres is the mother of the Paris climate agreement and she came with us to Greenland. If she believes in Extreme E then everyone should believe in us.” We almost end on that positive note but, just after we say goodbye, Agag shouts one last invitation: “Come to Saudi with me, huh?”My Christmas has (sort of) come early this year. As Omicron sweeps the UK, my annual festive warmup routine – cramming on to a train, dragging a heavy suitcase and clutching an overpriced sandwich that was chosen in a cold sweat at King’s Cross station – was brought forward by an entire week. After getting my booster and testing negative, I decided to travel early to give myself the best chance of seeing relatives safely come Christmas Day. I’m fortunate to be able to work remotely in the meantime – in fact, I’m writing this while on my train journey, listening to chief medical officer Chris Whitty at Wednesday’s Downing Street briefing say, “there are lots of things we don’t know, but all the things we do know are bad”. With my train speeding homeward, it once again feels as if the UK is hurtling towards disaster. I wonder if Christmas will feel normal, or at least non-apocalyptic, ever again? Before the pandemic, I’d have rolled my eyes at the idea of longing for Christmas-as-usual. As an adult I had become gradually more Scrooge-like. When you no longer view Christmas through childhood eyes, you realise just how much work, money and time goes into making it special. Sometimes it just felt so wasteful: buying people gifts they might not like and certainly don’t need. Apparently more than 2m kg of cheese is thrown away in the UK every year, which feels almost criminal. Then Christmas 2020 happened. Like many people, I had my suitcase waiting by the door when everything changed because of the tier 4 Covid restrictions. The next day, I bought a tree and resolved to make the best of things. I’d spend Christmas as I’d spent the rest of the year: sat inside my flat, 400 miles from my family. Lockdown Christmas was a mixed bag. On the plus side, I felt rested by the end. But I missed my mum’s decorations and the almost-annual tradition of her suggesting we order a curry instead of making a big Christmas dinner, then changing her mind at the last minute. I even missed the things I thought I disliked: navigating family politics and the exhausting pressure to see as many people as possible. It turns out that you can splash out on food, eat those red Lindor chocolates for breakfast and drink prosecco until you’re fending off acid reflux, but Christmas isn’t the same without the feeling that you’re in cahoots with people you haven’t seen in a while. Our festive rituals distract from the routine of “normal” life and close the distance – physical, cultural, generational – that usually separates us. The pandemic has shifted our mindset time and time again. People who hated going to the gym were queueing to get back in there when they reopened this summer. Self-described “introverts” started craving social interaction. Some people even began to miss working in an office. So with Christmas playing “treat them mean, keep them keen” in 2020, and “hard to get” this year, I find myself obsessed with it. Now, I honestly can’t remember a Christmas when I’ve felt more festive. I put my tree up in November and I’m not even slightly irritated by the ads that are monopolising my TV screen. Some plans may have to change, but I’m still holding out hope of experiencing Christmas in all its glory: do any straight people want a debate about Norway’s newly gay Santa? Or perhaps that lyric from Fairytale of New York? (Actually, I draw the line there). After a year of such upheaval, I’m not going to take Christmas for granted. Yes, it can be claustrophobic, tiring and sprinkled with festive familial tension. And yes, it can sometimes feel like work. But ever since it became normal to worry that Christmas could be cancelled, I can see that there is so much hope in the work that goes into making it special. I want to appreciate that this year. Louis Staples writes about the internet, culture and societyIn Britain it’s alcohol, in Canada it’s maple syrup, while in Australia it’s a crucial additive for diesel trucks, and in New Zealand it’s brown sugar. These are just some of the many shortages affecting consumers and businesses around the world as industry experts warn that the supply chain crisis prompted by the coronavirus pandemic could last for many more months and even up to two years. Although there are signs that some bottlenecks are easing, the onset of the Omicron Covid variant could lead to new shutdowns, sending another disruptive spasm through the global system. The gravest appears to be an outbreak of Covid this week in the Chinese manufacturing hub of Zhejiang, which is home to the world’s largest cargo port, Ningbo-Zhoushan. Tens of thousands are in quarantine under China’s strict zero-Covid policy and some local authorities have urged workers not to travel home “unnecessarily” for lunar new year festival in February. “Further supply chain disruption is a significant possibility,” economic analysts at Capital Economics said in a note. Industry experts and economists believe the problems could persist as the finely calibrated network of world trade, already weakened by months of shipping backlogs, labour shortages and geopolitical tensions, remains “discombobulated”. Maersk, one of the big three shipping companies, said the worst delays were still on the US west coast where ships were waiting four weeks to unload due to the lack of workers on land. This creates a chaotic “ripple effect” around the world with ships locked into tight deadlines and a glut of containers in some ports in the US and Europe, but not enough in ports throughout Asia. “With winter, year-end holidays in North America and Europe, Chinese new year in Asia, the already stretched supply chain will get even further stretched as workers, truckers and terminals are off for holidays,” a Maersk spokesperson said. “Normally we can absorb these seasonal impacts fairly quickly, but when already stretched, it just becomes a multiplier,.” “We do not see major improvements as long as we have line of sight, which is into 2022 ... Very likely that it continues thereafter and for North America even longer.” In Felixstowe, the UK’s biggest container port, the dockside remains clogged with containers waiting to be emptied, meaning that empty containers coming back on trucks from inland warehouses have to be diverted to other ports. Robert Keen, of the British International Freight Association, said driver shortages were being felt all over the world with port infrastructure not keeping pace with the container vessels. Covid was “an ongoing problem”, he said. Flavio Macau, an associate professor specialising in supply chains at Edith Cowan University in Western Australia, said that fine-tuning could take years and that the world economy was still suffering from a kind of “high blood pressure” as it lurched from one disruption to another. “Lockdowns are hopefully a thing of the past outside China, but there are still all kinds of restrictions in place to the movement of people, including workers with in-demand skills. “My view is that supply chains still have high blood pressure, consistently showing arrhythmia. It will take to mid-2024 to get back to “normal’.” As well as the possible shortages of Christmas drinks and sugar for festive treats, economies such as the UK and US are facing rising inflation across a range of goods from energy to apples as a torrent of demand puts pressure on insufficient supply. Shipping accounts for the movement of at least 90% of goods around the world and the cost of transporting things by sea has rocketed in the past year. For example, the Drewry world container index measuring the cost of moving a 40ft container is 170% higher than it was a year ago. The price on some particularly in-demand routes such as Shanghai to Rotterdam has increased by almost 200%; in the case of the Dutch port to New York, the cost has risen by 212%. Basic consumer staples are spiralling in price because of higher shipping costs and heightened demand from consumers stuck at home for months and unable to spend any money on treats such as holidays and nights out. Coffee prices have doubled over the past year, according to current data, as has the price of oats. Lumber, cotton, wheat and palm oil have all risen by more than 30%. Not surprisingly, inflation has touched decades-long highs in western economies such as the US, Britain and Germany, bringing calls for an end to the ultra-loose monetary policies pursued by central banks since 2008. Roy Cummins, who has worked in logistics for 30 years and until recently was chief executive of the Port of Brisbane in Australia, said there was some sense that things were improving but he estimated that constraints on the international shipping network were unlikely to be alleviated for the next two years. His point is illustrated by the bottleneck of giant containers that has built up off the west coast of the US. With so many ships unable to dock and unload, more than 80% of the 434,000 20ft containers exported out of the Port of Los Angeles in September went out empty. Shipping companies can make up to eight times more money taking goods from China to the US, so it made sense to get the containers back to Asia rather than wait for them to be filled. This has fulled huge imbalances throughout the system, he said: “The supply chains were discombobulated. Shipping capacity was quickly exhausted at the start of the pandemic because everyone planned for a big decline in demand but in fact there was a surge because people wanted to buy things. Then the supply side was hit hard with ports, warehouses and truck companies all short of workers. “But you can’t flick a switch and get new capacity back on. New ships are not ready until 2023. Shipping supply should normalise within a year but does the economy normalise?” Tiffany Compres, a partner at international law firm FisherBroyles based in Florida, said: “It will take time to get better, for companies to adjust, and for the legal framework to adapt. To add to the challenge, this is very much a political issue, and nations will need to cooperate to really get us to a new sustainable way of operating the supply chain. It seems to be a tall order in our polarized era.” Before the pandemic struck, the shipping industry had driven down the cost of transporting goods and had perfected the celebrated “just-in-time” system whereby commodities and spare parts were moved seamlessly around the globe and delivered exactly when and where they were needed. This reduced corporate costs dramatically, for example by reducing or completely eradicating the need for on-site warehousing. If the uncertainty continues and consumers carry on with online shopping splurges, Cummins says, “you will see ‘just-in-time’ becoming ‘just-in-case’ as companies build up inventories to guard against disruptions”. Dennis Unkovic, a US corporate lawyer, trade expert and author of Transforming the Global Supply Chain, says the Covid crisis had shown that the system was dependent on a just-in-time model designed to run perfectly, “but that’s not what’s happened”. The deterioration in relations between the US and China which led to trade tariffs and loss of trust was also having a bigger impact than hitherto recognised, he says, dislocating the mechanics of world trade that have been taken for granted for many years. Cyber-attacks and robotics have also made companies review their supply chains and source materials closer to home. “For anyone expecting the post-pandemic world to return to ‘normal’, forget it. Whatever was considered normal before the pandemic is not coming back. “Companies have to make the supply chain a priority,” he says. “If it breaks down we can’t say we didn’t see it coming.”Ricky Gervais’s assistant leads me past a huge, empty room to the top floor of an office above a shop on a swanky London high street. Gervais is sitting behind a desk at his computer in another huge, empty room, and looks as if he’s just squatted the place. There is nothing that suggests this is his office, except for the branded mugs sitting on his desk; one shows his face, the second says Tambury Gazette, the fictional newspaper where Gervais’s character, Tony, works in his hit Netflix series After Life. As soon as he sees me, he swings his legs off the floor and on to the desk. I expect him to say, “Right, shoot”, as his fabulous fictional creation David Brent might have done, but he reins himself in. It’s 20 years since Gervais made his name with The Office, and it’s often been difficult to know where Brent ends and Gervais begins. Gervais, who is wearing his customary black T-shirt, tracksuit bottoms and trainers, gestures to a bottle of water on my side of the desk. “That’s for you,” he says magnanimously. I ask how he has changed since making The Office. “People normally think wealth and fame change you, but I don’t think they have, because by the time you’re 40 you already know who you are. I don’t think they’d change a 40-year-old like a 20-year-old.” The Office has been remade in 11 different countries, netting him a fortune in the process. How much is he worth these days? “Oh come on! Fuckkkkkin hell,” he squeals in protest. He looks offended for a good second. “I’m sure there’s a news story that tells you. I’m doing all right. But I don’t want to be in print telling you how much I’ve got.” It’s classic Brent. Gervais is worth an estimated £105m. He is enjoying his greatest success since The Office and Extras, the TV comedy about background actors that featured real stars playing themselves in an unflattering light. As Gervais is quick to point out, After Life was the most watched British comedy in the world in the past decade, having been viewed by more than 85 million people. And, as he is equally quick to point out, the series in which he plays Tony, a grieving widower, has moved many viewers to tears. Go to his Twitter account, where he has 14.5 million followers, and you’ll find endless retweets praising it, and his many other projects: “Have just watched #AfterLife for the fourth time now and @rickygervais still makes me cry”, “#AfterLife is the best comedy series I ever watched.” When not posting about his shows on social media, Gervais tweets photographs of animals, and reminds us to be kind to each other. Kindness is his big thing these days. If he can make the world care a little more, he feels he’s done a decent day’s work. At the same time, he’s also come to be regarded as a scourge of “wokedom”. Last year he said: “There’s this new weird sort of fascism of people thinking they know what you can say and what you can’t.” In October, he told neuroscientist and writer Sam Harris: “I want to live long enough to see the younger generation not be woke enough for the next generation. It’s going to happen. Don’t they realise that, it’s like, they’re next.” It’s never been easy to pin down Gervais. Not least because he says that comments made in jest are too often taken literally. After reports suggesting that he believed The Office would be a victim of cancel culture today, he tweeted a clarification: “Someone said they might try to cancel it one day, and I said, ‘Good, let them cancel it. I’ve been paid!’ Clearly a joke.” This tension between the kindly and the cantankerous – which seems to be on full display today – is also at the heart of After Life. Tony is a lovable louse or an odious do-gooder depending on your perspective. Tony works for a local newspaper writing corny features and is inconsolable after losing his wife, Lisa, to cancer. At some point in every episode we see him watching old videos on his computer of the wonderful times they had together – playing practical jokes on each other, watching movies, drinking, playing with their dog, walking, laughing. They didn’t need other people or children because they completed each other. And when she died, he was left with nothing but the dog, Brandy, for comfort. He contemplates suicide because life is so meaningless. But instead he decides to tell everybody what he really thinks of them, and calls it his superpower. If it all goes wrong in the end, he tells himself, he can still kill himself. It is a MacGuffin that enables him to indulge a familiar Gervaisian trope – undiluted rudeness. His superpower often involves telling people they are fat. In the first episode, he calls a stranger a “fat, hairy, nosy cocksucker”, a child a “tubby little ginger cunt”, and his colleague “fat boy”. Meanwhile, in a video recorded before her death, Lisa (no stranger to truth-telling herself) calls Tony a “fat, lazy, self-pitying lump” and a “fat twat”. Now Gervais is about to launch the third series of After Life – a first for him because he has never made more than two series of any of his TV sitcoms. Tony has evolved, and has discovered the limits of nihilistic nastiness. Kindness is beginning to get the better of him. The supporting characters in After Life constantly tell Tony how kind and funny he is. He comes to realise that caring, rather than not caring, is a superpower. After Life is a potty-mouthed version of Frank Capra’s It’s A Wonderful Life. Like George Bailey, Tony is rescued from despair when he is made aware of how much better he has made the world for others. Whereas The Office was universally lauded, After Life has received mixed notices – detractors have said it is heavily signposted and saccharine, while fans have marvelled at the mix of emotion and humour. I ask Gervais how it came about. “With most things I can remember how I thought of that joke and how it developed,” he says. Already I’m confused – I had assumed that it started with the idea of loss and grief. “So I was on tour in March 2017 with my show Humanity, and I’ve still got that work ethic. I thought, I’m staying in castles and being chauffeur-driven, and I feel guilty about only working an hour a day. So I thought I should write something new.” Gervais is mid-monologue. He doesn’t really allow for interruptions. He just talks till he runs out of steam, then asks what the question was. “Humanity was vaguely about free speech and the world changing. And I thought, ‘Why do we worry about what people say?’ Well, we worry about the consequences. But why do we worry about the consequences? Well, because you want to be popular and you don’t want to hurt people’s feelings. Well, what if you didn’t care, what if you had nothing to lose? I went, but why would you do that? Well, if you were going to die or nearly died. If you were going to kill yourself, and you didn’t. What could have happened to make you feel that bad? Because you lose the love of your life. Why didn’t you kill yourself? Because the dog was hungry.” And there you have it: the genesis of After Life. Gervais comes to a stop, awed by his train of thought. “That all happened in two minutes. And then the rest is … ” He trails off, not wanting to resort to cliche. *** Gervais, 60, was born in Reading to working-class parents – a father who laboured on building sites, and a mother who did odd jobs while bringing him and his three siblings up. When he asked why there was such a gap between him and the other children (he is 17 years younger than the oldest) his mother told him he was a mistake. It made him laugh. She often made him laugh. One day, when he was up earlier than usual, she asked if it was because he’d shat the bed. Things came too easily to him, he says, so he didn’t give his all – not at school, or work, or in his early days as a performer. “I was proud of passing exams without trying hard. Now, I look back and think, ‘Well you’re an idiot; imagine if you’d tried harder.’” He started a course in biology at university, then swapped to philosophy because it was a doss – seven hours a week instead of 40. “I didn’t really study for three years. I feel a bit guilty about that, too.” He was lazy, he says. He watched comics on TV, told himself he was funnier than they were, but never did anything about it. The young Gervais was a pretty boy who modelled himself on David Bowie and David Sylvian. In 1982, he formed Seona Dancing, a new-wave duo, with his best friend, Bill Macrae, and they got themselves a record deal in his final year at University College London. They released two singles on London records that flopped in the UK. Listen to More to Lose and Bitter Heart today and they could pass for 80s synthpop classics. Again, Gervais says he didn’t give it his best, and the band were dropped. “You think, ‘Fucking hell, that was it.’” He briefly managed Suede before they hit the big time, then settled for office life, working his way up to events manager at the University of London Union. He made extensive notes about the daft conversations, annoying habits, petty jealousies, rivalries, egos and office romances. In his next job, at the London radio station Xfm – where he was “head of speech” – he employed Stephen Merchant, 13 years his junior, as his assistant. Together, this odd couple (Gervais is a squat 5ft 8in, Merchant a lanky 6ft 7in) went on to create The Office with the help of the notes Gervais made in the previous job. It is such a beautifully structured, spare piece of writing, I say. Did Merchant help discipline you as a writer? “No, The Office was the first thing I’d ever tried my hardest at, and that was because I thought, ‘What a privilege to have a second bite of the cherry.’” He pauses. “That’s a big lesson I’ve learned. Working harder at something makes you better at it.” Gervais is a master of stating the obvious as if it’s a pearl of wisdom. I ask if his quest for kindness marks a change. “Kindness, compassion has definitely been in my work of the last 10 years.” Then again, he says, look back to The Office, and at heart David Brent wanted to do well by people and be loved. “My stuff has always been quite existential – are we wasting our life? – through to Derek, which is about people at the end of their life, through to After Life, which is about people losing their life.” In Derek, a mockumentary about life in a care home, Gervais plays the eponymous hero as a gurning simpleton whom everybody loves. Although he denied that Derek was supposed to have disabilities, the sitcom caused controversy. Opinion was divided among those who found it offensive over whether Gervais was mocking or sentimentalising people with special needs. The biggest change since The Office, he says, is the rise of social media. “Nowadays you hear everyone’s opinions. If you go on Twitter for a day, you think there is a war going on, then you go outside for a walk and nothing’s changed. Twenty years ago, if you saw something on TV you didn’t like, you’d pick up a pen and go: ‘Dear BBC, I’m absolutely horrified … ’ Nah, fuck it.” He imitates somebody picking up a pen, then putting it down because it’s too much effort. “Now you fire off a tweet and it makes the news. Twitter is like road rage.” It has to be said that he can rage with the worst of them. In August, he wrote about a group of people who were torturing and killing monkeys on camera: “I’m so fucking angry I don’t know what to do. I could honestly kill the dirty, savage cunts that do this.” In the same month, he tweeted in response to critics of Operation Ark, Pen Farthing’s mission to rescue animals from Afghanistan and bring them to the UK: “Dear stupid cunts saying we shouldn’t put animals before people … ” Social media, he suggests, is the great equaliser. I assume he means that is a good thing, but no: “Twitter enables narcissism because it allows people to put in print and to publish alongside scientists and politicians their deeply held opinion. Like, I do a thing about save the rhino, and someone always goes: ‘What about the kids in Syria?’ And I want to go back: ‘What are you doing about the kids in Syria?’” If Twitter infuriates him so much, why doesn’t he get off it? “Marketing,” he says. It’s a brilliant tool for self-promotion. And, he adds, it’s a great resource for humour. “As an observational comedian you usually have to go around prisons and asylums to meet the people I talk about, but now I can find out the score from my Hampstead mansion. Hehehehehehh!” He opens his mouth, displays the famous fangs, and laughs like a hyena. So he actively seeks out the craziness? “Yeah, I go fishing. I sometimes put out a tweet that I know is going to get me opinions. For example, I did a tweet asking what’s the one thing you should never make a joke about. I got a thousand replies, and every one was different and funny.” What amused him, he says, is that each response was as pious as it was wrongheaded. Gervais’s stance on appropriate subjects for a joke is simple – anything goes. In a democracy, he says, you have a right to offend and be offended, but you don’t have the right to outlaw topics. The trouble is, he says, some people are not bright enough to get his jokes; they confuse the subject with the target. So, for example, when he said Caitlyn Jenner had not done much for women drivers (Jenner had been involved in an accident that resulted in a fatality), he wasn’t ridiculing trans women, he was playing on the stereotype of bad women drivers, he explains. Today, Gervais is a polarising figure. On social media, half the posters deify him as a champion of free speech standing up to the tyrannies of wokedom, while the other half accuse him of picking on the disadvantaged and punching down. Both interpretations are wrong, he says. “I’m nobody’s champion. Get a better champion is what I’d say to anybody who thinks I’m their champion.” And if he is not dividing people, he protests, he is not doing his job properly. Gervais is certainly happy to attack the powerful. He has hosted the Golden Globes five times and never failed to offend Hollywood royalty. In 2020, he accused the stars of enabling Harvey Weinstein by “acting like they don’t see a thing”, and being so venal that if Isis started a streaming channel, they would call their agent. His act is uncomfortable, charmless, crude and brave. As the camera pans round the room, you can see the A-listers wincing. What he doesn’t understand is the criticism he gets for giving the stars a tough time. “Do I pander to the 200 billionaires in the room or the 200 million people at home sitting in their pants drinking beer who aren’t winning awards, who aren’t billionaires? It’s a no-brainer for a comedian. I’m a jester. I play to the other peasants in the mud. I wasn’t going in terrible. Think of the things I could have said.” He starts to give it the full Joe Pesci as he works himself into a rage. “Think of the fucking terrible things I could have joked about. It’s off the charts – It’s. Off. The. Charts – the terrible things I could say.” A second later, he’s calmly telling me of the fans he does have among the glitterati. “Robert De Niro was just crying with laughter when I made a joke about Hugh Hefner and his young bride. He called me after a week and said: ‘I wanna say you did a great job.’ ‘Oh man,’ I said, ‘I annoyed some people.’ He said: ‘Fuck ’em, they were jokes.’” Earlier this year, Ash Atalla, the producer of The Office, said that some of the jokes Gervais made about his disability left him feeling “a little bit uncomfortable”. At the British Comedy awards in 2001, Gervais said that Atalla, who contracted polio as a child, was the show’s “runner”, called him “my little wheelchair friend”, and said that he was “just the same as Stephen Hawking, but without all the clever stuff”. Gervais looks shocked when I mention it. “Well if he’d said to me at the time he was uncomfortable with it, I wouldn’t have done it. But he didn’t.” Atalla said that comedians who emerged in the 00s, such as Gervais, Jimmy Carr and Frankie Boyle would “see what you could get away with and then reverse-intellectualise it”. Gervais still does it today. He tells me how he starts his latest live show, SuperNature, with a lesson in irony. “I say, ‘That’s when I say something I don’t really mean for comic effect and you, as an audience, laugh at the wrong thing because you know what the right thing is.’ I challenge them to be offended and they never are of course, because they get it.” Actually, he says, if nobody is offended, he’s failed. “You have to provoke! It’s a good thing. Learning provokes, science provokes, opinion provokes. Offence provokes.” Is he often offended? “Course I am. I’m offended all the fucking time. Everything offends me.” What like? “Real things, obviously. Not jokes or words or opinions. The first thing that springs to mind is animal cruelty. But everything. Stupidity.” Is it true that he finds noise offensive? Absolutely, he says. He gives me an example. “I’m on a plane. There’s a guy there about my age, reading the paper. We’re about to take off, New York to London. First class, so I had nothing to moan about. But he was doing this.” Gervais yawns loudly, and makes a smacking sound with his lips. “I looked a couple of times to make sure there was nothing wrong with him, and he did it 10 times, and I went, ‘Sorry can you yawn without all the stuff after. And he went, ‘Oh sorry!’ And I thought, ‘Fuck me, I’ve got to sit here for another six hours.’ Hahahahahhaaaaa.” Again the gnashers flash, and he’s laughing hysterically. But he means it. Gervais prides himself on his intolerance. There’s the time he and his partner of 40 years, Jane Fallon, could hear their neighbours’ television through the wall. “We could hear what the programme was. It was really really loud.” He makes clear the objection was his, not Jane’s. “Again if it was a thunderstorm or herds of wildebeest or wolves, it wouldn’t bother me, but if somebody’s got the telly on a bit loud, it’s like they’re doing it on purpose. So I went round and knocked on the door, and this old lady answered and I said, ‘Oh sorry, your telly’s very loud.’ She said, ‘Oh sorry, I’m slightly deaf,’ and I said, ‘Oh sorry, don’t worry.’ As I went away, she said, ‘And I hate to wear my hearing aid.’” He looks as if he’s feeling the annoyance afresh after all these years. “I thought, ‘Oh why did you tell me that?’” I ask why he is so obsessed with fat people. He looks surprised, and says he’s not. Well, they are so often the target of Tony’s abuse in After Life, I say, asking if he is sensitive about weight because he’s been called fat? He says that couldn’t be less true. “I didn’t care about being fat when I was fat. And I still am a bit fat. Insults don’t mean anything to me. I think they’re funny. If someone genuinely tries to insult me, I laugh, because how can you insult me? I’m too happy. You can’t ruin my day by calling me something.” He says he and Jane could not be more content. They don’t have children, they have little to worry about, and they adore each other. After Life, which Gervais also directed, was partly inspired by thinking about how meaningless life would be without Jane. That’s so interesting, I say, because you don’t come across as a happy man. “I know. I know.” You seem curmudgeonly, I say. “People think I’m angry on Twitter, and I’m never angry.” He stops. Well, maybe occasionally he is. He tells me how he can’t abide people crunching on apples or crisps. “Ugh, apples,” he says. “Apples have got everything. Cos it’s the crunch, then the too much in the mouth, then the sucking it in … I need to go for another wee. It’s an age thing.” *** On his return, he looks at his watch, says he can’t believe the time, and he’s got to head off. “I guess it was naive of me to think we’d just talk about After Life, wasn’t it? Did we mention it at all?” His mood seems to have changed. Before he was grumpy funny. Now he’s just grumpy. I ask why he rarely gives interviews these days. “I don’t like them. They give me too much anxiety. I’m not in control. I don’t know what you’re going to write. And I only do it so someone who hasn’t heard about After Life will watch the show. If you didn’t write about After Life, this would be fucking pointless. It would only be bad.” He is talking with such venom. I give him a look. “No, no. I don’t mean you. Don’t take it personally, but I wouldn’t do it, I wouldn’t come to spill my heart out. I’ll read it with anxiety. What’s he said? What’s that come across like?’” What will you worry about most? “Well, misinformation.” I’m still sitting at the desk and he’s hovering over me. “Misrepresentation. You being unfair. If you read a thing, it’s 50% wrong. I mean trivial things. There might be the odd misquote, age wrong, where I was born, one of my brothers’ names. You start realising everything’s 50% wrong”. Years ago, getting a good review from a critic meant more to him than a show being commercially successful. Not any more. “I’ve totally changed my mind. Totally changed my mind. When you start off, you look at every critic, every review, everything matters. Every bad one hurts you. But now, there’s so much it doesn’t matter. There’s no one critic, no one paper – so the people are bigger.” And this is where social media – or at least his fanbase on social media – gets his approval. “That’s why I go direct to the people, because I only ever cared about criticism because I thought it could make my show better. I only cared about winning Baftas because I thought people might watch the show. It was never about: ‘Guess what Jane? The critics love me.’ It was always about: will more people watch the show, will I sell more tickets?” How does he think he is misrepresented by the media? “That I’m cruel and I don’t care what people think about me. It’s not true. I do care what people think about me.” If anything, you’re thin-skinned, aren’t you? “Well. I think it’s unjust. But then again, I don’t care enough to go and tell the world. In the early days, I just thought if someone slagged me off, ‘Where the fuck do they live?’” I remind him of the time Ian Hislop slammed his standup show Animals in 2003. After that, he finished each gig by calling Hislop an “ugly little pug-faced cunt”. Ah, Gervais says, but this was actually a clever joke rather than foul-mouthed retribution. “The joke was he said that I was childish and used playground insults, so then I do a childish joke. I even called him up to ask if he minded me saying that. And he said, ‘Do what you want, but I just want to say I’m a fan.’” I’m thinking about what Gervais said about me not taking his dislike of interviews personally. Actually, it’s hard to take anything he says personally because he doesn’t seem to do personal. There’s been something strange about our meeting, but I can’t quite place what. Only towards the end, when we’ve been talking for more than 90 minutes, does it strike me that he has not used my name once. Nor has he asked what it is. In fact he’s not asked me a single thing. Most interviewees engage on a basic level – where have you come from today, do you like your job, what do you think of this or that? Not Gervais, though. I don’t think I’ve ever met anybody less interested in other people. In After Life, Tony expresses his newfound kindness with dramatic gestures. Gervais doesn’t seem to realise kindness is also about little things – learning a name, showing an interest, making people feel they matter, too. Perhaps it’s all of a piece. Gervais’s later work has tended to deal more with types than fleshed-out humans – so people with learning disabilities like Derek are sweet-natured; people who have lost loved ones are broken; Hollywood A-listers are hypocrites. Despite the sympathetic treatment of his newspaper staff in After Life, I sense he files journalists under “Bastards who get 50% wrong”. I assure him I will mention After Life, and ask about the allegations involving its producer Charlie Hanson. In May, it was revealed that Hanson, a longtime Gervais collaborator, had been suspended by Netflix during filming of the third series after 11 women made historical allegations of sexual misconduct, including serious sexual assault, dating from 2008 to 2015 (during which time Hanson produced Derek and Life’s Too Short). Hanson has denied all the allegations. What impact has this had on Gervais and the show? “I got a call from Netflix saying there’s been allegations. They said: ‘We’d like to ask Charlie not to come in again.’ I went: ‘OK. Right.’ And that is literally the last I heard about it.” It must be devastating to hear these allegations about someone you’ve worked with so closely for 16 years? “Yeah, yeah. It’s horrifying. I literally tried not to think about it at all. I don’t think I should discuss it, because I don’t know what’s happening.” Has he spoken to Hanson about it? “No, no, not at all.” He seems to be counting on his fingers. “We’ve done four things over 20 years, and he’s done, I don’t know, 100 other shows, but obviously you’re worried about that, too.” Actually, Hanson has produced every Gervais sitcom apart from The Office, and two of his movies. We head out of the huge, empty office on to the streets of Hampstead. It’s not sunny, but he puts his Ray-Bans on – presumably as a disguise. Gervais looks more recognisable than ever. He stops in the street to continue demonstrating why a joke from his 2011 Golden Globes speech was unfairly criticised. “I said the Golden Globe for special effects goes to the people who airbrushed the Sex and the City poster. And I go: ‘Girls, we know how old you are, one of you was in an episode of Bonanza!’” He might have made the joke 10 years ago, but it still rankles that the cast confused the target with the subject. “Kim Cattrall said it was ageist. I said: ‘No it’s the opposite. I’m saying, what’s wrong with being 50?’ I hate that about Hollywood, where fucking George Clooney has to have a fucking 22-year-old girlfriend. Aaagh!” A middle-aged man passes in the street. “And a very good joke it was too, Ricky,” he says. Gervais smiles. For the first time all day, he looks happy. Gervais tells me he is crossing the road here, and before I know it he has disappeared into the crowd. • The final season of After Life will be available on Netflix from 14 JanuaryTwenty years ago, an area of ice thought to weigh almost 500bn tonnes dramatically broke off the Antarctic continent and shattered into thousands of icebergs into the Weddell Sea. The 1,255-sq-mile (3,250-sq-km) Larsen B ice shelf was known to be melting fast but no one had predicted that it would take just one month for the 200-metre-thick behemoth to completely disintegrate. Glaciologists were shocked as much by the speed as by the scale of the collapse. “This is staggering. It’s just broken apart. It fell over like a wall and has broken as if into hundreds of thousands of bricks”, said one. This week, ice scientists meeting in New Orleans warned that something even more alarming was brewing on the West Antarctic ice sheet – a vast basin of ice on the Antarctic peninsula. Years of research by teams of British and American researchers showed that great cracks and fissures had opened up both on top of and underneath the Thwaites glacier, one of the biggest in the world, and it was feared that parts of it, too, may fracture and collapse possibly within five years or less. Thwaites makes Larsen B look like an icicle. It is roughly 100 times larger, about the size of Britain, and contains enough water on its own to raise sea levels worldwide by more than half a metre. It contributes about 4% of annual global sea level rise and has been called the most important glacier in the world, even the “doomsday” glacier. Satellite studies show it is melting far faster than it did in the 1990s. Thwaites is worrisome, but there are many other great glaciers in Antarctica also retreating, thinning and melting as the Southern Ocean warms. Many are being held back because Thwaites acts like a cork, blocking their exit to the sea. Should Thwaites fall apart, scientists believe the others would speed up, leading to the collapse of the whole ice sheet and catastrophic global sea level rises of several metres. Whether and how quickly they may collapse are some of the most important questions of the age. Sea levels are rising fast: the annual rate of increase more than doubling from 1.4mm to 3.6mm between 2006 and 2015, and accelerating. A few millimetres a year does not sound much but the loss of even a small part of Thwaites would not just help to speed this up further but would likely increase the severity of storm surges. Should all West Antarctica’s glaciers ever collapse, there is no coastal city in the world that would not, over time, be swamped at ruinous cost to life and economies. The consensus of glaciologists used to be that it would take centuries of global heating before glaciers the size of Thwaites shattered and collapsed, but so rapid and unexpected has been the loss of sea ice at the opposite end of the earth in the Arctic, and so sudden was the loss of Larsen B that it is now considered possible it could happen rapidly in Antarctica, too. Ice loss in the Arctic barely affects sea levels because it mostly forms at sea. Antarctic ice, however, is mostly on land so any melting adds to sea levels. The tipping point for the Larsen B ice shelf came suddenly. How Thwaites and other glaciers respond to global heating is still not known but these big global physical processes are under way and can be addressed only by global action. Yet just one month after Cop26 ended in Glasgow, the warning that the 300-metre thick, 50-mile wide Thwaites glacier has started to crack up has been met with silence from governments preoccupied by Covid-19 and the return of normal politics. The danger is that the many actions pledged in November to address global heating will be shelved for another year, to become just one more risk in an increasingly dangerous world. Thwaites underlines that global heating and glaciers do not wait for politicians, and every year action to reduce climate emissions is delayed only accelerates global disaster.Iam generally done with my Christmas shopping by November, but always wait until this week to buy one last bottle of perfume for someone. It’s a tradition that allows me to soak up the department store buzz, enjoy a blast of Slade and peer at what others are buying. If you’re a panic fragrance shopper (don’t feel bad – a scented gift is no less wonderful for its unoriginality), I enthusiastically recommend these widely available gems. Let’s begin with bold, sexy scents for those who can stand up to them. This year, I’ve fallen hard for Tom Ford’s Noir de Noir (£142.40, 50ml), but with a caveat: please spare an hour to go for a pint while the on-counter spritz (a punchy, characteristically smutty Ford take on rose, truffle and vanilla) dries down to an incredibly soft, sensual robe of velvety black chocolate. It’s everything I avoid in a perfume and yet I’m involuntarily obsessed. More typically my poison is Cartier’s La Panthère (£74.40, 50ml), a greener, muskier offering that transitions appositely from office to party to bed. It’s extremely sexy on men and women, but it does have a classical, grown-up feel that wouldn’t feel quite right for a teenager. Beauty fans could hardly have missed Chanel’s centenary celebrations for No 5, the 1921 icon that remains outstanding in its beauty and elegance. If you have a No 5 devotee on your gift list, now’s the time to indulge, since the collector’s eau de parfum packaging will disappear in the new year. But if I may also throw a curveball: No 5 eau de toilette, at £73 for 50ml, is No 5’s least expensive incarnation and among my favourites. Sharper, with a little more attitude, it’s an overlooked masterpiece. I enjoy the challenge of buying fragrance for – and trying to convert –those who slightly fear it and in such cases, Clarins Eau Dynamisante is my gateway drug. This light, airy, citrussy but still distinctive and rather sexy skin scent smells so quintessentially French as to almost be comical. Gender neutral, it’s chic, unobtrusive and exceptional value (£44.20) for such a massive bottle (200ml!). Truly, it is never wrong. For something just as wearable but perhaps more seasonal, Roger &amp; Gallet’s Gingembre Rouge (£39.50 for 100ml, but seemingly always on offer somewhere) is a terrific buy. Warming ginger and pomegranates make it pleasingly festive, minus any time sensitivity – so it can be worn safely all year round, without jarring like a reindeer jumper at Wimbledon.The All Blacks’ visit to Washington DC in October only strengthened American hopes of staging a Rugby World Cup and the US will be announced as host for 2031 next May, USA Rugby chief executive Ross Young said – unless World Rugby decides to go “back to the drawing board” entirely. Young spoke to the Guardian following World Rugby’s announcement of England as preferred candidate to host the women’s event in 2025, the same status for Australia for the men in 2027 and “exclusive targeted dialogue” with the US regarding 2031 and a women’s event potentially two years earlier. World Rugby chief executive “Alan Gilpin has been quite clear here”, Young said. “Everyone else has been quite clear that we are in an exclusive period now. So we’ll either be awarded the World Cup in ’31 in May, or they’ll go back to the drawing board. They’re not going to announce anyone else.” The change in World Rugby policy towards partnering with unions to stage World Cups fits with US plans, Young said, because “we’ve said from the start of the process, we wouldn’t be able to get financial cash guarantees from government as previous host countries have. “The huge attraction of a World Cup coming here is rugby really starting to unlock, or using this 10-year pathway to unlock, the biggest media market in the world. Or unlock the potential for that media market. “… We talk a lot about major events in terms of the legacy, of what that does for the sport after the event. What we’ve talked about with World Rugby is working in partnership around development funding: how do we pull forward that legacy funding to happen before the event, which ultimately will make it more successful for everyone, financially and operationally. “If we sit and wait for real development dollars to come out of the tournament post-31, we will have lost a huge opportunity. Whereas if we can raise the profile, raise the value of the game, and the Eagles brand and World Rugby’s brand, before the tournament, it’s going to make for a better result for everyone.” Unfortunately, the All Blacks game at FedEx Field delivered a worrying result on the pitch. The men’s Eagles scored their first tries against New Zealand but were annihilated, 104-14. Young said the game did more good than bad. “Nobody likes getting beaten by the All Blacks but when we went into that game, you know the general intention was it was a bit more of a developmental All Black side. Unfortunately, because of Covid restrictions they were all stuck in Queensland [prior to the game] and so we got Richie Mo’unga coming back, we got Damian McKenzie coming back. They kicked the ball twice … when have we last seen an international game where one team only kicked twice? “To me it showed lots of positives about a big rugby brand. Obviously the World Cup is a huge brand too.” Young pointed to the game pulling in more than 40,000 fans despite Covid travel restrictions, which were then in place internationally. He also lamented the lost chance to pull in traveling fans for a game against Ireland in Las Vegas which was cancelled, and pushed back at suggestions USA Rugby lost out financially from hosting New Zealand. “Under normal circumstances, we would have got pretty much the same as the All Blacks out of that game, but it was all relying on on how many people came through the door. It wasn’t the case of us just putting the game on for a paltry fee.” Young also saluted close work with Washingtonians including Old Glory DC, of Major League Rugby, and city officials. “The thing that is painful but we have to admit,” he said, “is the fact that we haven’t got the depth on the field. We can’t be missing 20 players [as against the All Blacks], which means we have to concentrate more on pathways, we have to have more options of players available. “There’s a long way to go for us to be competitive and we need more meaningful games more often in windows where we have access to all of our international players because games outside of the window, if that’s all we’ve got between now and the next couple of World Cups, it’s not going to work.” The US men are not the only ones to suffer. In November, a women’s team without key players shipped 89 points to England. Asked if better fixtures will be possible, Young pointed to Japan. In the four years before a successful World Cup in 2019, he said, the Brave Blossoms played 12 games against top-tier opponents. The Eagles played two (and won one, against Scotland in 2018). If a US World Cup is confirmed, Young said, we can expect to see more of the US at strength against stronger teams. How strong US rugby can be is an evergreen question. Young spoke approvingly of MLR, whose board meeting he and Gilpin attended before the All Blacks game, but suggested the number of overseas players in the 13 teams – the Dallas Jackals enter next year – may not be ideal. “A lot of it comes back to pathways,” Young said, pointing to collegiate and club games struggling for cohesion and clarity. One anomaly even within the highly anomalous US club scene is the American Raptors, the new name for an effort to develop crossover athletes run out of Glendale, Colorado by interests once part of MLR, now feeding players to it. Young applauded the Raptors’ performance on the field, including a trip to South America, and off it. But he said: “What we have to ensure with all these things is that we remain joined up and they don’t almost get a life of their own. That they don’t end up being disparate, because we want to be joined-up and we want to have continuity. We don’t want to keep pulling in different directions.”Tottenham’s new found defensive stability under Antonio Conte receives its first real test. They have conceded one goal – against Leeds – in four Premier League games since Conte took control, collecting 10 points in the process. It will take some doing to continue that parsimonious run against a Liverpool side that has scored at least once in their past 32 games – a club record – with Real Madrid the last to prevent Mohamad Salah and company finding the net in April. Liverpool have also won their past eight but with Covid potentially ruling out key players on both sides the outcome could be anyone’s guess. Stephen Hollis Sunday 4.30pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Tottenham Hotspur Stadium Last season Tottenham 1 Liverpool 3 Referee Paul Tierney This season G12 Y46 R0 3.83 cards/game Odds H 4-1 A 4-7 D 7-2 TOTTENHAM Subs from Gollini, Austin, Doherty, Davies, Reguilón, Roden, Højbjerg, Skipp, Alli, Clarke, Gil, Scarlett, Lucas, Son Doubtful Reguilón (match fitness) Injured Romero (hamstring, Jan) Suspended None Discipline Y24 R1 Form LLDWWW Leading scorer Son 6 LIVERPOOL Subs from Kelleher, Pitaluga, N Williams, Gomez, Konaté, Tsimikas, Thiago, Jones, Milner, Morton, Keïta, Minamino, Firmino, Origi Doubtful Van Dijk, Fabinho, Jones (all Covid-19), Origi (knee) Injured Phillips (cheek, Jan), Adrián (calf, unknown), Elliott (ankle, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y21 R0 Form WWWWWW Leading scorer Salah 14Thomas Tuchel is growing frustrated at the wastefulness that has cost Chelsea ground in the title race so he will hope his side find their shooting boots as they go up against a Wolves defence that do not give away many chances. Wolves, who themselves have been often guilty of bad finishing this season, will give a Chelsea a good test. And given how stretched Wolves’ small squad is, Chelsea’s injury problems will offer no excuse if the result does not go the visitors’ way. Paul Doyle Sunday 2pm Venue Molineux Last season Wolves 2 Chelsea 1 Referee David Coote This season G9 Y51 R2 6.11 cards/game Odds H 6-1 A 1-2 D 3-1 WOLVES Subs from Ruddy, Moulden, Cundle, Hwang, Boly, Hoever, Traoré, Dendoncker, Campbell, Aït-Nouri Doubtful Aït-Nouri (groin), Hwang (hamstring) Injured Mosquera (Covid-19, unknown), Jonny (knee, unknown), Silva (Covid-19, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y31 R1 Form WDDLLW Leading scorer Hwang 4 CHELSEA Subs from Arrizabalaga, Bettinelli, Chalobah, Azpilicueta, Saúl, Sarr, Kovacic, Barkley, Loftus-Cheek, Pulisic Doubtful Jorginho (back), Loftus-Cheek (knock) Injured Lukaku, Werner, Hudson-Odoi (all Covid-19, unknown), Chilwell (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y25 R1 Form WDWLWD Leading scorer Mount 7Richard Derrington was one of the first people to apply for a much-hyped government grant to decarbonise his home, a cottage in the Cotswolds, and help the UK meet its aim to be net zero by 2050. His speed off the mark counted for little as he faced months of delays, bureaucracy and repeated requests to prove his identity. A year on from applying for the £5,000 green homes grant, Derrington finally had the satisfaction of seeing a new heat pump installed in his garden. “I suppose we are one of the lucky ones,” he said. “God knows how many hours we and our supplier put in to get to where we are now. But the nightmare will stay with me forever.” Derrington’s property was one of only 47,500 domestic buildings – out of a promised 600,000 – that were given one of the now-shelved grants to make them more energy-efficient. By the government’s calculations, that leaves 18,952,500 properties that still need to be made low carbon and low energy if the country has any hope of meeting that net zero goal. “The green homes grant simply did not achieve what it was intended to do: spearhead uptake of domestic renewables, support confidence in the sector and provide a much-needed boost for installers,” said Ian Rippon, the chief executive of the renewable energy certification body MCS. And it is not just that grant that has withered and died. Dan Bovill, a renewable energy installer who runs SolarTherm UK in Essex, remembers many of the ideas that have fallen by the wayside in the past 10 years, such as subsidies for the solar industry in the feed-in tariffs (FIT) scheme, which were promised, wavered on and then cut. Some businesses spent an average of £87,000 getting set up for the green homes grants by gaining the necessary certifications, hiring staff and promoting the scheme, only to have to then cut staff because of the delays in issuing vouchers and making payments, according to evidence to MPs on the public accounts committee. “It is often the administration costs of setting up for these schemes which send small businesses under,” Bovill said. The latest offer from the government, a boiler upgrade scheme to support the transition from gas boilers to heat pumps in buildings, will provide £5,000 grants to households up to a total of £450m, far less than the promised £1.5bn available for the green homes grants. As the countdown begins to its start next spring, industry figures, campaigners and politicians are united about the need for this scheme and future projects to be long-term, properly funded, accountable and efficient. “Given the colossal scale of the task in hand, the goalposts must stop moving and government policy in this area must be clear, stable and endure,” said Philip Dunne, the Conservative chair of the environmental audit committee. “Before the 2019 election, £9bn was committed to address energy efficiency measures. Current funding plans look certain to fall well short of this total.” Ed Miliband, the shadow climate change and net zero secretary, said: “Labour would launch a national mission to, within a decade, upgrade the 19m homes below decent standards of insulation. We would do it by investing £6bn a year in a house-by-house, street-by-street programme for insulation and zero-carbon energy. The programme would be led by local authorities to deliver warmer homers and lower energy bills.” Elsewhere in Europe, attempts to decarbonise domestic properties are proceeding at a pace that homeowners such as Derrington can only dream about. In France, the government launched a similar scheme to the green homes grant, also as part of a post-Covid green recovery. Ma Prime Rénov (My Renovation Bonus) provided €75 per sq metre for insulation and €4,000 for a heat pump, comparable to the £5,000 given to UK households. The average response time to an application is 11-and-a-half days. Jess Ralston, of the Energy and Climate Intelligence Unit, an independent non-profit, said the French scheme was considered a success, with 190,000 applications submitted by the end of last year, and 380,000 by mid-2021. In Germany, the Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (Reconstruction Credit Institute) scheme has been in place for 10 years and covers many aspects of retrofitting homes to make them energy efficient and less carbon dependent. Ralston’s analysis shows that in 2019 the KfW had 326,000 applications, and the following year 600,000, driven by increased uptake in renewable heat and energy efficiency in new and existing buildings. She said Germany had successfully leveraged €83bn in private funding in 2020 towards its programmes. Domestic buildings account for 19% of the UK’s greenhouse gas emissions, and the Climate Change Committee (CCC) has said the path to their decarbonisation must start with immediate action on insulation so that low-carbon heat systems will run efficiently. It is a message echoed by activists from the direct action group Insulate Britain. “This is what our supporters, nine of whom are currently in prison, have been saying since mid-August,” said Liam Norton, a spokesperson for the group. “Why don’t they just get on with the job?” A government spokesperson said: “We have taken the experience of the green homes grant into account when designing new measures, with a commitment to go further and faster by investing £6.6bn in improving the energy efficiency of our buildings, including £1.3bn this year alone to upgrade up to another 50,000 homes.”So here we are again. Out are the plans to dust off your dancing shoes at the Christmas party, and in is the stockpiling of toilet rolls and boxes of chocolates for the long nights ahead. With a “staggering” increase in Covid cases accelerated by the spread of the Omicron variant predicted by medical advisers this week, many people are fearing that they will once again face Christmas in not-so-splendid isolation. So what can you do to prepare for a brilliant Christmas – even if you or a household member tests positive for Covid and has to isolate over the festive period, or Christmas is cancelled once again? Eat, drink and be merry You’re going to need food and drink. Lots of it. Buy now or repent at leisure. This is the perfect moment to bake that extravagant cake you’ve dreamed of, or finally make use of the sourdough starter your annoying friend foisted on you after the first lockdown. Jo Elgarf, an urban prepper who could frankly be forgiven for being a bit smug right now, suggests putting a pack of chicken or veggie alternative in the freezer with some frozen brussels sprouts and roasties, just in case. And buying chocolate: “If the worst comes to the worst, and you just sit there for the whole day eating a tin of Roses, is that really such a bad thing?” The food writer Jay Rayner has one main tip: order in a crate of Baileys. He adds: “Plan your Christmas Day meal around the idea of filling the fridge with nice things for days to come. And stock up on nibbles. If your house does not contain cheese-flavoured pastry Christmas trees and Twiglets, it’s not even Christmas.” Other stellar suggestions from Guardian readers on Twitter include eating a Christmas dinner of pigs in blankets dipped in camembert because you can, make hot chocolate bombs or, failing that, make sure you have a list of takeaways that deliver on Christmas Day. ‘Tis the season for self-care Christmas, even in a good year, can be a time of heightened stress, loneliness and struggle for many people. Prof Vivian Hill, a chartered psychologist and member of the British Psychological Society, suggests enjoying an isolated Christmas free of the myths of what Christmas “should be”. “Have a think about what the authentic characteristics of a really good Christmas are to you, and try and plan how you could recreate them if you have to stay at home,” she says. “Doing something special for yourself and for the people you’re closest to is really key.” Have a bath, go for a long walk, stay in your pyjamas, make sushi – do whatever you want, basically. “Christmas traditions evolve and develop over time,” says Hill. “Recognise there are other ways to celebrate.” Schedule your family fallouts For many people, Christmas is all about eating too much with family and friends. If that is impossible, perhaps open presents together via Zoom in the morning, keep the camera on during lunch and schedule a half-cut argument with your sibling at around 5pm. You could always spend your extra time inventing a machine you can pull a cracker with. An industrial bull clip will do the job for those lacking in imagination. To temper your sadness, console yourself with the thought that you are doing the Right Thing, says Hill. “Maybe your gift to your friends and family is recognising you’re a risk and staying away.” The gifts you could stop giving Have you bought all your presents yet? If not, don’t panic, and don’t immediately turn to Amazon, says Tim Lane of Ethical Consumer. “There’s loads of online ethical retailers that are great options for last-minute presents,” he says. “Or just buy less. If you want to consume ethically, cut down your consumption and maybe organise a secret Santa with your family as an alternative.” For top organisational points you could wrap and exchange gifts on your doorstep with family members who live close enough now, just in case. If they live in different parts of the country/world, it’s probably too late. Don’t sweat it, at least you have the perfect excuse. On the 10th day of isolation, my true love gave to me – a sought-after games console and a long, pitiless book One bonus of an isolated Christmas is all the extra time to sit around mainlining chocolate orange and watching festive films. Excellent Guardian reader suggestions for passing the time include making as many anagrams as possible from the different Covid variants, reading War and Peace, chortling along with virtual gigs with Always Be Comedy, creating a Christmas-themed mystery game to free Santa and the presents, knitting, crafting and doing a thousand-piece personalised jigsaw of your family while listening to Toto’s Africa. Or you might have kids. In which case secure a lock on the bathroom door. It’s not all about you, you know It really isn’t. Many Guardian readers, altruistic souls that they are, suggest keeping others in mind rather than just feeling sorry for yourself. Buy some extra goods when festive stockpiling to drop off at the food bank like those run by the Trussell Trust or just donate; call an older person for a chat via Age UK, Independent Age, Re-engage or Opening Doors; buy a toy for a vulnerable child via The Toy Appeal or Family Action; buy a gift for a woman or child fleeing abuse with Refuge; write to someone facing injustice in the world via Amnesty International’s Write for Rights campaign. That, friends, is the true spirit of Christmas.Amid all the noise, glitter and razzle-dazzle, the most iconic moment of this year’s Strictly Come Dancing took place in complete silence. The music paused for several seconds while deaf actor Rose Ayling-Ellis and her dancing partner Giovanni Pernice continued to glide elegantly across the floor. The dance was intended as a tribute to the deaf community, but it has resonated far more broadly: as well as receiving a perfect score, the couple’s performance has been labelled the “greatest ever” on the show, while an official BBC clip has been viewed 1.7m times on YouTube. There has been a resounding (silent) cheer for Ayling-Ellis’ success from the deaf community, who see her as a rare on-screen role model capable of inspiring deaf young people, who often struggle with pressures to fit into mainstream schooling, to embrace their deaf identity and pursue their passions on their own terms. The show has also prompted a huge increase in interest in deaf culture and learning British Sign Language (BSL), with the Institute of British Sign Language and other providers saying they receive a rise in inquiries every time Strictly airs. Paula Garfield, the founder of Deafinitely Theatre, the UK’s first deaf-led theatre company that runs the prestigious youth theatre Ayling-Ellis trained at, said she has seen a surge in interest from budding young deaf performers. “Rose is so important as a positive role model. She’s deaf, but she has a community, culture, language and pride in those – she’s not trying to hide her deafness. She’s saying, ‘Don’t be shy, you shouldn’t be ashamed of using your first language, BSL, because it’s beautiful and rich.’ That’s opening a lot of doors. She’s saying deaf people can do anything they want to do,” she said. Garfield, who grew up in the 1970s, hopes that seeing people such as Ayling-Ellis on TV will spare deaf young people her experience of being pressured to learn to speak instead of being allowed to learn sign language, which resulted in her leaving school at 17 with a reading age of eight. “We felt invisible, it was a dark and depressing time.” She said attitudes in theatre had shifted over the past 10 years with BSL-led performances becoming more common and mainstream productions increasingly integrating actors who communicate via BSL, such as Deafinitely alumnus William Grint, who is touring with the Royal Shakespeare Company. However, many drama schools remain inaccessible to deaf students, she said. Garfield added that there is much mainstream theatre can learn from deaf culture, including the expressive nature of sign language, the increased emphasis on physicality and movement, and the use of a visual vernacular. She underscored the importance of deaf-led “safe spaces” for young people to build the confidence to aim high. This is an approach shared by Hamilton Lodge, the specialist school for deaf children that appeared on Strictly to give a signed message of support to Ayling-Ellis. “Children are often discouraged from using BSL. I’ve been working in education for 20 years and I’ve seen children damaged from traumatic experiences in the wrong placements. They have a very negative attitude about being deaf, and we repair that. It’s really important that they develop their deaf identity and all our children leave as confident and happy individuals. Maybe with Rose at the forefront of people’s minds that will permeate society and education,” said Juliet Grant, head of school. Hamilton Lodge, in Brighton, also emphasises building deaf awareness in the hearing population, since 11 million people in the UK are deaf or hard of hearing. Sam Caiels, deaf studies coordinator, has appreciated how Pernice has shown a “positive attitude” in finding creative ways to communicate with Ayling-Ellis. Since this season of Strictly started she has noticed people responding to her differently, for instance lowering their face masks to enable her to lip-read. “Now Rose is on TV the hearing and deaf worlds are not colliding but merging,” Caiels said. Reframing deafness as something to be celebrated rather than a deficiency has a huge influence on how the school’s pupils see themselves. Caiels recalled one student who arrived anxious about drama as she had never been picked for plays in her mainstream school. Within a year she had built the confidence to take up a role, and gave a “stunning” performance. This chimes with the experience of Empress, a year 10 pupil who was among those to deliver the message to Ayling-Ellis. “I went to mainstream school, where I had lots of barriers and breakdowns in communication. When I got to Hamilton I received so much support and lots of deaf role models,” she said. Empress is pleased to add Ayling-Ellis to that list of role models. “It’s about time – finally – that there is a deaf person on a high-profile programme,” she said. “I’ve always avoided things like drama in the past, but I’ve looked at Rose and thought ‘my god, she can do it, she’s in EastEnders, why can’t I give it a go?’”The story goes that Peter Cook was at a party in the 1980s when a friend came up to him and declared that he was writing a novel. “Oh really?” the comedian replied. “Neither am I.” Many of us think we have a novel inside us, if only we had the time to write it without work, childcare and Wikipedia articles about the world’s most unusual deaths getting in the way. Some of us even give it a go: painstakingly crafting 600 words or so, before tweaking it repeatedly, fiddling with the font for a bit and then throwing the laptop out of the window. That person was me. I could never get beyond a few hundred words because whenever I read back the faux-literary waffle I’d put on the page I’d think, “Well, that’s clearly not as good as Cormac McCarthy,” and give up. Earlier this year I took a sabbatical from work and decided to use that time to write a novel, seriously this time. I was amazed by how much I got done: I cleared out the cellar, sorted the garden and watched two seasons of Succession. But the novel never got beyond the planning stage. Clearly, I needed a kick up the arse. That came when I heard about National Novel Writing Month (or NaNoWriMo). Every November, aspiring writers are invited to try to write 50,000 words in just 30 days: it works out as 1,667 words every day. NaNoWriMo has been going since 1999 when San Francisco writer Chris Baty decided he wanted some company while he tried to bash out a book as quickly as possible. Of the 21 participants he rounded up, six managed to hit the total, and so it became an annual event. Last year more than half a million writers took part. It’s rumoured that some agents have started to dread the deluge of terrible manuscripts that arrive in its wake. But among the inevitable dross have been remarkable success stories: The Night Circus author Erin Morgenstern credits NaNoWriMo with getting her into writing seriously: “I used to write a few pages and hate them so I’d stop. Having peer pressure and a deadline worked wonders.” Budding novelists are advised not to edit, or even look back at their work; instead they should just keep moving forward with a whopping word-count as their main goal. This “quantity not quality” approach is not entirely dissimilar to the advice writers such as Stephen King give: just get the damn thing on the page and worry about making it good later. Now I am about to become a debut novelist, I decide to plan it in depth as soon as I’ve taken my two children swimming, sorted the food shop, found my mum a birthday present … oh god, it’s 1 November already … Day 1 When I tell my colleagues I’m about to write a novel one of them lights up at the possibilities: “You could write about anything,” she says. “It could be about a ninth-century monk in Japan!” Hmm, yes it could, but I might run out of things to talk about once they’d gazed at Mount Fuji and, umm, eaten some rice. I sign up to the NaNoWriMo website, which asks if I’m a Planner (spend days plotting everything methodically) or a Pantser (fly by the seat of your pants). I’m definitely in Pantser mode, spending an hour at most sketching out the bare bones of my story – it’s to be about a group of old ravers reuniting for a big night out in their 40s, told via flashbacks to their younger days. Graham Swift’s Last Orders for the chemical generation, I tell myself. The website asks me to pick a genre and I’m immediately stumped. Science fiction? Definitely not. Action? Not really. Erotic? Jesus Christ no. I decide that I should aim high and tick “literary”. Then I change the status from “planning” to “in prep” and off I go! I don’t, it has to be said, have the idyllic writer’s set up. No oak desk, vintage typewriter or noise-cancelling headphones for me. Instead I am on a laptop at the kitchen table. My day starts at 6am when my son and daughter get up, and ends at around 11pm when I go to sleep – with a full working day in between. That leaves precious little time for writing. Unsurprisingly, day one is a real slog: 67 words, 93 words, 128 words … I’ve never checked a word count so often. Mercifully, work is quiet today so I get some done in spare moments. By around 5pm I arrive at 1,000 and spend the evening forcing out some turgid prose until it creeps over the daily minimum 1,667 mark. Phew. It feels good but it had better get easier than this. Day 3 I don’t know exactly what my novel is going to be yet, but I already know it won’t be literary. I mournfully untick that box. What hits me, somewhat naively, is how much stuff you have to invent … literally everything! Every minor character’s appearance, every venue’s decor, every person’s dialect. At one point I find myself Googling “popular Latvian women’s names” because I don’t know any. I also don’t know why the character is Latvian but there is no time to question these things. Onwards I go. But the questions keep coming. Why is it a cold day in this scene? Why is a helicopter circling overhead? Why does that character enjoy a relatively large degree of financial stability? There are so many decisions to make on the hoof. When one of my characters is at the doctor he walks out having been prescribed antidepressants. Which is fine until that fact starts interfering with bits of my story later on. I should really go back and change it but I simply refuse to lose 237 words, so the poor chap stays on his meds. Day 4 Something exciting happens around the 8,000 mark. I was worried my narrative might collapse into dust around this point, but instead I hit my stride. I can see the story stretched out ahead of me and it seems to fit the rough pacing of a novel. I start to know my characters a bit better and when they interact with each other it can result in wild bursts of speed-writing. By following the NaNoWriMo mantras – stop overthinking! Banish your inner editor! Ignore the terrible prose! – the process of writing becomes genuinely liberating. Subtext, symbolism, or even consistency in a character’s backstory can be fiddled with later. The whole point is to get your story down: all your self-conscious hang-ups are forced aside. I start to think about my characters when I’m out and about, doing the school run or commuting. The project becomes all-consuming. And NaNoWriMo helps make it that way by gamifying the whole process: little badges light up when you hit 5,000 words for three days in a row. I resolve never to skip a single day’s writing simply so I can one day see the “update your work every day” badge light up. Day 9 There’s a neat little graph on the NaNoWriMo site that plots your progress against where you need to be. Incredibly I’ve pulled ahead of schedule by 3,000 words. I am on fire! The new Jack Kerouac and I didn’t even need amphetamine! But there is a problem, which has been slowly brewing in my story for a couple of days now: I can’t help but notice that two of my characters are, to put it in literary terms, destined to bang. Could I fudge that in some incredibly coy way? That’s not really the spirit of NaNoWriMo, is it? Day 10 If I had to deliver one piece of advice about writing a sex scene it would be this: don’t do it while your mother-in-law has come to stay. Sadly, when you’re doing NaNoWriMo all time is precious and so my characters are forced to get it on while my daughter is jumping on her grandma’s lap about three feet away. I try to block them out, write as quickly as I can and then slam the laptop shut, feeling rather sordid and promising myself that nobody will ever read this ever again, including me. Day 13 The weekends are where I’m struggling the most – there are pre-planned social events and I’m knackered from writing during every spare minute I have (the time it takes to boil the kids’ pasta becomes a valuable 10-minute slot). I write in a doctors’ waiting room. I write in the car while waiting for my daughter to finish gymnastics. But my 3,000 word head start has vanished. Day 15 By 25,000 words I start to really struggle. At first it was exhilarating to throw off the shackles and plough forward with a stream of nonsense trailing behind me. But now I’m starting to forget what’s even happened before: have these characters met already? Did this father have two boys or two girls? Is this guy the one with the Latvian-for-no-reason girlfriend? Day 17 I make the mistake of glancing back at what I’ve written so far, which, no matter where I land, always seems like a bit of a shitshow. The lack of proper planning is showing now: the characters all speak with virtually the same voice (mine), or change personalities halfway through. The book is based in Leeds but it could be literally anywhere – Plymouth, Hong Kong, the moon – given how little description I’ve used. Day 21 I’m truly fed up of Google searches for things like “90s slang” or “Brickwork in Chapeltown circa 1998” or, embarrassingly, “How to make your characters likable”. (FYI, the latter request says get them to pet an animal early on, which is a relief as one of my characters does rescue an injured bird). Day 24 My writing hours are 9am-10am and then 9pm-11pm, which is pretty full-on after three weeks, but the end is in sight now. I realise that, barring some major disaster, I am going to get to 50,000 words. I have grave reservations about my book. But the simple style of writing has worked in one way: there is an actual story on the page that at least makes some kind of sense. This feels like an achievement. And a revelation about how much is actually possible if you make it happen. Day 29 A creative flurry sees me over the line with a whole day to spare. I can’t lie, it feels good! I’ve somehow written 50,107 words. Tomorrow, I will add a couple hundred more to make that extra shiny badge light up. And then I will have a lie down. Aftermath Stephen King advises that you take a few weeks off before you read what you’ve written. Before I get to that stage I promise to finish off the story, which I think should come in at around 80,000 words. I sense what I have is quite bad, but just how bad I honestly won’t know until I go back to it. It’s been a slog, I can’t lie, but there are positives that outweigh that. The features I write for the Guardian when I’m not cosplaying as Graham Swift now seem to come together much quicker than they did before. I’d also been struggling, since about six months into the pandemic, with a strange malaise that had been hard to shake. This project, which I doubted I had the time or energy for, helped shake me out of it. My mental health got a significant boost. Best of all, though, is simply the achievement that – good or bad – I have written (most of) a novel. Not everyone can say that. And if I bumped into Peter Cook at an 80s party to tell him I was writing one he would be forced to say: “That’s extremely impressive Tim, well done you ... although why is there a Latvian woman in chapter one for no reason?” ••• Opening of Chapter One From across the road, Sam took the opportunity to examine his friend. Robert Hunter was waiting for a break in the traffic, lurching from left to right, as if seriously contemplating leaping through the gap between trailing cars. He’d come straight from work: shiny brown brogues, a patterned shirt and waistcoat, hair slicked back. It made Sam think of a conversation he’d caught a snippet of at work: “Why does she keep setting me up with boys in bootcuts and pointy shoes?” What she’d been wary of was men like Hunter, and with good reason. ••• An agent’s view by Karolina Sutton of Curtis Brown, whose clients include Margaret Atwood and Haruki Murakami Well done, Tim! You’ve completed a first draft and that’s no mean feat. I have been given as little time to read it as NaNoWriMo has allowed you to write it, the clock ticking in the background for both of us The novel is set in a university friendship group: a recollection followed by a reunion, all inspired by a group photograph. University friendship groups have always fascinated first-time novelists. The boarding school or university experience closely follow a natural rhythm of a story with transformation and initiation written into its fabric. Throwing characters into a new group dynamic, taking away their safety net, making them step into adulthood and at the same time thwarting their journeys with reckless distractions are all tropes that have served writers well for centuries. With little notice and a crushing deadline, Tim followed a good instinct of working his story into a classic Bildungsroman. It’s an atmospheric and deeply felt novel committed to reconstructing an authentic 90s experience and it certainly succeeds on those terms. I liked its honest study of masculinity, specific to that decade, but although it felt authentic, I wanted it to be more surprising. For me, where the novel faltered was in its heavy use of predictable tropes: infatuations, friendships, drugs and a death that felt far too familiar. If, as a novelist, you follow a well-trodden path, your readers’ expectations for an original take, be it a voice or a plot twist, will be propelled sky high. I would say to Tim: if you want this story to fly then you need to bring something uniquely yours to it, a real point of difference. As for the writing itself, I feel Tim showed an excellent instinct for individual scenes, but I would advise him to pay more attention to pacing between them. Some changes in point of view felt a bit ad hoc and the novel’s first half was noticeably more developed than the rest, but that’s only natural when writing to an impossibly tight deadline.The kick-off at St James’ Park is now at 2pm rather than 2.15pm and it is not the only thing that has been moved at Newcastle. For the first time since Mike Ashley’s departure as the club’s owner in October, the Sports Direct advertising that previously covered the ground has been removed. Manchester City fear Pep Guardiola might not be there to see it following the manager’s inconclusive Covid test on Friday but, even if Guardiola is forced to watch from home, Eddie Howe could struggle to secure Newcastle’s desperately craved second win of the season. Louise Taylor Sunday 2pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue St James’ Park Last season Newcastle 3 Manchester City 4 Referee Martin Atkinson This season G10 Y24 R2 2.80 cards/game Odds H 18-1 A 1-7 D 6-1 NEWCASTLE Subs from Darlow, Clark, Krafth, Longstaff, Hendrick, Ritchie, Willock, Fraser, Almirón, Gayle Doubtful None Injured Dummett (calf, Jan), Fernández (thigh, Jan) Suspended None Discipline Y39 R2 Form DLDWLL Leading scorer Wilson 6 MANCHESTER CITY Subs from Steffen, Carson, Palmer, Fernandinho, Jesus, Aké, Mbete, Zinchenko, Delap, Mahrez, Stones, Sterling, Egan-Riley, Wilson-Ebrand, Lavia, McAtee, Gündogan Doubtful Delap (match fitness) Injured Torres (foot, Jan) Suspended None Discipline Y25 R1 Form WWWWWW Leading scorer Silva 7Strictly Come Dancing: The Final 7pm, BBC One After an emotional and incredibly uplifting competition, this year’s Strictly finally reaches its end. The two remaining couples – Rose Ayling-Ellis and Giovanni Pernice, and John Whaite and Johannes Radebe (sadly, AJ Odudu and Kai Widdrington had to pull out) – hotfoot it on the dancefloor in sequins and sparkles, giving it all they’ve got one last time. Then, look out for the festive spectacular on Christmas Day. Hollie Richardson The Brits Are Coming 5pm, ITV Changes are afoot for this year’s awards, with four new categories including hip-hop/grime/rap act and dance act. It’s also the first year they’re doing away with gendered categories. About time. In this one-hour special, Maya Jama and Clara Amfo announce the nominations, while Anne-Marie and Swedish pop starlet Mabel perform. Alexi Duggins A Lake District Farm Shop at Christmas 6pm, Channel 4 What better way to kick off the festivities than with a trip to, er … Tebay services on the M6. But far from being a pit stop for fast food and the loo, Tebay is a farm shop that embraces its Lake District surroundings. Here, we see how they prepare for the busiest time of the year during a pandemic. HR Christmas at Chatsworth House 7pm, Channel 4 British stately homes take Christmas preparation to another level. In the first of a trio of episodes that go behind the scenes of estates, we visit Chatsworth House. After Covid complications, can staff prepare Chatsworth in time for yuletide visitors? Henry Wong Gomorrah 9pm, Sky Atlantic The fierce, visceral and compelling Neapolitan mob drama returns for a final season. When we left Gennaro Savastano (Salvatore Esposito), he was hiding in a bunker, with his dreams of civilian life in tatters as predators gathered round him. He has no option but to fight for his life – what will he lose in the process? Phil Harrison Paul O’Grady’s Saturday Night Christmas Line Up 9.30pm, ITV Dame Joan Collins is in the house for O’Grady’s celebrity hurrah, along with Julian Clary, Sunetra Sarker and Paddy McGuinness. One of the tasks given is to arrange themselves from best to worst. Awkward much? HR Film choice Last Train to Christmas, 1.45pm, 8pm, Sky Cinema Premiere On a train back to Nottingham on Christmas Eve 1985, Stringfellow-esque club owner Tony Tower (Michael Sheen) discovers that if he moves between coaches he can visit his past or future life. With his business and relationship with his brother, Roger (Cary Elwes) in peril, Tony tries to rewrite history in his favour, only to make things worse for everyone. A smart, twisty reboot of A Christmas Carol from Julian Kemp, with Sheen sporting a series of wonderfully cringe-worthy hairstyles and clothes. Simon Wardell Great Expectations, 2pm, BBC Two The greatest Charles Dickens film adaptation to date, David Lean’s atmospheric 1946 drama gave us the iconically cobwebby Miss Havisham (Martita Hunt) and a truly menacing Magwitch (Finlay Currie). The redoubtable John Mills plays the fallible hero, Pip, as a young adult, after a secret benefactor has transformed him from country lad to gentleman about town. As always with Dickens, some of the depth and character colour is discarded in the script-to-screen process, but Lean’s eye for detail makes this cautionary tale zing. SW Scrooge: A Christmas Carol, 5.55pm, Channel 5 Alastair Sim set a standard for Scrooge in this 1951 film that has rarely been bettered in the many subsequent attempts at Dickens’s festive favourite. Whether being properly mean, convincingly freaked-out or giddily happy, Sim is a joy to watch as his miser learns a lesson in humility and humanity, helped by director Brian Desmond Hurst’s inventive treatment of the light and dark of snowy London. A host of solid British character actors are in support, including Michael Hordern as Jacob Marley, Mervyn Johns as Bob Cratchit and George Cole playing young Scrooge. SW David Byrne’s American Utopia, 6pm, Sky Arts Spike Lee’s glorious concert film of a Broadway date on the erstwhile Talking Head’s 2018-19 tour is worthy of a place in the concert documentary pantheon next to Stop Making Sense. Dressed in grey suits to match his hair, the ever amusing Byrne and his impressive musicians weave their way through songs from his long career (lots of Talking Heads tunes, thankfully) plus a cover of Janelle Monáe’s political anthem Hell You Talmbout. Annie-B Parson’s courtly choreography and Lee’s up-close camerawork add colour to a joyous musical experience. SW Live sport Darts: The World Championships 3pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Arrows from Alexandra Palace.Politics is always both complex and very simple. The North Shropshire byelection, if we needed any reminder, proves it. The Liberal Democrats won big in this safest of safe Tory seats. And yet in six out of the past seven general elections, it was Labour and not the Lib Dems that came second here, so shouldn’t it have been the progressive’s choice? How do we answer that, and what does this result tell us about the chances of a non-Tory government? The Lib Dems know how to finesse byelection campaigns; it’s their specialist Mastermind subject. Their people flood in from across the whole country, putting bodies on the line. Perhaps critically, their vote share can generally enjoy higher highs and lower lows than Labour’s. It can soar like yesterday or plummet like it did nationally in 2015. But in this seat Labour’s vote was arguably already at its ceiling at around 30% in 2017, and so somewhat counterintuitively the third-placed Lib Dems were best placed to win. Just think about any safe Tory seat – like North Shropshire was supposed to be. If Tory voters are going to kick their party, who are they going to use to do the kicking? Labour, or the more centrist and safer Liberal Democrats? Even under that nice Mr Starmer, it’s an obvious choice for them. As of the last general election, there are 80 Tory seats where the Liberal Democrats are second to the Tories. Labour can either step aside in these seats, or split the vote and let the Tories win. Attacking the Lib Dems for not always being as left as Labour on every policy issue is electoral suicide – whereas giving them room to win over soft Tory voters can help Labour into power. But to some key people in the Labour party, the Lib Dems will always be the enemy to be crushed. This is a tragic misreading of history – not least, of 1997, when cooperation with the Lib Dems helped Labour to victory. It is also a misreading of Labour’s historic win in 1945, when its whole programme was based on the economic and social liberalism of Keynes and Beveridge. Attacking the Lib Dems along with the Greens locks the country into a Tory future. Labour needs to win an impossible-seeming 125 seats just to achieve a majority of one in the Commons. But only 40 seats would need to change hands to progressive parties to deny the Tories a majority. No power, or the largest share in power: the example of North Shropshire poses a stark choice for Labour. Of course, for some in Labour there is a strategy to get Tory voters to jump straight to them: it’s to follow the 1990s New Labour model. Back then “New” sent the signal to Tory voters that New Labour was in reality “Not” Labour. Tony Blair made it safe for millions of Tory voters to back him, precisely because he offered no challenge to their way of life or values. Inevitably this stirred up trouble in Labour’s backyard – it sowed the deep seeds of Brexit, the loss of vital Scottish seats and then red wall seats, and four straight Tory general election victories. It is not a place Labour should go back to. Let’s return to North Shropshire. Labour’s campaign was a mess. It seems likely that a deal had been done on the quiet between Keir Starmer and Ed Davey that divided up Old Bexley and Sidcup for Labour, and North Shropshire for the Lib Dems. We can assume this because Starmer didn’t go to North Shropshire once, whereas Davey visited umpteen times. But locally, Labour ignored this and still campaigned robustly. They very well could have split the vote. Luckily the voters knew better. This is the politics of both hypocrisy and failure: the party leaders do a deal, pretend they haven’t and confuse everyone. At a byelection there is enough noise for progressive voters to work out who has the best chance to win. But project this on to a national election and it’s a recipe for chaos. Meanwhile, Labour keeps on supporting first past the post, despite its members overwhelmingly wanting change to the antiquated voting system that shores up the Tories and punishes progressives by splitting their votes. And for good measure, if any Labour member says, “Vote Lib Dem to beat the Tories”, they get expelled. For the Labour machine, maintaining the “two-horse race” feels more important than winning. So, some home truths. First, while the Liberal Democrats can outperform their national showing at byelections, they often fail to hold the same seats at a general election. A byelection strategy is no replacement for a political strategy. The Liberal Democrats should enjoy their moment, but not kid themselves. They have a lot more work to do. Second, Boris Johnson will either recover from this blow or be replaced. Tory politics won’t remain static. They are ruthless and determined. If they are to be denied a record fifth victory at the next general election, then all progressive parties are going to have to do better individually and collectively, not least to find a way to reward the Greens, who are now potentially king- or queen-makers for Labour or the Lib Dems in up to 30 seats. Here, then, is the simple bit. The electoral map is crystal clear. It is progressives versus the Tories. All progressive parties need to do is work together to create a national mood for change, and then get out of each other’s way at the next general election. If local constituency decisions can be made for one-off “stand-asides” to beat the Tory candidate, along with an agreement that the next government would implement proportional representation, then progressives might stand a chance of both dislodging the Tories, and creating a new kind of politics. Last night voters showed this is what they want. The alternative doesn’t bear thinking about. Neal Lawson is director of the progressive alliance campaign organisation CompassThere’s a strong Premier League following in the Gambia: just like Brunel Johnson, 14-year-old Musa is an Arsenal fan. The London-born photographer was on his way to lunch when he noticed the teen, in his favourite football shirt, huddled with friends. They were on the grounds of Spot Academy, watching game highlights on one of the older kids’ phones. Brunel had been living alongside the boys for two weeks, documenting the work of the charity, which serves as a community school while providing boarding places for orphans. He’d left his digital camera in his room and knew the moment would pass if he went back for it. So he reached for his iPhone. The photograph’s angle was a spur-of-the-moment decision, chosen simply to fit as many faces in as possible; he added the black and white “Noir” filter later. “I wanted the focus to be on their faces as they saw themselves on the screen, and their smiles. Many of the boys are orphans: all have lost at least one parent, like Musa. But there is rarely a moment when they aren’t smiling,” Johnson says. “As a Black photographer of African heritage, it’s my responsibility to authentically document the reality of Africa, in all its beauty and in its poverty. And you can show poverty while still maintaining human dignity.”Throughout the Red Summer of 1919 and beyond, no journalist did more to chronicle the lynchings and other forms of terror inflicted on Black people than Ida B Wells-Barnett. From East St Louis, Illinois, to Elaine, Arkansas, her pen was an instrument for justice. The 12 Black men had been tortured, smothered with rags soaked in chemicals, strapped to electric chairs, beaten with whips by white mobs trying to wring “confessions” out of them. The men had been arrested after the Elaine Massacre, during the Red Summer of 1919, when white mobs “with blood in their eyes” descended on the cotton fields of Elaine, Arkansas, killing more than 800 Black people. The men, who had come to be called “The Elaine 12”, had been unfairly rounded up, then falsely convicted after a sham six-minute trial in Helena, Arkansas. Now, they sat on death row for crimes they did not commit. They had one last hope. Perhaps, Ida B Wells-Barnett, a Black investigative journalist known for her utter fearlessness in her “crusade for justice” for her people, could save them. Perhaps this woman, who had once written “if it were possible”, she, “would gather my race in my arms and fly away with them,” had that kind of power to fight a “tide of hatred”. Did Wells, an unflinching woman who had traveled the country to investigate the ruthless barbarity of white mobs in other lynchings and massacres, have that much power to save these Black men on death row in Arkansas? One of the old Black men believed she did. “Dear Mrs. Wells-Barnett,” he wrote. “This is one of the 12 mens which is sentenced to death speaking to you on this day and thanking you for your grate speech you made throughout the country in the Chicago Defender paper. So I am thanking you to the very highest hope you will do all you can for your collord race. Because we are innercent men, we Negroes. So I thank God that thro you, our Negroes are looking into this truble, and thank the city of Chicago for what it did to start things and hopen to hear from you all soon.” The letter was dated 30 December 1919 with a date line of Little Rock, Arkansas. It was sent to Wells three months after the Elaine Massacre. Wells heard the desperation in the letter and, without hesitation, took a train from Chicago, heading into the deep south, which had once threatened her life and warned her never to return. “It was my first return to the South since I had been banished thirty years before,” she later wrote. The letter from the Black men on death row, Wells wrote, was “a cry from Macedonia”. *** Wells was born enslaved in 16 July 1862 in Holly Springs, Mississippi, during the civil war, five months before President Abraham Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation. After her parents died of yellow fever, she took care of her siblings and eventually became a teacher in Memphis. In 1884, Wells filed a lawsuit against the Chesapeake, Ohio, and Southeastern Railroad, citing racial discrimination after a white conductor tried to force her from first class into a smoking car. In the groundbreaking case, Wells won the lawsuit, but lost on appeal. Wells wrote: “I have firmly believed all along that the law was on our side and would, when we appealed to it, give us justice. I feel shorn of that belief and utterly discouraged, and just now, if it were possible, would gather my race in my arms and fly away with them.” In 1889, Wells became a part owner of the Memphis Free Speech and Headlight newspaper, where she continued to write columns against racism. Wells began investigating lynchings of Black people, compiling a groundbreaking “Red Record” of the lynchings. In a column published on 21 May 1892, Wells denounced “the old thread bare lie” that lynching was used to “protect white womanhood”. Wells, who was traveling on the east coast at the time, was unmoved by threat to her life. “I had been warned repeatedly by my own people that something would happen if I did not cease harping on the lynching of three months before,” Wells wrote in her memoir, Crusade for Justice: The Autobiography of Ida B. Wells. “I had expected that happening to come when I was at home. I had bought a pistol the first thing after [my friend] Tom Moss was lynched, because I expected some cowardly retaliation from the lynchers.” Wells wrote: “I felt that one had better die fighting against injustice than to die like a dog or a rat in a trap. I had already determined to sell my life as dearly as possible if attacked. I felt if I could take one lyncher with me, this would even up the score a little bit.” After the publication of the column, a white mob descended on her office in Memphis, destroying her presses and warning they would kill Wells if she published her newspaper again. Wells moved to Chicago, where she continued her crusade for justice for Black people and for women. In 1913, Wells founded the Alpha Suffrage Club in Chicago. She traveled to Washington DC to join the women’s march for suffrage, whose white leaders had demanded that Black women march at the back of the parade. Wells stood on the sidelines, but when the Illinois delegation passed, she stepped into the parade and took her place at the front. As Wells, who was a co-founder of the NAACP, fought for suffrage, she continued investigating racial terror lynchings and massacres, including the East St Louis Massacre of 1917, the Chicago Massacre of 1919 and the Elaine Massacre of 1919. *** The Elaine Massacre erupted on 30 September 1919, after Black sharecroppers organized a union to fight unscrupulous white land owners in Arkansas who cheated Black sharecroppers out of money for their crops of cotton. On that night of 30 September, dozens of Black men met in a church in Hoop Spur, to deliberate on membership in the Progressive Farmers and Household Union. They planned to hire an attorney to help them in negotiations with white land owners. Cotton crop prices were soaring, and the men hoped they could finally gain an economic foothold and rise out of the peonage system of sharecropping that kept them in perpetual debt to white land owners. Knowing there could be trouble from white people in Arkansas, who did not want them to organize, they placed Black veterans outside the church to stand guard. About 11pm that night, white men drove up the dark country road. “Without warning,” Wells wrote, “a volley of shots are fired into this free assembly. The lights go out and those who are not killed or wounded get away as quickly as possible.” The Black veterans fired back. A white man, WA Adkins, was killed, “whether by the men he is with or the guards out in front will probably never be known”, Wells wrote. Some historians say dozens of Black men, women and children were killed in the church. “No one knows how many of these peaceable unoffending Negroes were killed by this volley,” Wells wrote, “as the persons who did this dastardly deed burned the church down the next day so no bullet holes in walls, broken windows or dead bodies of Negroes would show the conspiracy of whites to kill black people.” Wells argued, “had this been a conspiracy of Negroes to kill whites, they would not have started in by killing their own members, break up their own meeting, nor burn their own church. They would have been in or near some white assembly hall or home working mischief. There would be more evidence of the conspiracy to kill whites than the single body of W.A. Adkins found dead beside the automobile which brought him to the Negro church to disturb a Negro meeting and commit murder.” Word spread like wildfire through Arkansas and surrounding states by telegrams and newspapers, falsely reporting that there was a “Black insurrection.” Thousands of white men from the surrounding states of Mississippi, Louisiana, Tennessee and Texas marched on Phillips county. A local sheriff led a posse of thousands of white men, who looted, burned houses and shot Black people indiscriminately. “The press dispatches of October 1, 1919, heralded the news that another race riot had taken place the night before in Elaine, Arkansas, and that it was started by Negroes who had killed some white officers in an altercation,” Wells later wrote in her book “The Arkansas Race Riot,” which was published in 1920. “Later on, the country was told that the white people of Phillips County had risen against the Negroes who started this riot and had killed many of them, and that this orgy of bloodshed was not stopped until United States soldiers from Camp Pike had been sent to the scene of the trouble.” White officials in Phillips county sent word to Governor Charles H Brough in Little Rock, requesting that he send troops. Brough dispatched more than 500 soldiers from Camp Pike, located near Little Rock. *** Brough traveled from Little Rock to Elaine to join the hunt of Black people fleeing the white mobs. During the next week, soldiers from Camp Pike, led by then Colonel Isaac Jencks, hunted Black people, walking acres across farmland to find Black people hiding along the banks of the Mississippi River, and in swamps, thickets and canebrakes. “In 1925, Sharpe Dunaway,” according to the Arkansas Historical Society, “an employee of the Arkansas Gazette, alleged that soldiers in Elaine had ‘committed one murder after another with all the calm deliberation in the world, either too heartless to realize the enormity of their crimes, or too drunk on moonshine to give a continental darn.’” The soldiers, who according to accounts included a machine gun battalion, rounded up Black people who survived the massacre at gunpoint and held them in camps, until white people came to “vouch” for them. A white journalist for the Memphis Press reported that white mobs shot at dead Black bodies lying in the street. The mobs cut off fingers, ears, genitals and toes for keepsakes. The reporter gave an eye-witness account of US soldiers dragging a Black man into a street. In a horrific act, the mob poured some kind of fuel over the Black man’s body and lit it. “The mob moved in its bloodlust,” the reporter wrote. “A mob attacked Lula Black, pulling her from her home, pistol whipping her, and kicking her. The mob killed another Black woman, Frances Hall, pulling her dress over her body.” The governor’s photographer snapped photos of Hall’s body. The governor kept the photo in a scrapbook. By 7 October 1919, the massacre ended. *** Even as Black bodies lay in the killing fields that had grown cotton, more than 285 Black people were captured and locked in stockades in Helena, 20 miles from Elaine. Hundreds of Black people were arrested; 122 black men and women were indicted on charges that ranged from “night riding” to murder. On 5 November 1919, 12 Black men were convicted of murder and sentenced to die by electrocution. The men, who became known as the “Elaine 12”, were identified as: Frank Moore, Frank Hicks, Ed Hicks, Joe Knox, Paul Hall, Ed Coleman, Alfred Banks, Ed Ware, William Wordlaw, Albert Giles, Joe Fox, and John Martin. In Chicago, when Wells heard the news of the “Elaine 12”, she began immediately raising attention about their case and raising money to save them. “They had been in prison in Helena, Ark, since the first week in October,” Wells wrote. “They had been beaten many times and left for dead while there, given electric shocks, suffocated with drugs, and suffered every cruelty and torment at the hands of their jailers to make them confess to a conspiracy to kill white people. Besides this a mob from the outside tried to lynch them.” Wells explained that “during all that two months of terrible treatment and farcical trial, no word of help had come from their own people until a copy of the Chicago Defender, December 13th, fell into their hands”. “A letter of mine had already appeared in the Chicago Defender calling attention to the fact that the riot had been precipitated by the refusal of colored men to sell their cotton below the market price because they had an organization which advised them so to do,” Wells wrote in her autobiography Crusade for Justice. “I appealed to the colored people of the country to use their influence and money for those twelve men, who had been found guilty of murder in the first degree and then sentenced to be electrocuted.” *** On 22 January 1920, Wells arrived in Little Rock, Arkansas, and headed immediately for the secret address the man had included in his letter. “Those men were under sentence of death and there was no time to be lost,” Wells wrote. In Little Rock, she found a group of Black women, the wives and mothers of the 12 Black men who were waiting on death row. She disguised herself as an old woman and slipped into the jail. “The iron bars were wide enough apart to enable us to shake hands,” Wells wrote. “The one guard on duty sat about fifty feet away reading the Sunday paper. When he looked up, he saw only a group of insignificant looking colored women who had been there many times before, so he went on reading his newspaper.” Inside the jail, Wells took precise notes, recording the testimony of the men. Wells asked them “to write down everything they could recollect about the rioting, and what befell each one of them”. She asked them to “tell me the number of acres of land they had tilled during the year, how much cotton and corn they had raised, and how many heads of cattle and hogs they owned, and be sure to say what had become of it all”. William Wordlow told her that it was about five carloads of white men who drove to the church that night on 30 September 1919. “I was out in front of the church in the road when these men came up in these cars and started shooting in the church on the other people both women, men and children. When the white men started that work, I broke and ran away. I saw them when they made the first shot. I went in the woods and stayed all night. I stayed until the soldiers came, then I came to them. I had eight women and children with me to hide, keep them from getting killed. The white people sent word all through the country they were coming to kill all the Negroes they could find. The soldiers took me to Elaine and I was put in the school-house and they kept me there seven days. Then they brought me on to Helena jail and we were whipped like dogs to make stories on each other.” The man pleaded: “I did not kill no one. I did not have a gun. Then after my trial was over in six minutes, some of the white men came from Elaine to the jail and told me if I would put something on more Negroes they would turn me free, if I would call just two or three men’s names that they did call to me. I would not do so, because it would be a story and I will not lie on no one. I was whipped twice in jail. Near to death. While they were whipping me they put some kind of dope in my nose; also I was put in an electric chair and shocked to make me tell a story on other men.” Frank Moore told Wells that more than 120 Black men, women and children were in the church that night. When the white men began shooting, he said he ran home. “The next morning the whites sent us word that they was coming down there and ‘kill every nigger they found.’’’ Moore told Wells: “The white people want to say that union was the cause of the trouble. It’s not so; the white people were threatening to run us from our crops before this trouble started. The Phillips County people know they started this trouble and they only got the army there to cover what they had done.” *** As Wells prepared to leave the jail, the men sang a song they had composed. The men sang in the most mournful tones she had ever heard. “I used to have some loving friends to walk and talk with me. But now I am in trouble, they have turned their backs on me; They just laugh me to scorn and will not come nigh, and I just stand and wring my hands and cry. Chorus: “And I just stand and wring my hands and cry, And I just stand and wring my hands and cry, Oh Lord! Sometimes I feel like I ain’t got no friends at all. And I just stand and wring my hands and cry.” Before she left, Wells asked the men to “have faith to believe that the great state of Arkansas would undo the wrong that had been done to them. I said they should pray daily that God would give the authorities the wisdom to realize the wrong that had been done, and the courage to right that wrong. I earnestly believe such prayers, will strengthen the hands of the white people of the state who want to do the right thing.” Wells returned to Chicago and wrote a pamphlet on the Elaine Massacre, publishing “the facts I had gathered and helping them to circulate them”, Wells wrote in Crusade for Justice. “I raised the money to print a thousand copies, and circulated almost the entire edition in Arkansas.” The NAACP mounted a case to fight for them. “In Little Rock and at the headquarters of the NAACP in New York, efforts began to fight the death sentences handed down in Helena, led in part by Scipio Africanus Jones,” according to the Encyclopedia Arkansas, “the leading black attorney of his era in Arkansas, and Edgar L McHaney. Jones began to raise money in the black community.” The lawyers won new trials for six of the men. However, the convictions of six of the men who became known as the Moore defendants were upheld. The first six defendants were eventually freed by the Arkansas supreme court. The case of the Moore defendants went to the US supreme court, which granted a new hearing, in the case of Moore v Dempsey, ruling the men had not been given due process. The attorney Scipio Jones began negotiations to have the men released. On 14 January 1925, then-Governor Thomas McRae ordered that the Moore defendants be released. *** The next winter, Wells was at home on a Sunday evening when she received a knock at her door. “A strange young man opened it. He said, ‘Good evening, Mrs. Barnett. Do you know who I am?’ “I do not,” I said. He said, ‘I am one of them twelve men that you came down to Arkansas about last year.’ The man, Wells wrote, was well dressed and had been living in Chicago for three months. “He said he had been looking for me all that time. He wanted to tell me how much he felt indebted for my efforts.” She introduced the man to her family. He told them, “‘Mrs. Barnett told us to quit talking about dying, that if we really had faith in the God we worshiped we ought to pray to him to open our prison doors, like he did for Paul of Silas. After that,’ he said, ‘we never talked about dying any more, but did as she told us, and now every last one of us is out and enjoying his freedom.’” *** Watch: How a labor movement in Elaine sparked a white backlash – 360 videoThe trial of Elizabeth Holmes has seen plenty of courtroom drama, but outside the courthouse in San Jose, California, a spectacle of another sort has unfolded week after week. On landmark days – such as opening arguments, testimony from star witnesses and when Holmes made the risky decision to take the stand herself – journalists, true crime fans and other spectators have turned out early to battle for limited seats inside the courthouse. For reporters like me, who have been covering the trial for several months, that’s often meant turning up before dawn for a good spot in line. Fellow members of the media and myself have laughed, cried and eaten countless lukewarm breakfast sandwiches from Starbucks (which, mercifully, opens at 5am) in the chilly darkness. In earlier days of the trial, most onlookers could show up as late as 9am when the trial began and still be seated. But as the proceedings intensified, securing one of the approximately 80 spots has required lining up as early as 2am on the sidewalk. Later in the trial, rumors emerged that a handful of people showing up were line holders hired from apps like TaskRabbit. Some bring folding chairs, others huddle under the awnings of the building, waiting for security employees to open the court house gates at 7am. Journalists are often seen making group coffee runs and filing stories by the dawn’s early light. In addition to the press, there are self-described “looky-loos”, true crime fanatics and retired lawyers following the case. Holmes often enters the building around 8am – typically wearing business casual dress and matching mask and flanked on either side by her mother, Noel Holmes and partner, Billy Evans. The trial has seen its fair share of stunts and other antics: one person showed up with a sign reading “Holmes Balwani not guilty on all charges,” referencing Sunny Balwani, the co-president of Theranos whose own trial is set for 2022. A gaggle of blonde women dressed like Holmes attended several days in support of the founder. Another day, an artist sold costumes out of a suitcase in line for the trial outdoors before being asked to leave as it is prohibited to “sell merch” on federal property. The spectacle has been a testament to Holmes’s enduring appeal as a cautionary Silicon Valley tale, one that’s been chronicled in a book, multiple documentaries and an upcoming film. The founder has been charged with defrauding investors and patients with her technology, which she said could perform hundreds of tests with just one drop of blood – claims that were later found to be largely untrue. Before the cracks in Theranos began to show, Holmes was a Silicon Valley darling – a rare female founder in a male-dominated field, raising millions of dollars from big-name investors like media mogul Rupert Murdoch and former US secretary of state George Schultz. Known for her signature black turtleneck wardrobe and husky voice, Holmes spoke on panels and television and graced the covers of major magazines like Fortune and Forbes. Closing arguments took place on Friday, with the government re-stating its case that Holmes knowingly defrauded investors and patients, lying about the value of the company and the capabilities of its technology. As the jury goes into deliberation, Holmes’s team requested they be instructed not to let her “celebrity” status influence their decisions. Despite this request, Holmes’s celebrity has been inescapable throughout the trial. It will always be an integral part of the story of Theranos – a company whose mythos outpaced its actual capabilities and whose founder created a cult following that obscured her shortcomings. From jury selection, during which it seemed nearly impossible to find a single juror who had not at least heard of Theranos, to the final days of press chaos outside the court house, Holmes remains one of the most-watched women in Silicon Valley. Holmes, for her part, seems as calm and collected as ever, stoically walking into the court house each morning. And aside from small contritions, such as acknowledging “I wish we had done things differently”, she has never apologized.Getting value for money might not be your prime goal when buying Christmas presents but if you are planning to snap up chocolates or sweets for the ones you love, it pays to check what you are going to get for your cash. That fancy box or tub may come at a cost (financial and environmental) – and, contrary to appearances, it might mean fewer treats for the recipient, not more. We’ve all heard about “shrinkflation”, where companies sneak through price rises by shrinking pack sizes, but when it comes to festive confectionery, it’s important to be wise to the other packaging tricks that manufacturers and retailers maybe hope we won’t notice. At Marks &amp; Spencer, for example, upgrading from a bag to a box of fruit jellies means downsizing – despite the latter’s much higher price tag – as a Guardian Money reader who got in touch was shocked to discover. In a London branch of the high street retailer, a 200g bag of Fruit Jellies sells for £1.20, while a box containing 180g of identical looking sweets, badged as Jelly Fruits, is on sale for £2.60. Per 100g, the sweets in the bag cost 60p and in the box cost £1.40. The unit prices are marked up on the shelves but from the outside it is not obvious that you are buying a box with a small bag inside. The box effectively costs £1.52 once the price difference and the 10% fewer sweets are taken into account. Pricing quirks and the cost of excess packaging are always worth bearing in mind, particularly around Christmas and Easter when manufacturers invent new ways to present their goods. This year, Mars’s Celebrations brand is available in a new “centrepiece” box, which holds 385g of the sweets. It typically sells for £1 more than a pouch weighing 370g, and at the same price – or more – as a plastic tub weighing 650g. In Tesco, for example, the pouch is priced at £3.50, or £2.50 for Clubcard holders, the centrepiece box at £5, or £4 for Clubcard holders, and the plastic tub at £4. Respectively, that’s a cost per 100g of 95p (or 67.5p with a Clubcard), £1.30 (or £1) and 62p. It is a discrepancy that’s not gone unnoticed by online shoppers. On Ocado’s website the centrepiece box gets one star, although at the time of writing it had been reduced from £5 to £3.50. The most recent purchaser, who posted on Tuesday, complained that they had “paid the price of a big box for a tiny one”. Ele Clark, a retail editor at the consumer group Which?, says: “While prices will inevitably differ between supermarkets, shoppers might be less aware that the price per 100g of a branded product can also vary enormously within a store, depending not only on the pack size but also the packaging type. “Some options will offer much worse value for money than others, so pay attention to the prices per 100g – and don’t assume you’re getting a good deal just because the item is on offer.” Helen Bird from the waste reduction charity Wrap says that while presentation “can be an important part of the gift experience”, it often means more packaging. If you are trying to choose between different packs based on their environmental impact, she says: “A general rule of thumb is the longer we use things, the better it is for the environment. Some packaging is designed to be repurposed, such as fancy tins. But another general rule is that the heavier the packaging, the more resources it is using and the more fuel it will consume in transportation. So if we’re not going to reuse something, a lighter pack may be better.” Mars Wrigley, which makes Celebrations, has this year reduced the plastic in its pouches by 19%. It says pricing of its products is at a retailer’s discretion. A spokesperson says: “At Mars Wrigley, our focus is always on ensuring we offer our great-tasting, high-quality chocolate at the best possible value. We have a range of Celebrations treats on sale this Christmas that, while available in different sizes, formats and price points to suit all occasions, provide value for money to the British public this festive season.” Bird says that once the packaging is finished with, it is important to recycle as much as possible. “Most packaging can now be recycled at home but paper or card that has glitter on it should not be recycled, so it’s also best to avoid buying it, too. Plastic bags, wrapping and pouches are generally not recyclable at home but several supermarkets, including Tesco, Sainsbury’s and the Co-op, provide recycling collection points at their stores as part of their efforts to hit UK plastics pact targets for all plastic packaging to be recyclable by 2025. You can find out what and where to recycle at www.recyclenow.com.”As those of us who have spent more time than usual at home over the last couple of years will know, those four walls can be a sanctuary, prison or, at times, both. Beautiful, monolithic and eerily empty, the house in the new BBC/HBO drama The Girl Before is definitely both. “The house,” says Gugu Mbatha-Raw with a laugh, “is the real star.” At one point in the first episode, Mbatha-Raw’s character Jane appears to have developed an intense relationship with it, caressing its smooth stone and glass. In The Girl Before, adapted from the bestselling psychological thriller by JP Delaney, Jane passes a rigorous vetting process before being allowed to rent this minimalist dream home. In return for cheap rent, she has to agree to around 200 strange and stringent rules set by the architect and owner. “No books?” she says, incredulous, when the estate agent reels off some of the stipulations (no pictures, no ornaments, “no children, obviously”). Jane will be watched, her every move and metric monitored, even her moods influenced, by the technologically advanced house and its creepy creator. She soon finds out that she is the second tenant – and she makes a chilling discovery about the first, Emma (played by Jessica Plummer). Mbatha-Raw does not seem so attached to houses. She bought one in Oxfordshire last year, but has barely had a chance to live there. She is, she says, “a nomad for work”. When we meet in a central London restaurant, Mbatha-Raw has not long returned from Vancouver where she was filming the lead role in Surface, a drama for Apple TV+. Before that, she was in Atlanta, filming the Marvel fantasy series Loki, in which she plays the judge Ravonna Renslayer. The fact that The Girl Before was so different to Loki appealed to her; from period drama to fantasy to Shakespeare to futuristic love stories (she starred in San Junipero, still regarded as the most uplifting episode of Black Mirror), Mbatha-Raw seems resistant to typecasting. “I’d never done a psychological thriller before,” she says, remembering when she read the script for The Girl Before. “I also loved the fact that it was female-driven; there wasn’t just one great female part, but two.” Both Emma and Jane have a relationship with the architect-owner, Edward, played by David Oyelowo, who is extremely controlling (and quite possibly murderous). Control seems to be the main theme, not just in Edward’s abusive coercive control-type behaviour, but something all the characters are trying to wrestle with, often as a result of grief or loss. “I looked at it as a journey for Jane, getting her power back,” says Mbatha-Raw. I can’t say I loved the book, with its nasty undercurrents and excruciatingly unsexy dialogue; Edward is not only extremely controlling, he is also a finickity bore, obsessed with limescale deposits and where his olive oil comes from. But if anyone can infuse him with grace and charisma, it’s Oyelowo, and the calibre of the team – not just the cast, but the director Lisa Brühlmann, who has directed episodes of Killing Eve – is reassuringly high. Mbatha-Raw, in her first producing role, brought Oyelowo, who is a friend, on board. She was also a producer on Surface, which is being made by Reese Witherspoon’s production company, Hello Sunshine. The experience of being a producer, she says, has been interesting, “because, in some ways it validates the opinions or ideas that you may have, but perhaps it’s not your place to say, or you’re encouraged to stay in your lane as an actor.” Has she felt unable to speak up before? “Not personally,” she says. “I know other actors who have felt that way.” Taking on a production role is also, as she told Variety last month in a wide-ranging piece concerning diversity in the British film and TV industry, about “trying to be the change myself”. Much of the conversation about diversity has been focused on what we see on screen, and while that has been slowly improving, “that doesn’t always represent every face behind the scenes”, Mbatha-Raw says now. “Acting is just one department of the entertainment industry, but it’s not all that there is. I’m just asking the question, curious to know how every other department that is less visible can still evolve and become as diverse.” It has an impact on stories that get told, and how they’re told. “Also, [it’s about] bringing up a generation of producers and gatekeepers, because they have much more power to steer the course of a production, and what it’s saying.” Mbatha-Raw has always been keen to fuel change, although she seems more likely to do this through her work and actions; in person, she is not guarded exactly, but speaks carefully, and elegantly sidesteps anything she doesn’t want to be drawn on. She was involved with the Time’s Up movement early on, “when nobody really knew what it was or what it would become. I care about people getting an equal chance to follow their dreams, essentially. All these issues ultimately are about power, and I care that that’s distributed evenly.” She had an early grounding in inequality and injustice. Her father had been a student ANC activist in South Africa. With the threat of being imprisoned, he fled and finished his medical training in the UK and became a doctor. When her parents’ marriage broke down, Mbatha-Raw, an only child, mainly grew up with her mother, a nurse, but saw her father and was aware of some of what he had been through. “As a young child, your understanding of the world is limited, but my dad would tell me in South Africa under apartheid, you are politicised at birth. As an adult, you understand the larger context of history in terms of the times in which [he was] born. I’m very grateful to my dad, and his perspective on the world. I think it’s always grounded me, to know how fortunate I am to be born in the times that I have been, and the fights of previous generations.” News and politics, she says, “were always visitors at our dinner table, and I’m really thankful for that more global perspective”. Mbatha-Raw remembers a conversation she had with Gina Prince-Bythewood, who directed her in the 2014 film Beyond the Lights, in which she plays a pop star dealing with fame. That film “was about misogyny in the music industry, essentially. Gina always said [a film] has to be about something bigger than you, and that really stuck with me. It’s great fun, acting, but I think what sustains you in the long haul is also knowing that you’re part of an artistic expression that really has the chance to move culture forward.” You can see this in most of her work: in Belle, she played the mixed-race daughter of an admiral, raised in 18th-century aristocratic English society, which broadened the vision of what British period dramas could be. In the Apple TV+ drama The Morning Show, she explored not just the devastating impact, but also the grey areas, of sexual assault. In last year’s Misbehaviour, about the feminists who disrupted the 1970 Miss World contest, she played Jennifer Hosten, the first Black winner. There cannot be many actors who have worked with as many female directors (and particularly female directors of colour) as Mbatha-Raw. Luck has played a big part, she says, but adds, “I’m very deliberate with my choices”. As a child, it was dancing that Mbatha-Raw loved. Growing up in Witney, Oxfordshire, she started ballet at the age of four, and she still has the posture of a dancer. When she was 11, she starred as Dorothy in the Wizard of Oz in a local drama group production, and decided she wanted to be a performer. It was only on leaving Rada that she thought about film and TV; her main interest was musicals and theatre. “There’s a magic to it: you get to dress up, express yourself and hang out with fun people, then people clap at the end.” She smiles: “Hopefully. It’s just a joyful place to be.” Mbatha-Raw seems so self-contained, not like someone who needs the attention of an audience. She wraps up, about to leave with as little fuss as she arrived. “I think it’s a misconception that people do it because they want attention. I always did it to express myself. I had all this energy and it was a place to put it, and it was fun. I’m sure part of me enjoyed the attention but that wasn’t really my motivation,” she says. “It was more how it made me feel.” The Girl Before starts Sunday, 9pm, BBC One.Stephen Hosking started showing symptoms of obsessive compulsive disorder as a toddler. “I’d feel the need to repeat things,” says Hosking, 50, who lives in Southampton and works as a transport planner. “Or to tap the wall. I just didn’t feel complete otherwise.” When he got older, he would feel compelled to ask embarrassing and inappropriate questions. His hands bled from overwashing. He was convinced he had Aids, and was going to infect others. Back then, few people had heard of OCD – it was not added to the official list of mental disorders until the 1980s. “My family called it ‘Stephen’s habits’,” Hosking says. In 2004, Hosking, by now in his 30s, was formally diagnosed. He wasn’t having any success with relationships, and was often in trouble at work. “I’d get so obsessed with listing all the jobs I had to do,” he says, “that I didn’t get on with doing them.” “It’s not great for your self-esteem,” says Hosking of OCD. “I felt like I wanted people to know the real me, and the way to do that was to confess all my inappropriate thoughts.” Widely cited but commonly misunderstood, OCD is not, despite popular perceptions, a desire for order or cleanliness. “It’s a disorder,” says Hosking, “where you are irrationally worried about things, which gives you anxiety – that’s the obsession. So you do something to relieve the anxiety – that’s the compulsion.” When the compulsion is fulfilled, the person feels relief, but this is short-lived. After two rounds of therapy, Hosking has got his OCD to a manageable place. (One practice, focused on exposing Hosking to his fears, was gruelling: “I had this fear of people slipping on banana skins,” he says. “It was almost comedic. Like in cartoons. One of my exercises involved dropping a banana skin and walking away.”) Most of the time, he doesn’t think about his obsessions, or act on his compulsions. Now, he is determined to help others manage this insidious and misunderstood condition. Hosking founded his first OCD support group in 2005, and now runs four groups: in London, Oxford, Portsmouth and Eastleigh in Hampshire. He does it all free of charge and, before Covid, ran himself ragged, crisscrossing the south-east to lead all four groups in person, every month. He used to work full-time while running the groups, but it was too much, so he has gone part-time. “Stephen has made a difference to hundreds, if not thousands of people in the UK,” says Danielle Walker, a member of Hosking’s London group. “My psychologist thinks attending the group regularly has helped me maintain my wellbeing and not relapse.” People with obsessive thoughts are often misdiagnosed. “I hate it when people say, ‘I am a bit OCD, ha ha’,” Hosking says. “It’s not true. OCD is not a liking for order and perfection. And it means people who do have OCD think that they don’t meet the criteria for diagnosis.” As a result, people with OCD can feel isolated from a society that does not understand their condition. But when people come to his groups, there’s a feeling of acceptance and recognition. “It may be the first time they’ve met somebody else with OCD,” says Hosking. “People start to nod. They realise they’re with people who understand.” When lockdown was announced, all four of his groups moved online: “We didn’t miss a single meeting, which I’m proud of.” He knew it was critical to keep the group going, especially for members whose OCD was triggered by the pandemic. People with contamination fears – who get obsessive thoughts about germs and disease – “were badly set back”. Their treatment before the pandemic had involved abstaining from masks and handwashing; now everyone was urged to do it. “We’ve had people say that their life had been saved by coming to group,” he continues. His favourite sessions are the ones where former members return. “Their OCD is basically gone,” he says. “And this shows others that it’s treatable, and beatable.” Hosking is a busy man, so finding time to arrange something nice for him was tricky. But at his request, Chatsworth House in Derbyshire – somewhere he had always wanted to visit – provided two complimentary tickets and meal vouchers for him and a friend. “It was lovely,” he says. “We went for lunch and had a wander around the grounds. What we liked best was the rock garden. All these massive blocks of stone that somehow looked natural, but were actually manmade.” A trip like that would have been an ordeal when Hosking’s OCD was severe. “I wouldn’t have enjoyed it,” he says. “I would have been worried about something or other and just have gone through the motions.” Perhaps he would have seen something on the train tracks, and been terrified it was a bomb, or a spotted broken window on a bus and felt an irresistible urge to report it. “The whole day would have been spoiled by my feeling anxious,” he says, “But I didn’t have any of that. We had a lovely time.” Want to nominate someone for Guardian angel? Email us – with their permission – and suggest a treat at guardian.angel@theguardian.comThroughout autumn, I tiptoed down my path into the sprawling, dew-heavy garden to pick the last of the seeds. I’d do this before breakfast, taking back whatever treasure I found to the kitchen to dry off as I drank my coffee. Starting the day collecting seeds was meditative and calming while the news on the radio whirled on. Never have I collected seeds like I have this year: Tupperware containers, old face cream pots, brown envelopes and tins that once held mints filled up with them. I sent seeds to everyone and anyone, and pressed little packages into the hands of visitors as they left the house. Most of our commercial seed is in the hands of a few global companies, and it is not news that the diversity of seed, particularly of vegetables and grains, has drastically reduced in the past hundred years, in part because of this. It is calculated that we’ve lost about 90% of crop varieties. Big companies do not support diversity. And yet that is exactly what we need. Who knows what the perfect squash might be in 100 years’ time? The only way we can ensure future gardeners have a wider library of genes to draw on is to do it ourselves. Thankfully, seed saving is deep within our DNA and people have been squirrelling away seeds for as long as we’ve tended the earth. And you, even if you don’t know it yet, have the potential to create diversity that the seed companies can’t. This is because crops are always evolving with the world around them, with their soils, their pests and disease, with the wind and the sun and the rain. Every time you grow something it adapts, just a little, to your corner of the world, but these adaptations are maintained only if you save some of their seed. Just saving seeds isn’t quite enough, though; it needs to be done well. This means growing the best plants we can in the healthiest soil; preventing unwanted cross-pollination; and selecting specimens for the most appropriate traits, so that varieties remain true to type and work for our location. It requires a nuanced understanding of growing, harvesting, processing, drying and storing. So here’s a gift idea for the gardener in your life – knowledge. For £48, Vital Seeds’ online seed-saving course is a brilliant starting point that covers the basics. The Gaia Foundation’s seed sovereignty programmes also have free resources for gardeners, including free webinars and films on seed production. Seed saving is more than just growing; it is about our past and our future, about all the diversity we’ve inherited from those before us and what we choose to send into the future.I first met bell hooks in the late 1980s at a feminist conference where I, and a slew of other graduate students, slept on the floor of her hotel suite because the meeting was overbooked. For the next three-plus decades we were colleagues, intellectual comrades and interlocutors who sometimes disagreed, but shared a bond of mutual respect and solidarity. I will miss her words and her presence in our lives. bell hooks (AKA Gloria Jean Watkins), feminist writer, radical thinker and teacher, died on Wednesday, 15 December at the age of 69, at her home in Berea, Kentucky. She was the daughter of working-class parents born in a small town in the Jim Crow South. She eventually went to Stanford University on scholarship and worked as a telephone operator to cover her other expenses. Borrowing her nom de plume from her outspoken great-grandmother, hooks went on to become one of the foremost feminist intellectuals and radical writers of her time. Her writings spanned the spectrum from capitalism and imperialism, to education, masculinity, beauty and love. Her influence is vast and her death leaves a painful void for those who knew and loved her. The outpouring of respect and tributes are testimony to the reach, in breadth and depth, of her work and the power of her legacy. hooks was as prolific as she was provocative. She wrote or co-wrote over 40 books ranging from children’s books to accessible theoretical texts. The titles of her books say a lot about her political message and her intellectual framework. In Feminist Theory: Margin to Center (1984), one of her most influential texts, she challenges us to embrace a feminist politic that is holistic, democratic, anti-capitalist and inclusive of all genders, including masculine ones. She rejects bourgeois white feminist writers that re-inscribe other hierarchies of power and domination in their politics and practices. These messages are reinforced in her related text, Feminism is for Everybody. Her works – including Teaching to Transgress, Breaking Bread: Insurgent Intellectual Life (co-written with Cornel West), and Remembered Rapture: The Writer at Work- all speak to her love of books and ideas as tools for radical social change. “My writing is a form of activism,” she once told me. hooks was a feminist through and through, but she was not a congenial feminist. She was a critic, a provocateur, and an interrogator. “Do we have to call every woman sister?” she wondered in one essay, suggesting that sisterhood and feminism were not about biology or essentialist notions of group identity, but about politics and values, and struggle. Instead of the more academic term, “intersectionality”, hooks preferred to name “imperialist-white supremacist-capitalist-patriarchy” as the interlocking systems that needed to be combatted. There is a power in naming the problem and l she did not shy from that. She also did not shy from critiques of other women, including Black women, when their politics and views did not align with hers – from self-promoting mainstream academics to popular pro-capitalist pop stars. hooks was a theorist, a rigorous thinker and a brazen and eloquent writer, whose books are taught in college classrooms around the world. However, what was most important to her was accessibility and relevance. She wanted her ideas to engage diverse and grassroots audiences, and they did: from kitchen tables to book clubs to prison yards. One of the most powerful testaments to hooks’s influence and ability to reach people in unexpected places is the feminist study group started by a group of incarcerated men in the California prison system to explore and root out assumptions and practices that underly toxic forms of masculinity. Their project was feature in a 2018 documentary called The Feminists in Cell Block Y. Their syllabus featured the writings of bell hooks. Her words, according to them, transformed their lives. hooks was able to touch so many people, at so many levels, across so many boundaries of difference, because she was a brazen truth-teller and willing to be vulnerable and transparent about her own life, pain and contradictions. “I was in an abusive relationship,” she confessed in one interview. In her writings she talked openly about a difficult childhood and a tyrannical father who could also at times be protective and kind. She opened up, especially in her later writings, about her own personal struggles, her rages and disappointments, her traumas and her fears. Sometimes theoretical writers distance themselves from the topics they write about with a feigned bloodless objectivity. hooks did the opposite. She invited us to care, to feel, and to experience the world through her lens. It all begins and ends, for her, with love. “The moment we begin to love, we begin to move against domination,” she once wrote. But not everyone loved her back when she spoke truth to power. hooks told her truths wherever she went and was not afraid of opposition. As a college commencement speaker in Texas, a year after the 9/11 attacks and the launch of George Bush’s so-called “war on terror”, hooks experienced a chorus of boos from parents and graduates as she loudly condemned war, violence and racism. She could never be accused of being a fair-weather radical. She took her Black left feminist politics with her wherever she went. hooks had an unconventional career path, by choice. She made her own road, spoke her own truths, and won the hearts and minds of many along the way. The social media tributes to her since her death speak to the ways that her vast body of work changed lives, launched activist careers, affirmed values and saved others from isolation and despair. In addition to fans and followers, she also had a handful of devoted lifelong friends. The following touching memory of hooks was shared with me by my dear friend and hers, the Black feminist pathmaker Dr Beverly Guy-Sheftall: “Loving my feminist friend/comrade for 40 years – unconditionally and deeply – enriched my life in ways that I am only now grasping. We gathered at Spelman, Oberlin, the New School and of course Berea College. We talked about books, politics, shopping, partners, the lives we crafted, the friends we shared, our dreams and disappointments. When I saw her at her home in Berea on November 25, I thought it might be the last time. I told her I would always love her and her writings …” She is forever a foundational force in Black feminist thought and praxis, and in the work of all movements that are attempting to take us beyond, to paraphrase hooks, imperialism, white supremacy, capitalism and patriarchy. Rest in power, dear sister, your work is done and we are better for it. Barbara Ransby is a historian, writer and activist. She is the author of Ella Baker and the Black Freedom Movement and a professor at the University of Illinois at Chicago, where she directs the Social Justice InitiativeThe government’s retreat from its hardline position in negotiations with the EU over Brexit arrangements in Northern Ireland has elicited a furious response from the most senior unionist in the House of Lords. Lord Dodds, the former deputy leader of the Democratic Unionist party, has issued a veiled threat of “action” unless it restores the option of pulling the plug on the Northern Ireland protocol by using the article 16 process. “Every day that passes with the protocol in place is another day which sees Northern Ireland and Great Britain move further apart. This is unsustainable. “If the UK government can’t or won’t act, then unionism will and soon,” he said in a statement. He was responding to reports that the UK has dropped its demands for removal of the role of the European court of justice from the Northern Ireland protocol. Downing Street has conceded this week that it will prioritise removing barriers to trade between Great Britain and Northern Ireland over other constitutional issues that have bedevilled the talks. Talks will be suspended until after Christmas. A government source said they would be seeking an “interim” solution on customs and physical checks on food that have proved a barrier to domestic trade and seen 200 businesses stop delivering to Northern Ireland. The change in tack has infuriated Dodds and others including Lady Hoey, who is fighting to get the protocol removed through the courts in Belfast. Dodds said it was now “abundantly clear” that the “protocol talks were being dragged out with little prospect of an outcome which meets the bar” set by Brexit minister Lord Frost’s command paper in July, which laid out the UK’s demands for a radical rewriting of the protocol. He accused the UK of “falling into line” with the EU’s timeline and of “retreating from its commitment to trigger article 16”, despite the prime minister himself declaring “conditions for doing so” were “met long ago”. He also said Frost had pulled back from an earlier negotiating position that all barriers to the supply of medicines from Great Britain to Northern Ireland should be removed. The future of the protocol talks has been further muddied by the shock resignation of a frustrated Frost from the Tory cabinet, revealed on Saturday night. He did not specify what “action” he meant would be taken, but the DUP has previously warned that it would walk out of the Stormont executive if enough progress in the talks were not made by November. In a more nuanced statement issued on Saturday morning, the head of the DUP, Sir Jeffrey Donaldson, said the party had been “patient whilst negotiations have continued”. But “in the absence of the EU’s willingness to agree the removal of the entirely unnecessary barriers to trade on the Irish Sea, it is essential that the government takes decisive action at the beginning of the year to restore Northern Ireland’s place in the UK”. Britain dropped its demand that Europe’s highest court should be removed from the protocol in the past fortnight, accepting there was an option that was acceptable involving the ECJ if disputes fail to be resolved politically or by an arbitration panel. Earlier in the week, Dodds told the House of Lords that the “delicate balance of relationships across these islands have been trashed as a result of the Northern Ireland protocol”.That’s it for today’s entertainment. We’ll have Ali Martin’s match report shortly, and then Tim and Tanya will be here for day four. Thanks for your company and emails - bye! The thoughts of Dawid Malan “We got ourselves into a half-decent position, but once again as soon as the Aussies opened the door they jumped straight through it. It’s disappointing and frustrating that we lost too many wickets in clusters. “The pitch was quite slow. The feedback that myself and Rooty gave was that one end did a little bit, but we felt that if we defended late and left well we could get a score. It [collapsing] is a little bit of a trend – it’s something that happened on the last tour as well. We can go from 150 for two or three to 180 for five or six. We need to make sure that, when we lose a wicket, we get another partnership going as soon as possible. “If we’re honest I didn’t play a great shot. When you get to 80 you want to make it count, especially out here. Maybe a couple of us played shots we’ll look back on and wish we didn’t. You’ve got to give credit where it’s due, though, and once the Aussies opened the door they made sure it stayed open. “The odd ball turned but I felt it was more bounce. It was hard to drive Nathan, who got a few to kick. Traditionally it does turn here as the game goes on, so being 300 behind is probably not ideal! We’ll find a way. We have to find a way.” That’s the end of another dominant day for Australia. England started well, with Dawid Malan and Joe Root batting through the first session, but then it all went well south Australia. The Aussie bowlers suffocated England, just as they had on that famous day in 2006, and forced a collapse of eight for 86 in 38.4 overs. The key period came just after dinner, when England wheezed from 150 for two to 169 for six. The rest of the innings was just detail. Australia decided not to enforce the follow on, and extended their lead in a relatively serent mini-session under lights. The only wicket to fall, that of David Warner, came from a run-out rather than a talking pink ball. There’s a mixed weather forecast tomorrow, but it won’t affect the result - for the seventh time in the last nine home Ashes series, Australia are 2-0 up after two Tests. 17th over: Australia 45-1 (Harris 21, Neser 2) With the left-handed Harris on strike, Root changes ends to bowl the final over. The ball is doing all sorts, even for an occasional spinner like Root, but Harris survives the over and will be back in the morning. 16th over: Australia 45-1 (Harris 21, Neser 2) With a right-handed nightwatchman at the crease, Robinson replaces Root. His second ball kicks off the pitch to hit Neser on the elbow, a painful blow that Neser accepts without complaint. He skims the next ball for a couple to get off the mark. One more over to go before the close. 15th over: Australia 41-1 (Harris 21, Neser 0) Shane Warne is already talking about Michael Neser getting a hundred on debut and being dropped, which is simultaneously one of the most absurd things I’ve heard and a profound insight into the mentality of a champion. Woakes bowls his second consecutive maiden to Harris. The pressure’s buildi- oh I can’t be bothered. 14th over: Australia 41-1 (Harris 21, Neser 0) Michael Neser comes in as nightwatchman. Joe Root brings himself onto bowl. His second ball turns and bounces absurdly to hit Warner on the arm, prompting Nathan Lyon’s self-esteem to literally explode through the roof of the Australian dressing-room. He is going to have all sorts of fun in the fourth innings. For now, the only people having a laugh are the England fielders. Harris turned Broad to backward square leg and set off. Warner started, stopped, started again and then realised he’d been sold down the river. He wasn’t in the frame when Buttler collected Broad’s throw and broke the stumps. 13th over: Australia 40-0 (Warner 12, Harris 21) Make it stop. 12th over: Australia 40-0 (Warner 12, Harris 21) A maiden from Robinson, who has been the best of the England bowlers this evening. Nothing particularly dramatic, just the ability to make batsmen play more often than not. It’s been an awful year for England’s Test team, probably their worst this century, but the emergence of Robinson is a decent silver lining. 11th over: Australia 40-0 (Warner 12, Harris 21) That’s a better start from Woakes, who angles two immaculate deliveries past Harris’s defensive pushes. Bugger this for a lark, concludes Harris, and throws his hands at a wide one. It takes the top edge and flashes over the slips for four. It wasn’t a great delivery, and Woakes knew it. “I don’t think it’s a coincidence that England’s dreadful away performances since 2013/14 have coincided with much shorter Ashes tours,” says Simon Huxtable. “Losing to Sheffield Shield teams in the 90s was humiliating but helpful for acclimatisation. In 90/91 England lost 3-0 but had the better of one Test and got an honourable draw in another, in 94/95 they won one and came close to winning another, and in 98/99 they were a third-umpire decision away from a 2-2 draw. I get that there are too many international games and players are tired, but what’s the point of fielding an underprepared team that loses 5-0?” There’s surely something in that, though it’s clearly not the only reason. The intensity of the preparation was a big part of their success in 2010-11. Maybe they should revive the bootcamp in Germany. 10th over: Australia 36-0 (Warner 12, Harris 17) Warner survives a run-out chance, with Woakes’ throw from midwicket just missing the stumps. This mini-session was supposed to be a bit of respite from the misery for England, with the ball swinging and wickets falling. Yeah, about that. I wouldn’t be too critical of the bowlers, as there hasn’t been much movement. 9th over: Australia 34-0 (Warner 11, Harris 16) A double bowling change, with Chris Woakes replacing James Anderson (4-3-2-0). The pink ball isn’t doing much at all, and Harris cuts him breezily for four to end an expensive over. At the end of the over, BT Sport’s Matt Smith apologises for “difficult images” in the crowd. I think a sozzled spectator made the universal hand gesture for onanism. And I thought lunch was difficult. “Talking of the gulf between county and Test cricket, my son is finding that learning a language is the biggest step from GCSE to ‘A‘ level,” says Tim Sanders. “He’s having to read proper literature in French as well as coping with proper listening and comprehension. Having said that, top international Test players often don’t cope well with English medium pace nibbling the ball about in April. So, it’s complicated…” What isn’t? Even lunch is difficult. 8th over: Australia 25-0 (Warner 10, Harris 8) Ollie Robinson replaces Stuart Broad, who bowled a nothing spell of 3-0-9-0. His second delivery is a no-ball, which shows admirable improvement from his first spell yesterday, and he makes the batters play more than Broad. This isn’t always a good thing, though: when he errs ever so slightly in line, Harris skims the ball through square leg for four. That aside it’s a good start from Robinson, who has an LBW appeal against Harris turned down off the final ball. I’m pretty sure it pitched outside leg. 7th over: Australia 17-0 (Warner 7, Harris 4) Anderson moves around the wicket to Harris, who defends solidly just outside off stump. A maiden. This is an important innings for Harris - not the last chance, but possibly the preantepenultimate one. (I’m assuming an innings victory in the third or fourth Test.) “Ah, the fast forward method,” says Emma John. “ It’s like mastering microwave timings so you don’t burn your porridge. Here’s my recipe: no more than two seconds on x30 in between deliveries for a pace bowler, and x6 for spinners. You can try a very brief burst of x12 for the latter if you want to test out your quickdraw skills, but NEVER attempt anything faster or you will miss the entire over.” So what about the darts? 6th over: Australia 17-0 (Warner 7, Harris 4) It’s easy to say Anderson and Broad should be bowling fuller, and Joe Root has just implored the same of Broad. But these are extremely smart bowlers, who know a soupcon more about their craft than armchair Einsteins like me, so it would be fascinating to know what the plan is. There must be a reason for it, and it’s been a recurring theme of their careers. Maybe it’s to avoid being driven for four, which Warner does in style when Broad pitches one up. Batting looks pretty comfortable for Australia, who lead by 254. 5th over: Australia 13-0 (Warner 2, Harris 3) This situation is perfect for Australia. Even if they lose one or two tonight, they can make England’s ageing and/or injured bowlers suffer for two sessions tomorrow and then raise hell with a new pink ball. They are effectively playing the third Test already - this game is won, and while the formalities are being completed they have the chance to undermine England physically and mentally. 4th over: Australia 11-0 (Warner 2, Harris 3) There’s an argument that Ollie Robinson should be bowling here, especially as he makes batters play more than Anderson and Broad. Mind you, Anderson is Anderson and Broad ruined these two batters in favourable conditions in 2019, so there’s that. They haven’t been quite at their best, though, and Broad’s second over passes without incident. “Hi Rob,” says Jon Millard. “I fear the English will never achieve dominance over the Australians for a statistically significant length of time. The Australian mindset is just plain better suited to cricket. They beat us like a drum for 16 years, and celebrated each victory simply by beating us again two years later. We won just the once, held a bus top parade, and apparently completely forgot we had to play them again at cricket properly until the second ball of the next series. The Australians must have been gobsmacked, then delighted. They had Bradman, we had Boycott. We had Gower, they had Border. Who has ever genuinely terrified the Australians? Mike Brearley and his mythical mind powers one summer in 1981? We should pick Derrren Brown. Or just some more South Africans.” As an aside, I’ve never understood the criticism of that celebration in 2005. It was the greatest series ever (possibly), ending 16 years of defeats to their biggest rivals. This might be naive but i don’t think there was much hubris involved. In context it was equivalent to a World Cup win, and they celebrated emphatically. I’m afraid afternoon tea simply wasn’t going to get the job done. 3rd over: Australia 8-0 (Warner 0, Harris 2) Better from Anderson, who angles a full-length delivery past Warner’s optimistic grope. Two leg-byes keep the scoreboard ticking, or whatever it’s doing. 2nd over: Australia 6-0 (Warner 0, Harris 2) Broad is back on the field and has two left-handers in his sights. Marcus Harris, the only player in Australia’s best XI who hasn’t contributed so far, works a couple off the pads. It hasn’t been a great start from England - Broad’s length was better than Anderson’s but his line was slightly wide. With Anderson’s line and Broad’s length, England would be unstoppable. “Morning!” writes my colleague Emma John. “I’ve been taking advantage of this day-night timing to let myself sleep to a civilised hour, then catch up on the entire day’s play with judicious use of the fast forward button. Turns out that spooling through today’s play over two and half hours has the exact same effect has watching a Susan Sarandon weepie.” I still haven’t mastered the fast-forward catch-up. Do people have it on x30? I do that and always miss stuff, then have to rewind, then it gets stuck and I start crying into my Weetabix. Maybe I should try x12. 1st over: Australia 4-0 (Warner 0, Harris 0) Stuart Broad, who was hit in the face by Jhye Richardson, isn’t on the field at the start of the Australian innings. Jimmy Anderson opens the bowling, with the chance to do some damage before the close. His fourth ball is an inswinger that beats Warner all ends up, hitting him on the top of the thigh and deflecting for four leg byes. The length was too short for a potential LBW, as it was throughout the over. That decision is good news for Nathan Lyon, who will clean up on days four and five. First, Australia have 17 overs to bat tonight, light and lightning permitting. As I was saying. Broad clouts Starc to Head in the covers, and that’s the end of that. Australia lead by 237 runs and will bat again. 84th over: England 236-9 (Broad 9, Anderson 5) Broad swipes a short ball from Richardson towards long leg, where the backpedalling Starc takes the catch a split-second before his right foot lands on the boundary sponge. Good lad. That’s Broad’s 50th Test six; only Flintoff, Pietersen, Stokes and Botham have hit more for England. A single brings Anderson on strike. He wears one in the sickeners and then clips efficently through square leg for four. These two have played pretty well, and with a lot of courage. 83rd over: England 225-9 (Broad 2, Anderson 1) Now Starc is taking the opportunity to rough Broad up. Get ready for a broken fucken record. Not that you can blame them, England would do exactly the same. The longer these two survive - 3.3 overs and counting - the less likely Australia are to enforce the follow on. “Hi Rob,” says Pete Salmon. “Given that every England selection these days is actually about planning for future Test matches, could it be that this side was chosen with one eye on the late 2022 tour of Pakistan? Is that why they are resting all the spinners?” Arf. While it’s not quite the aforementioned by-election result, that did raise a smile. England may be useless at almost everything, but it’s still a world-beater when it comes to gallows humour. 82th over: England 224-9 (Broad 1, Anderson 1) Broad is fine to continue being peppered by Richardson. On BT Sport, Matt Prior discusses what it’s like as a proper batter in a situation like this, how you feel guilty because you haven’t done your job properly and your mate is getting dusted up as a result. “Morning Rob,” says Nick Parish. “Like many other of your readers, I’m just waking up and finding out about the cricket disaster. It’s just like yesterday all over again. What time does the by-election result come along to make us all feel better?” Hmm, I know this is the Guardian but I’m not sure politics and sport should mix in this case. Unutterably funny though, eh. 81.1 overs: England 221-9 (Broad 0, Anderson 1) Jhye Richardson’s first ball is a beautifully directed bumper than Broad gloves into his grille. Richardson talks a bit of trash; Broad has a pop back. I suspect he reminded Richardson that, while the score might 221-9, it’s also 525-6. There’s a break in play while Broad is checked for concussion. 81st over: England 221-9 (Broad 0, Anderson 1) Mitchell Starc takes the new ball, because he needs every advantage he can get against Broad and Anderson. Actually, Anderson does really well to get on top of a couple of unpleasant short balls. He survives a full over before wearily touching gloves with his gganbu at the other end. They’re too old for this. “Interesting point about the effect of Test cricket,” says Matt Dony. “I don’t think I’ve seen another sport where the step up to the elite competition is so great. Test cricket really is a different sport compared to the domestic layers beneath it. It involves many of the same people, and ostensibly the same circumstances and situations, but it’s a world apart. As much as we all want to be sportsmen, I can’t imagine having the ability, dedication and focus to play for Glamorgan in front of a few thousand people. The thought of padding up for a Test innings is so far beyond terrifying, I can’t begin to comprehend it.” I think you’ll be okay, Matt. But you make a really good point – I suppose it’s because the format is so long, both matches and series, so there’s more scope for a bit of the old mental disintegration. 80th over: England 221-9 (Broad 0, Anderson 1) Green has dismissed England’s two best batters, Root and Stokes, which is a decent notch on his Statsguru. This match has been so similar to the pink-ball Test in 2017-18. Shane Warne makes the point that Australia might enforce the follow on this time because of what happened in the third innings four years ago, when Jimmy Anderson rolled them for 138. Cameroon Green wins the battle of the allrounders. Stokes, who was slogging selflessly in an attempt to save the follow on, tried to flatbat Green through the covers and dragged the ball onto the stumps. 79th over: England 220-8 (Stokes 34, Broad 0) Stokes turns down another single off Lyon’s first ball, and then slog-sweeps him into crowd for a laugh. That’s England’s first six of the series. He launches Lyon handsomely over wide mid-off for four more, and then takes another single to keep the strike. Eleven runs from the over. As the proverb says, a journey of a thousand miles starts with a single step. Mind you, so does a drunken journey of four yards that culminates with you falling flat on your face. “DELIGHTED to see Robinson out as a ginger duck: when one burns a review on one’s quacking way out,” says Meghan Purvis. “Yes, it’s named after Jonny Bairstow. Yes, I’m supporting Australia, but I think the term’s usefulness cuts across country lines.” I’ll be honest with you, with all the Ns in the surrounding words, and given England’s struggles since dinner, at first glance I read ‘usefulness cuts’ somewhat differently. 78th over: England 209-8 (Stokes 23, Broad 0) Shane Warne thinks Australia should enforce the follow on, which is interesting because he normally advocates what’s best for the spinner. Stokes has decided it’s time to go into slog mode. He has an almighty heave at Green, inside-edging past leg stump for four, and then turns down a single to long off. He keeps the strike with a single off the last ball. The Australian commentators on BT Sport say he is really struggling with his knee, and that’s partly why he has been so strokeless against Lyon. The upside - if he’s not completely knacked - is that he has faced 90-odd balls, which is important for a player who is so dependent on rhythm. 77th over: England 204-8 (Stokes 18, Robinson 0) Since he made a determined 42 on debut against New Zealand, Ollie Robinson has scored 53 runs at 5.88. He’s better than that. I think, though I’m not really sure any more. Test cricket has a nasty habit of turning excellent county No8s into walking wickets, and Ollie Robinson has made another duck. He missed a whip across the line at Lyon and was given out LBW. Robinson reviewed, a fair decision as there was some doubt on height, but replays showed it was hitting the top of the stumps. 76th over: England 203-7 (Stokes 17, Robinson 0) Cameron Green gives Robinson a dose of his own trajectory with a trampolining delivery that beats the edge. Andnow Robinson has been dropped! He edged to fourth slip, where Starc (yep) put down a fairly straightforward chance. Smith threw himself at the rebound but couldn’t hold on. “It’s just dawned on me that I have been emailing you on the OBO for nearly a third of my life,” writes Phil Withall, aged 247. “Probably 90% of those emails have been written in a state of confusion and despondency, this one included. Has time moved forward at all? Apart from my fetchingly bald head, general weariness with life and a myriad shattered dreams, has anything really changed? Dysfunctional selection, batting collapses, ineffective bowlers, bizarre managerial decisions... God I love cricket, and the OBO provides a little bit of comfort through all the pain. My thanks to all.” I wish we’d had the OBO in the 1990s. The 46 all out would have been a riot, and as for the second innings at Melbourne in 1990-91... 75th over: England 202-7 (Stokes 15, Robinson 0) Though it means a tricky session against the pink ball under lights, I expect Australia to bat again. There are wickets galore for Lyon on day five, with the added bonus that it will make him a greater threat for the rest of the series. Woakes goes, bowled by Lyon. He was unsettled by the previous delivery, which turned and bounced grotesquely to hit him in the stomach. He felt nervously outside off stump at the next ball and inside-edged it onto the stumps. 74th over: England 201-6 (Stokes 15, Woakes 24) Stokes drives Neser pleasantly through mid-off for a couple. “Given the urgent need to do something - anything! - about the top order, and Ollie Pope’s struggles with spin, is it worth shifting him up to 3 and having Malan open?” says George Wright. “Then Lawrence can come in at six? I appreciate it’s all shuffling the deckchairs at this point, but it seems strange to have a clearly decent batsman in a position where he most commonly faces his biggest weakness?” It’s an emerging weakness, which is why we’ve all been caught a bit cold. I wouldn’t open with Malan - he’s too high at No3 outside Australia - but I wonder if this is something Pope might do for Surrey from next summer, especially as he is an excellent counter-attacker against seam. Not sure about him against the new ball, but they could try something like Crawley, Hameed, Pope, Root, Malan, Stokes. Or they could just start weeping openly, while making ostentatious wailing noises, and see what happens. I wouldn’t drop Burns yet. He’s been England’s second best batter this year (yes, I know) and unless it’s obvious he is shot mentally I would give him at least one more Test. 73rd over: England 198-6 (Stokes 12, Woakes 24) A maiden from Lyon to Woakes. He played one nice stroke, a clip off the pads, but couldn’t beat midwicket. Seven overs to the new ball. 72nd over: England 198-6 (Stokes 12, Woakes 24) Michael Neser starts after tea, and beats Woakes with his first and third deliveries. “Australia are the better team but are they this much better?” writes Niall Mullen. “To quote Peter Reid, ‘I don’t give a f*** about losing but I’ll tell you what I do give a f*** about, losing shite’.” I’m not sure that’s fair. Australia are just a much better team in these conditions, especially with England’s morale through the floor even before the series. England didn’t help themselves with their pre-match decisions at Brisbane, but once they lost that game the rest of the series was always likely to be admin. A new captain and/or coach might get more out of them I suppose. But, and I know it’s not much consolation right now, they are still the fourth or fifth best team in the world, and they’ll beat most opponents in the next couple of years. The Test rankings are a bit like the Premier League - the top three that are miles better than the rest, which leads to some grisly mismatches. “Rob, you seem to misunderstand,” says Andrew Hurley. “If Stokes contributed to winning some games with big centuries, and still only averages 36, that indicates quite clearly he contributed to losing many more games - granted, these low scores don’t make the headlines or stay in people’s memories, but he’s nowhere near a great batsman, not even a good one - good batsmen at 5/6 do not average 36.” All runs aren’t equal, surely. If Stokes comes out at 400 for three and gets a duck, who cares. He has hot and cold periods - when he’s out of form he can look awful - but I don’t accept that you can judge him purelyon statistics. What’s next, quantifying orgasms? Sorry, my love, I’ll give you a hug in a minute but I just need to put that knee-trembler through the algorithm. Let’s leave it at that, we’re clearly not going to agree. I think you have a point, and there is a contradiction in a great players whose numbers are relatively mediocre, but I think that should trigger curiosity rather than judgement. Talking of Ramps and the 1990s, those of a certain disposition will enjoy this. “Honestly don’t know how you keep coming back for more OBO punishment,” says Will Vignoles. “Is Ollie Pope in danger of becoming this generation’s Mark Ramprakash? Beautiful to watch, clearly too good for county cricket, but maybe just lacking that final ounce of mental toughness required to become a top-level batsman. A real shame as when he first emerged he looked like the answer to the middle order, but maybe England need to look elsewhere. Another chance for Dan Lawrence perhaps?” It’s certainly possible, and as you say Pope will score millions in county cricket if he doesn’t make it at Test level. There have been worrying signs this year, especially against spin, but he turns 24 in January so he has loads of time. I think he’s tough enough mentally, though we don’t see what is going on behind the scenes. (There were, we realise now, warning signs aplenty with Ramps once he started to struggle in 1992.) I still think Pope will make it, though I said that about Ramprakash once a month, every month, between 1991 and 2002. It still annoys me that they left him out in New Zealand in 1991-92, mind. That did a lot more damage than any of us realised at that time. That was a match-winning, series-winning session for Australia: 30 overs, 57 runs, four prime middle-order wickets. Cameron Green blew the whole thing open with the wicket of Joe Root, and then Mitchell Starc and Nathan Lyon started to drip water onto England’s scalp. England didn’t help themselves with some iffy shot selection, but I do think it was more about good bowling than poor batting. Australia are a better team, the end. 71st over: England 197-6 (Stokes 12, Woakes 23) Lyon bowls the last over before the break to Stokes, who continues to defend slightly crabbily. Another maiden. It’s been an intriguing contest, and for once that’s not a euphemism. Stokes has barely played an attacking stroke off Lyon but, after a very difficult start, has looked increasingly secure. It’s been pretty similar to his start at Headingley. though he is scoring more quickly this time: he has 12 from 71 balls. 70th over: England 197-6 (Stokes 12, Woakes 23) Woakes rifles another square drive for four off Richardson. If he is ever going to get a half-century in Australia, it will surely be on a slow pitch like this one. He looks vulnerable against the short ball on the quicker pitches at Brisbane and Perth. Richardson decides to explore the middle of the pitch, but the ball sits up in slow motion and Woakes larrups a disdainful pull through midwicket for four more. This is a useful counter-attack, 23 from 25 balls. 69th over: England 187-6 (Stokes 12, Woakes 13) A single off Lyon allows Stokes to join the double-figures massive. Four of them now, what a formidable gang they are. It took Stokes 62 balls, a reflection of his over-my-dead-bat mentality. A thick edge brings two more later inthe over, though he wasn’t running freely as it came back for the second. His knee clearly isn’t right. Paradoxically, I think his dodgy knee will help him become England Test captain in January, because he can redefine himself as a batter who bowls a bit. That and the fact there are literally no other candidates. 68th over: England 183-6 (Stokes 9, Woakes 12) Thanks for all your emails, which I’m trying to sift through between and during overs. I should probably stop for a bit and concentrate on the cricket. Woakes, driving loosely at Richardson, slices the ball in the air and not far short of backward point. Earlier in the over he drove his third boundary to become the third English player to reach dougle figures, and end geeky scorecard comparisons with Trinidad 1986. 67th over: England 179-6 (Stokes 9, Woakes 8) “OK Rob, it’s time to ask the question,” says Shaun Lawson, which really has taken me by surprise given we’ve never met. “We both grew up at a time when the England cricket team was a national laughing-stock. An unmitigated embarrassment for 13 years. But the team of the 90s would beat this shower like a drum... wouldn’t they? “The whole of Test cricket was massively better back then. And no way, no way would the likes of Gooch, Atherton (even with his poor Ashes record), Stewart, Hussain, Ramprakash or the majestic Thorpe have just surrendered like this. Nor would Gough, or Headley, or Malcolm. Tufnell at his best was terrific too. In short: just what in the world is going on here? Yours in affectionate remembrance of English cricket.” I’m not sure I agree. I love that team, but they were the worst in the world in 1999. This England team, for all their limitations, are still the fourth or fifth best in the world. And don’t get me started on the late-1980s team. I think we’re guilty of thinking of the 1990s team at their best and the 2021 team at their worst. I realise the way they are playing at the moment makes the latter somewhat unavoidable. 66th over: England 179-6 (Stokes 9, Woakes 8) Jhye Richardson replaces Starc, who bowled an outstanding spell of 7-2-12-2. His second ball is a half-volley that Woakes punches confidently between extra cover and mid-off for four. He edges the next one, but softens his hands sufficiently to ensure it dops well short of Smith at second slip. Later in the over, another edge drops short and scuttles away for four more. “Rob,” says Davorder. “This innings now feels very Blade-runnery indeed. ‘Fiery the angels fell; deep thunder rolled around their shores; burning with the fires of Starc.’ Only slightly adapted from the film. But then Roy also messed with the original lines by Pope. (I wanted it to be Pope, darn it.)” 65th over: England 171-6 (Stokes 9, Woakes 0) Saying which, Stokes tries a reverse sweep at Lyon and misses. The next ball turns sharply, if slowly, to beat the edge. If this goes to a fifth day, and I think it will, Lyon will be unplayable. Another maiden, the nth since lunch; yes I have lost count. Stokes has 9 from 54 balls. 64th over: England 171-6 (Stokes 9, Woakes 0) Stokes continues to defend diligently atop the burning deck. At some stage, if he’s still there, he’ll start swinging, but at the moment he’s getting more value from hanging around and getting some rhythm into his batting. “I was referring to Test cricket, and referred to Stokes’s average,” says Andrew Hurley. “How is a player averaging 36 a great player? Help me understand...” Because he wins more games and big moments than most people who average 45. And that average includes some lost years early in his career. For what it’s worth I don’t think he’s a great batter, but anyone who doesn’t think he’s a great cricketer needs a month in the Statsguru rehab clinic. 63rd over: England 170-6 (Stokes 8, Woakes 0) That last Starc over was a wicket maiden, and the 11th maiden since lunch. The way Australia have quietly overwhelmed England evokes the darkest day of all on this ground, 5 December 2006. Lyon continues, with four men round the bat for Woakes. One from the over. Lyon’s figures look fairly ordinary (20-7-41-1) but he has been a key part of the post-dinner suffocation. 62nd over: England 169-6 (Stokes 7, Woakes 0) That was a 15-ball duck for Buttler. He started this series with such promise and freedom, and already Australia have broken him. Sad to say, one way or another this is his last Test series. Oh dear lord. Buttler, still stuck on nought, chases a wide, full delivery from Starc and is beautifully taken by Warner at first slip. That’s another loose stroke, though it was a forced error - since lunch, Australia have just suffocated England. 61st over: England 169-5 (Stokes 7, Buttler 0) “I keep reading Stokes is a great batsman but he averages 36,” says Andrew Hurley. “Isn’t he like a striker who rattles in a hat trick once in a blue moon but ends up with ten goals a season? Why the hyperbole about a player who very, very rarely produces?” There’s an interesting point in there, and his career is a bit of a contradiction - but come on, he doesn’t ‘very, very rarely produce’. He certainly has little-girl-with-the-little-curl qualities. But he also wins big moments with bat and ball - World Cup finals, that sort of thing - and you can’t quantify that. 60th over: England 169-5 (Stokes 7, Buttler 0) Buttler chases a wide one from Starc and is beaten. He has started his innings like a man whose subconscious won’t shut up. Another maiden, which means England are 29 for three from 19 overs in this session. And if you conveniently ignore the first two overs after dinner, they are 21 for three from the last 17. That’s with an old ball on a relatively flat pitch. It’ll be interesting to see whether Australia enforce the follow on. They have already won this game, let’s be honest, and as an added bonus they get to choose the tool with which to torture England: a new pink ball this evening, or an old ball turning square for Lyon on day five. I suspect they will bat again. 59th over: England 169-5 (Stokes 7, Buttler 0) There’s already a lot of turn for Lyon, which makes life especially difficult for the left-handed Stokes. Thus far he has played very watchfully, but when Lyon errs slightly in line he smacks a sweep through square leg for four. That’s his first boundary. Obviously, because he’s now on seven. “Following on from Brian’s Roy Batty reference, maybe this is the point where Stokes says, ‘I want more runs…’,” says Matt Dony, as a blast of fresh air tickles the top of my head. “Of course, how he finishes that sentence depends on which version you’re watching.” 58th over: England 165-5 (Stokes 3, Buttler 0) Buttler’s approach at Brisbane was just right, though that was before he dropped a sitter on day one. He gets down on himself quite easily, certianly in Test cricket, so it’ll be interesting to see how he plays. Starc beats him third ball with a fine delivery, angled across him from over the wicket. During that last over we saw a few replays of Labuschagne’s catch - it was superb, not just the reaction but also the anticipation. As Pope went down the track, Labuschagne took a couple of steps to his left; had he not done so, it would have been a much tougher chance. It would be wrong to blame Root and Malan for this, but equally you can’t ignore England’s poor conversion rate - especially in Australia, where it’s so important to turn fifties into one-fifties. In the last two Ashes series in Australia, ie the lifespan of these teams, Australia’s conversion rate of fifties to hundreds is a solid 41 per cent. England’s is 15. 57th over: England 164-5 (Stokes 2, Buttler 0) That’s drinks. It’s easy to call England the biggest shower in the history of slang, and we’ll come to that, but Australia have been phenomenal since lunch. It’s been a masterclass in old-ball bowling - tight, aggressive quick bowling at one end and mischievous, aggressive spin at the other. In this session, England are 24 for three from 16 overs. Do not adjust your set. A few balls after the DRS reprieve, Pope is caught at short leg for real. He skipped down the track to Lyon and flicked the ball straight at Labuschagne, who took a superb reaction catch. Pope is a fine player but he is very skittish against top-class spin bowling. It hit him on the elbow, not the glove, so Pope survives. Lyon is wicketless but looks extremely dangerous, and for heaven’s sake he’s no longer wicketless. Or is he? Pope pushes forward and is given out caught at short leg. He reviews immediately, which suggests he didn’t hit it. 56th over: England 163-4 (Stokes 1, Pope 5) Thanks Emma, morning/evening everyone. Stokes gets off the mark from his 24th delivery - he’s tryingto follow the Headingley template, isn’t he - and then Pope pulls confidently behind square for his first boundary. He’ll be keen to counter-attack if possible; until that moment, it hadn’t been. Australia have been quite brilliant since lunch. 55th over: England 158-4 (Stokes 0, Pope 1) Lyon is in control here. The hosts are not giving away runs for nothing, and Lyon makes it another maiden here. He has Pope defending off the back foot, nudging from deep in his crease. Stokes, meanwhile, can’t get himself off zero. And with that, I’m now going to hand you over to Rob Smyth, who will take you through the remainder of the day’s play. 54th over: England 158-4 (Stokes 0, Pope 1) Pretty shrewd of Smith to bring Green off for a bit and bring back Starc. Malan has thrown away his century and this day has completely turned within about 15 minutes. What two quickfire wickets can do. Australia are back in control here. Pope steals a risky single off Starc, the only run for the over. 53rd over: England 157-4 (Stokes 0, Pope 0) Stokes leaves a wide ball as Lyon comes around the wicket. Now he’s beaten as the ball spins well off the bounce. “Good morning Emma,” says Brian. “Well that didn’t take very long for my euphoria at waking to a wicketless opening session to disappear ‘like tears in the rain’. Time to die, as Roy Batty would say, or can Stokes replicate the form of yore?” 52nd over: England 157-4 (Stokes 0, Pope 0) All over, red rover. Pope is in the hot seat and survives a Starc inswinger to complete a dramatic over. Green has been brought off and Starc is now inswinging hard to Malan, who blocks this with authority but has been lacking a little in composure compared to the last session? Am I imagining this? Maybe, as Starc gifts him a shot, wide-ish one for him have some fun with for a four. Oh and he’s out! The very next ball! He tries for the same shot as the one that got him that boundary but he’s nicked a nice, full delivery and Smith is right where he needs to be in the slips. 51st over: England 153-3 (Malan 76, Stokes 0) Malan breaks the drought, outsmarting Lyon’s bounce and turn that is looking very nice, and edges for two runs. 50th over: England 150-3 (Malan 73, Stokes 0) Stokes is dancing on his funky feet, shuffling and shifting against the ferocity of Green. He starts running for a single, is called back in the nick of time, defends, digs out a yorker, pulls, drives, for no return. That’s six Australian maidens now. 49th over: England 150-3 (Malan 73, Stokes 0) Lyon bowls Australia fifth consecutive maiden. They’re not bleeding runs and have ensured Root STILL does not have a Test century in Australia. Is this when the pendulum starts to swing? 48th over: England 150-3 (Malan 73, Stokes 0) Stokes starts by defending, and he’s doing a good job of it. Until, um, he is avoiding a short ball from Green and then swinging back around Matrix-style to have a go at it. He’s confused himself a bit. Green, meanwhile, bowling at 143kph. 47th over: England 150-3 (Malan 73, Stokes 0) What can Ben Stokes bring to the table? He’ll have to wait an over to find out because Malan is spending this one drifting, edging and floating for no runs off Lyon. 46th over: England 150-3 (Malan 73, Stokes 0) There has been a hint of something coming for a couple of overs. A small whiff of discomfort on the batters’ part and Green went for blood here. A delivery not completely unlike Root’s last close call and he gets enough of an edge that it pings behind him to first slip where Smith is waiting for the regulation catch. That’s a big wicket. Root edges behind to first slip and it’s all over red rover for the England captain! What was I just saying about a breakthrough? 45th over: England 150-2 (Malan 73, Root 62) Maiden over for Lyon to Malan, but Australia still don’t have a breakthrough. If they can jag one wicket they might just start to work their way down the order. Christina writes in: “I bet Australia are regretting the fact that they declared now! Could prove to be a costly mistake...” 44th over: England 150-2 (Malan 73, Root 62) Green has the ball in hand and he almost, almost has Root right where he wants him. His delivery has a little bit of lift as Root appears indecisive about whether to have a go at it or not. He makes the – late– call to leave it and only just gets away with it. 43rd over: England 148-2 (Malan 72, Root 61) Lyon has a crack now, and we are edging towards the part of the day when he may be used more often. He has Malan slicing the ball slightly skyward in a fashion that it drops just a little out of reach of a hovering Green. Two balls later, though, he pounces on a shorter delivery and cuts away a four to backward point. 42nd over: England 144-2 (Malan 68, Root 61) We are back after dinner, or afternoon tea, or breakfast – depending where you are in the world. Green is on the attack first and it only takes Root four balls to bring up the first four of the session. He plays it late, opens his face only ever so slightly and threads a sliver of space between slip and gully. There are a few England fans on the email and Twitter doing that England fan thing. “Listen,” writes Ben, “its the hope that kills you. After lunch, the first over will result in 6 wickets and we’ll follow on for a combined total of 300. Anything better is a bonus.” In the final overs of that session Root surpassed 1,600 runs this calendar year. He is currently on 1,601, which means he has eclipsed Michael Clarke’s 1,595 and now has Graeme Smith (1,656 runs in 2008) in his sights. It seems an obvious question, but how much are Australia missing Cummins and Hazlewood right now? The ball was relatively new and yet the pace attack has still been left wanting. Not a criticism of Neser and Richardson et al, just an observation. “This is a much better start to the weekend than many of us expected,” writes Guy, who is presumably an England supporter. “It’s heartening to see our two best batters fight back. But we’ve been here before, specifically last week, so it’s not just down to them, is it? Ask me again at the close, but I’m praying for 300-2.” The partnership stands at 128 as Root and Malan head off the pitch and into the tunnel. A light lunch, a snack perhaps, some electrolytes to celebrate Australia’s failure to take a wicket in the first session of day three. 41st over: England 140-2 (Malan 68, Root 57) Wow, that’s close. Richardson beats Root on the inside edge but ball tracking shows it’s bounced over the stumps. Leg bye. It’s time for dinner! 40th over: England 139-2 (Malan 68, Root 57) Root has 23 Test centuries but none of those have come in Australia. Seems absurd, but he could be on track for his first. He inches closer as Green bowls a wee bit short and then a little too full, driving the Australian through point for two and then a cheeky one via a pull shot. 39th over: England 134-2 (Malan 67, Root 53) Dinner is getting closer and England just have to hold firm until then. To wit, Root brings up a four and his half-century – his 52nd in Test cricket and his 15th against Australia. He is going great guns and is seemingly hanging around for a bit. On the email, Redmeansrun writes in with some Jos Buttler punnage: “We seem to have mislaid your coat sir” Buttler 38th over: England 129-2 (Malan 67, Root 48) Welcome Cameron Green. What have you got? Can you give this sauce bottle a shake? Good length and no runs from his opening three balls to Malan, until the length isn’t so good and the batter makes hay through midwicket for four. 37th over: England 123-2 (Malan 62, Root 47) Richardson has the toe cut out of left shoe to help with the impact. We are getting close-ups now of Fox of his toe peeping out the front, and laughter from the commentary box. Let’s get the camera back on the action, hey, because Root has just smashes a decisive four to backward square leg. 36th over: England 117-2 (Malan 61, Root 42) A maiden over for Lyon, thank you very much. Bit of overspin, bit of fun twistiness. 35th over: England 117-2 (Malan 61, Root 42) Root hits a single but cops a hit to his thigh. Malan adds a single to point and Malan another to cover. Richardson gets a tiiiiny bit of movement away from Malan. He’s beaten, but notches another single to round out the over. England have made 11 century partnerships in Tests this year. Nine of those have involved Joe Root and three were the combo of Root and Malan. They really have left a lot to be desired in this department though: 34th over: England 113-2 (Malan 59, Root 41) Malan puts away a straight-shooter from Lyon and brings up his century partnership with Root, which right now is going some way to closing the hefty deficit. Australia need a wicket or risk being given a taste of their own medicine. 33rd over: England 110-2 (Malan 58, Root 39) Richardson is back in the attack and ships one run to Root. Speaking of Root, he has now surpassed Tendulkar for most Test runs in a calendar year, which is truly, mind-blowingly impressive. He’s close to Clarke now! 1788 - Mohammad Yousuf (2006) 1710 - Viv Richards (1976) 1656 - Graeme Smith (2008) 1595 - Michael Clarke (2012) 1563* - Joe Root (2021) 1562 - Sachin Tendulkar (2010) 32nd over: England 109-2 (Malan 58, Root 38) Lyon gives Malan a freebie with just enough width to drive it through the covers for four. 31st over: England 105-2 (Malan 54, Root 38) Labuschagne, meanwhile, is moving his mouth non-stop – he’s outdoing Warney for laddish commentary at the moment, though seems pretty harmless. Malan brings up three runs and England’s 100 off Neser before Root stands tall on his backfoot for a truly exquisite punch through to the short boundary. 30th over: England 98-2 (Malan 51, Root 34) Lyon is back on the attack, first of Malan, who gets away a single to fine leg, before Root swerves and sweeps the next five for no reward. 29th over: England 97-2 (Malan 50, Root 34) LBW! LBW? Is it? Nesser has bowled to Root and it appears to have struck his pad first. Was in the line of the off-stump? It’s given not out but Smith reviews. He does not get the answer he was looking for as ball tracking shows it skirted over the top of the bails. Great ball though, and it seamed sharply back in at Root. The review overshadowed Malan bringing up his 50. 28th over: England 96-2 (Malan 49, Root 34) Jim from Dublin has this to say: “I enjoy following the English on their travails in sunnier less hospitable climbs, however, I have a bad feeling Mother Nature may have had enough, and could come to the rescue of the weather beaten lobster laden barmy army, offering 2 draws. 3 losses.” 27th over: England 92-2 (Malan 47, Root 32) Nesser is bowling and Malan picks up a couple of handy runs via fine leg, before popping up a potential gimme for Neser that comes to nothing. He defends, defends, then thumps another to long-on for two. 26th over: England 88-2 (Malan 43, Root 32) Root gets away a superb reverse sweep that seemingly comes from nowhere after almost an over of playing off the back foot to point. This time his weight is over his front knee and his body turning as the ball runs away for a four to deep backward point, evading the fielder who digs up some dirt in his effort to stop it. “Morning, Emma,” says Darryl from Johannesburg, who is about to criticise Root straight after his fine shot. “Surveying the England shambles in the series thus far it seems essential to spike Silverwood and replace Root as captain: nice guy, nice with bat in hand, but light in the captaincy department. It’s appalling how Leach has been treated – and deployed. And it’s time the gloves went to a proper keeper like Foakes. It is long overdue to acknowledge the mirage of Buttler turning into an English Adam Gilchrist. The only sadness there is that the question about who is responsible for another Test loss - “Whodunnit?” - won’t be answered by “Buttler done it.” 25th over: England 84-2 (Malan 43, Root 28) Root diverts a full Neser delivery to mid-wicket. Malan gets away (again) with a mistimed drive that skims off his inside edge, but atones at the end of the over with a four that was just breezy to watch. Time for the drinks break, and England will be very happy with the position they are in. 24th over: England 77-2 (Malan 38, Root 26) Four! Almost a six! Lyon bears down on Root but he is in fine touch. He shuffles his feet, then swings his bat through that pink so sweetly it bounces just short of the ropes before hurtling over. Malan follows his captain’s lead with a boundary of his own but is less in control, even though Lyon is clearly unhappy with his away-spinning delivery. Because it was a little short he sort of cuts it up, speculatively, but gets away with it. Still, you have to take it. 23rd over: England 68-2 (Malan 34, Root 21) Neser is finding movement where there is ostensibly no movement to be found. The debutant is having a cracker, a deserved one at that. Not the ideal circumstances under which to get your start but the 31-year-old has taken his opportunity. Root mostly defends, eking only a single out to deep backward point. 22nd over: England 67-2 (Malan 34, Root 20) The new bat appears working a treat but he gets a decent slice of luck after leaning in and trying a sweep shot that catches an edge and pops up into the path of Starc in the outfield, but fortuitously a little to the left. 21st over: England 65-2 (Malan 33, Root 19) Roots makes no runs off Starc’s first four balls but appears to have cracked his bat. There is a brief halt in play as he waits for a replacement to be brought out. He has a choice of two and weighs up both before taking one and marching back to the crease. Meanwhile, Robert has been wordsmithing at home on a theme of Jos Buttler and has this: “The Buttler did it. No he didn’t!” 20th over: England 65-2 (Malan 33, Root 19) The GOAT is here. Nathan Lyon is here. The commentators are reminding us once again that the spinner used to be a groundskeeper at Adelaide Oval. To be fair, he has 51 wickets at an average of 26 here. Root gently taps his first delivery outside his off-stump, which is how much of his first over goes. Malan is in defence mode. 19th over: England 64-2 (Malan 33, Root 18) Starc is back bowls well wide, which Malan leaves, but follows with an inswinging yorker and then a bouncer for variation. Malan has to hustle to get out of the way. 18th over: England 62-2 (Malan 31, Root 18) Phew! That was close that, but good judgment from the batters as Malan flick Richardson to the right of short cover. The fielder is up for it and hurtles the ball towards – but not directly on target at – the stumps, but Root is home either way. The pair bring up their 50 partnership. 17th over: England 55-2 (Malan 27, Root 15) Starc enjoys a maiden over against Root to wipe away his tears after his opening horror show. To be fair they are not fantastic conditions for him – there’s not much movement happening out there. Meanwhile, reader Mac Millings clearly still has his head in England’s fielding problems and has selected his all-time Dropped Catch XI: “Spill AtheyFumble Mohammad AshSNAFU Stuart Floor In-and-outzamam-ul-Haq Basil “Dolly” D’Oliveira Jimmy Neeshambles Miss Lewis Jos Buttlerfingers Gimme Anderson Can’t bat, can’t bowl, can’t Phil DeFreitas” Can someone please come up with a more original Jos Buttler pun? Please. 16th over: England 55-2 (Malan 27, Root 15) Malan is up and about and on the front foot to drive Richardson to deep extra-cover and make two runs for his troubles. The next delivery, though, is full, and catches his outside edge before pinging away towards Smith at second slip. It bounces just in front of him before he gets low and to the left to stop the ball in its tracks. 15th over: England 51-2 (Malan 24, Root 14) Starc is in the middle for a spell and doesn’t start too well as Malan pumps him for consecutive fours off his first two balls. They are short deliveries, both outside the off stump, and the batter simply lies in wait until he’s ready to cut it away. No run, no run, three (3) runs – a drive wide of mid-off. Very positive signs for England. 14th over: England 40-2 (Malan 13, Root 14) There is a soft appeal from Australia as Richardson hits Malan on the pads – via his bat – that turns into a decidedly loud appeal once Marnus Labuschagne pipes up at third slip. No dice. But Malan is struggling ever so slightly to give himself enough room but oh! As soon as I type this he has leaned in beautifully for a drive that transfers the momentum off Richardson’s full delivery and past mid-off for a four. 13th over: England 35-2 (Malan 8, Root 14) Neser, bowling fuller than England have been, almost grabs a maiden but for one run that Malan glances to long leg. The next half-hour to an hour will be key for these batters, you’d think. Australia will want to strike the top order sooner rather than later or otherwise allow the tourists to settle in and get comfy. Robert Wilson has written in. “Greetings from late-night Paris. The Barney Ronay piece is a good one. But it’s a mistake to think he’s not feeling positive. Since yesterday’s play hit that note of tremulous haplessness that England fans know so well, they’ve been feeling absolutely tremendous, like a six year-old on Christmas morning. Their blood-pressure is down, their heart-rates are calming and they’re settling into that usual fug of rueful dismay that they find as cosy and familiar as a pair of old slippers. A score of under 80 is a warm bath to them, an innings defeat a glass of claret. It’s not that they cope well with losing. They evidently preferit. “Adelaide in 2010 made them fretful and feverish. They liked Mark Ramprakash a lot more than Robin Smith. Look at the BTL comments on today’s reports. Their delight is palpable, a steady drizzle of mulish acceptance, with the odd comfortless and icy joke. And it’s not even a dreary Boycottian Things Were Better In My Day nostalgia. Indeed the only energy the old timers seem to show is to debate whether it was more depressing to be an England fan in the 80s, or 90s, or early 2000s (a couple of haunted veterans still having flashbacks of watching Chris Tavaré or Martin McCague waxed quite heated). 2005 was an outlier (I think they were all drunk). England fans are ****ing loving this.” 12th over: England 34-2 (Malan 7, Root 14) Lovely shot from Root, who opens the face of his bat, stands tall, and slips his shot away through backward point. Richardson’s delivery didn’t move away quite as much as he may have anticipated and Lyon can’t stop it hitting the ropes. He really is a lovely technician, Joe Root. 11th over: England 28-2 (Malan 6, Root 9) Root is showing his class here with a full-faced drive as Neser goes for his leg stump. Malan, facing Nesser, catches the inside edge again and appears as if he can’t quite pick up his feet. He’s lucky again, and makes one run, which is more than he managed from his previous two deliveries. Root is up now and ouch, the delivery rises sharply and kisses his hip. 10th over: England 23-2 (Malan 5, Root 6) To update, there will be 95 overs remaining today. Including this one which starts with Root facing Richardson, who bowls a no ball in his second delivery and is hit for a single by the England captain to cover. And hey, there’s a four to Malan. He got a bit lucky there as Richardson drew an inside edge but got it away. 9th over: England 17-2 (Malan 1, Root 5) Nesser gets us away with Malan in strike. Good length just outside the off stump. Another to round out this over has Malan on the defence. We are getting close to the start of play now, which has been brought forward by 20 minutes to make up for yesterday’s lost time. The warm-ups are done, which included some keepy uppies, and the players are out in the middle. Meanwhile, Barney Ronay is back in Blighty and has been feeling a little less positive about England’s performance. “Detailed analysis shows Australia have been better in three key areas so far: batting, bowling and fielding. Otherwise things have been pretty even. It was at best a flicker of a false dawn. But there was something else here too, a sniff of a more competent timeline; of the series, as they used to say on Bullseye, that you could have had. These Ashes feel doomed already after a day in which England were reduced to 17 for two, 456 behind. And yet, with all due respect to Australia’s good batting and excellent seam bowling, this has been a case of self-dooming. And self-dooming on two fronts, most obviously the muddled internal management of Chris Silverwood and Joe Root.” Full article here: The considered Geoff Lemon had some thoughts on the considered Steve Smith. “In 2017, Steve Smith began what can now be mapped as his highest batting peak. Three centuries in four Tests while leading a tour of India, a feat no visiting captain has bettered, while holding his team in the series until a final defeat 2-1. Then home for an Ashes series that he opened with a match-winning hundred at Brisbane, followed with a double in Perth, and sealed with a hundred in Sydney, winning 4-0 with 687 runs at an average of over 137. Three months later came the Cape Town sandpaper affair, and his year-long ban ended up being an absence from Test cricket of 16 months. What has happened since has been the waste of Smith, the squandering by Cricket Australia of their most extraordinary batting talent since Don Bradman.” Full article here: If you are still catching up on Friday’s happenings, Ali Martin was at the ground and has your back: Good afternoon Australians. Good (very early) morning Britons. We are back at Adelaide Oval for this, day three of the second Test. Well, lightning was England’s player of day two as the elements halted proceedings before the tourists’ already-dented innings took any further hits. A divine intervention, if you will, at 17 for two and trailing by 456 runs. Now they resume, on a mission from god, to save this Test and the series. The standoff between Cricket Australia and the South Australian health authorities is frankly more fraught than much happening on the pitch right now. And as Pat Cummins watches from isolation back in New South Wales, his side are taking their confidence from bat to ball. England’s circumstances are effectively the inverse of this. The scoreboard is bearing down, Mitchell Starc already has his tail up, Michael Neser has his first Test wicket and Jhye Richardson is looking sharp. That’s before we even get to Nathan Lyon, who likes the pink ball very much indeed. Word is it’s a little cooler (though still relatively humid) at Adelaide Oval today, which will suit Australia’s bowlers. This wee fact might have been bouncing around that very particular tactical brain belonging to Steve Smith yesterday. While the mercury hovered in the mid-30s the captain had his hosts hunker down with the bat and force England to continue toiling in the field until sunset, at which point he declared at 473 for nine. That scoreline also had a bit to do with England’s largely one-note attack and some general carelessness. It is difficult to see the tourists making a proper go of this Test but Ben Stokes is still a believer so let’s see what happens. Over to you, Joe Root and Dawid Malan. At the Gabba this pair brought up a 159-run partnership. Can they do it again?Few matches arrive with much jeopardy just nine games into a 22-game season but on the eve of the Women’s Super League winter break, Sunday’s meeting of Leicester City and Birmingham could not feel any more tense. For both teams, who are separated by the single point Birmingham collected from a 1-1 draw with West Ham in October, with new managers hired last month, taking three points at Filbert Way could swing fortunes and provide the first step away from the WSL’s single relegation place. The trouble though, for Leicester’s Lydia Bedford, the former England women’s youth team head coach, and Birmingham’s interim head coach, Darren Carter, is to balance the need to win with the bigger picture. “We have 11 games left this season and what the players can’t do is put all their eggs in one basket this weekend and think about the result,” cautioned Bedford. “The performance is really important. If we get a performance and a result on Sunday it will help us launch that into the second half of the season. If we get a performance and not the result then we know we are progressing.” Carter believes his Birmingham players are “not naive enough to think otherwise” when asked if this game is as big as it gets. “We both find ourselves in a position where we’re fighting for points and looking for that first league win, so it’s an important game but it’s definitely not going to define the season for either team,” he added. Being cut adrift from Aston Villa, who sit in 10th place, nine points clear of Birmingham and 10 of Leicester, makes putting breathing room between the teams vital. Birmingham did remarkably well to avoid relegation last term with Carla Ward, now at Villa, working wonders to keep the Blues up against the odds, while Leicester have failed to register a single point in the WSL having been promoted following a dominant Championship season. With two new managers, there are plenty of unknowns. “I think it adds to the mystery of it to some extent as both managers have had just one or two games to be able to implement what they wanted to do,” said Bedford. “I went down to watch Birmingham against London City Lionesses [in the League Cup] when we finished training. Both managers have had very little time to influence. You have to trust your players to some extent to go out and do what they are expected to do, which is work hard together to try to get a result. It will be an interesting one.” Bedford formally began her role with Leicester on 6 December, a day after they earned an impressive penalty win over Manchester United in the League Cup, but lost 4-0 to the league leaders, Arsenal, in her first and only game in the Leicester dugout. Carter, meanwhile, has seen his team score four goals in two games, twice taking the lead against Manchester City before an 89th-minute goal from Ellen White gave the visitors a 3-2 win. They came from two goals down against London City in the League Cup before losing on penalties. Given Birmingham had scored two goals in their previous 11 games, the impact has been immediate. “The one thing I noticed straight away from watching the previous games before I came in was that the mentality was always to drop and be on the back foot rather than be on the front foot,” he said. “It’s easy to say these things, but to go and put it into practice is asking the players to be brave, and I certainly think they’ve been that since I’ve come in. We’ve asked them to go and press higher up the pitch and ultimately that’s allowed us to transition and get more entries into the final third. “So I think what you’ve seen the last two games especially is that we’ve rewired that mindset.We don’t want to be a defensive team, we don’t want to just sit in and soak up pressure and hit teams on the counterattack, that’s not my DNA, wasn’t as a player and certainly won’t be as a coach. “I want us to be on the front foot, I want us to impose ourselves on the game and we’ve got some real talented forward players in the squad and you want to utilise them and get them into the positions where they are going to shine.” With the return fixture in February, there is hope, particularly given Reading’s defeat of Chelsea and Brighton claiming a point off Arsenal, that both teams can pick up points elsewhere. “If you look at our Manchester United game [in the cup] a few weeks ago, the players pulled off a bit of a result there already,” said Bedford. “Each weekend there’s a few surprise results which you think you might not have called. I imagine we’ll be in a position if we get our gameplans right … to pick up points against multiple teams and that’s the aspiration.”As surely as the first cuckoo arrives in spring, so the first festive CD lands around mid-August. By usual standards this year’s Christmas heap is small, but quality is high. The collegiate choir offerings, thwarted by not being able to practise in lockdown, are mostly absent. An exception is those Nine Lessons and Carols stalwarts, the Choir of King’s College, Cambridge, directed by Daniel Hyde. Their In the Bleak Midwinter has a particular distinction: for once, the men and boys sing in a resonant empty chapel, without the acoustic muffle of a congregation. Grandeur is achieved by the organ, played by Matthew Martin. This is the choice for anyone who wants carols they recognise. A strong alternative is the recently formed adult Belfast Cathedral Choir in their debut album for Resonus, A Belfast Christmas: first-class singing, conducted by Matthew Owens, in choices by Philip Ledger, John Rutter, Elizabeth Poston and others. In addition, Owens has recorded Christmas Bells: Organ Music from Belfast Cathedral. The Sixteen’s Carol of the Bells matches the group’s usual impeccable standards under its director, Harry Christophers, who has devised a clever recipe of music that sounds warmly festive but shuns the obvious. With five traditional carols interspersed (Wassail Song, All in the Morning), the disc opens and closes with Pilgrim Jesus and Advent Antiphons by one of the UK’s best living choral composers, Bob Chilcott. Other tracks from this largely contemporary collection include the popular title piece, Carol of the Bells (as heard in the film Home Alone), by Mykola Leontovych, Eric Whitacre’s Lux aurumque and Cecilia McDowall’s Of a Rose. The immediate, vigorous energy of Apollo5, part of the Voces8 Foundation, shines out in their eclectic A Deep But Dazzling Darkness, with music from William Byrd to William Walton, Herbert Howells and Dobrinka Tabakova: expert singing, unexpected choices, with some subtle arrangements made specially for this intimate ensemble. An Elizabethan Christmas by the viol consort Fretwork, with mezzo-soprano Helen Charlston, is a quietly joyous exploration of domestic music from the time of Elizabeth I and James I, by Byrd, Orlando Gibbons, Thomas Weelkes and more. Love Came Down at Christmas features treble duets by Myron and Archie, the teenagers’ second album: unusual arrangements, wonderfully sung, in aid of an important cause, childhood cancer. Strange Wonders: The Wexford Carols Vol II is a follow-up to singer-arranger Caitríona O’Leary’s highly successful 2014 album of Irish music, performed by a top lineup including vocal group Stile Antico, trumpeter Alison Balsom and folk fiddler and singer Seth Lakeman. Like This, by the small folk-choral collective Circle, escapes into its own special soundworld via traditions ancient and modern, featuring the Senegalese kora player Kadialy Kouyate and a guest appearance from the countertenor James Bowman. The six versatile singers also play cornett, nyckelharpa, recorder, percussion and keyboards. This album’s abiding mood, which many of us may welcome at this time of year, is serenity.Recent history dictates the claiming of trophies alone is not sufficient to protect a Celtic manager. Ronny Deila, recently catapulted back into the spotlight at New York City, collected three major honours in Scotland but was never convincing in a role he held for just two years. Neil Lennon, already a decorated Celtic player and manager, was at the helm as the club won five trophies after his second tenure began in early 2019. By late 2020 angry fans were rampaging outside an empty stadium, demanding Lennon’s removal. There is also the issue of how much of an achievement the winning of domestic cups by either half of the Old Firm actually is. Celtic and Hibernian, given leeway having qualified for European competition, have played just three matches in order to reach Sunday’s League Cup final. The huge resource advantage enjoyed by Glasgow’s big two means context, rarely delivered, is useful. Yet it is undeniable that for Ange Postecoglou this trip to Hampden Park carries huge significance. The Australian, successful as a coach in his homeland and Japan, quite rightly scoffed at the notion he might be overawed by the competitive demands of Scottish football at the time of his appointment. Postecoglou knew Eddie Howe had been Celtic’s prime candidate but was not at all bothered by that either. If the 56-year-old can place a trophy on the table, six months after his arrival in Glasgow and mid-rebuild, he would be fully entitled to reflect on a strong start. That Rangers are looking increasingly powerful under Giovanni van Bronckhorst would be unworthy of consideration for a brief period at least. “It should be a special day,” says Potescoglou. “An opportunity for the club to win some silverware. We want to get back to doing that as a club and this is our first opportunity. Hopefully we will take it.” There is a broader picture. The Scottish government’s unease about football continuing to take place in front of full stadiums renders this an occasion that will draw nervous or cynical glances from elsewhere. Assessing Celtic under Postecoglou, who is understated both in front of cameras and around the training ground, is not particularly easy. At their front-footed, free-flowing best Celtic are fantastic to watch. Kyogo Furuhashi, who is a serious fitness doubt for this final, has lit up the Scottish scene. Postecoglou also grasped the absolute necessity to win games despite background upheaval; Celtic enter this final on a run of just one defeat in 16, that coming against Bayer Leverkusen. Celtic are also, however, prone to giving up plenty chances to any opposition willing to play with a degree of ambition. Postecoglou has been denied forward-thinking players time and again because of injuries, triggering unhelpful speculation about the intensity of training sessions. What is plain is that during a number of matches on this winning run, Celtic have not actually been convincing. And this, it should be noted, is a particularly modest Scottish top-flight season in respect of general standards. Celtic have been eliminated from two European competitions, the Champions League and the Europa League, under Postecoglou with barely a murmur. He has apparently unanimous backing from the stands. “I was under no illusions when I joined this club that I had to try and bring success,” says Postecoglou. “It is a big game. You cannot ignore that fact.” The former Yokohama Marinos coach is due credit for openly acknowledging the pressures that go with his environment. Many before him did not. Hibs should in theory – but only that – provide timid opposition. The Edinburgh side, who have won just three of their last 12 outings, last defeated Celtic in December 2018. With Jack Ross having been relieved as his duties, David Gray will take charge of Hibs at Hampden as caretaker. Talks with Shaun Maloney, a former Celtic player, about the manager’s role at Easter Road continue to rumble on in the background. In Kevin Nisbet, Hibs have a striker capable of punishing regular slackness in the Celtic defence. Martin Boyle, when not affected by balance problems, can traumatise full-backs. Hibs are in that free-spirited position of having absolutely nothing to lose. Their followers are right to ponder which direction their club will head in next. Celtic’s support are fully engaged with Postecoglou and necessary revolution after the relative trauma of last season. Winning the League Cup would not only endorse a sense of progress but give Postecoglou a positive point of reference. For however long that may prove valid.Former Wales and Lions rugby captain Gareth Thomas grew up in Bridgend, Wales, with his parents, Yvonne and Barry, and two older brothers. A prominent force on the pitch since the late 90s, he’s arguably been an even more influential presence with his advocacy work. Since coming out in 2009, Thomas has raised awareness around LGBTQ+ representation in sports and mental health. He is working towards destigmatising HIV; first with his 2019 documentary HIV and Me, which explored his fear of sharing his diagnosis with the world, and now Tackle HIV, a campaign in partnership with ViiV Healthcare and the Terrence Higgins Trust. He lives near Bridgend with his husband, Stephen. For more information, visit tacklehiv.org and follow @TackleHIV. Gareth This photo is from Benidorm – it was our first family holiday abroad, and I was about 10. That night we had a nice, posh meal, and a waiter with a big bushy moustache took our photo. It came in a cardboard frame – my parents paid an arm and a leg for it. I was a really mischievous little boy – full of energy and easily led. As a result, our household was in chaos. Between me and my brothers, there was always a fight to be the alpha male. My parents had to control the carnage from the moment we got up to the moment we went to bed. But I was never spoiled, and knew how hard my parents worked for us. Even though I was given the opportunity to do lots of sports – from karate to boxing, there’s not a sport on this planet I didn’t try – I was taught that things don’t come for free. Because of my upbringing, I’ve never been allowed to be famous; I’ve never forgotten where I’ve come from. It took me more than 20 years to understand and accept who I was. My parents have been the most important people in my life for 47 years. For me to all of a sudden say, “You know what? I am gay, I want to tell you this and accept it straight away,” I thought that was a selfish act. But they didn’t reject me, they just wondered: “Why did you feel you couldn’t tell us? Why did you feel you had to wait until you had no other option?” When I found out I had HIV, I thought I was going to die. That’s what I’d taken from the adverts from the 1980s. I was in my parents’ car when a reporter told my dad about my diagnosis. I knew the press were on to me and had been for a few years, but what happened that day was a level too far down in the gutter. It was early in the morning and Dad was driving me to the station so I could go to work in London. As we pulled out of the drive, there was this guy standing in the road, and my dad, being the person he is, stopped to see if he was OK. He put the window down and the reporter stuck his head in and asked my dad to make a comment on the fact that his son was HIV positive. It was a weird old car journey to the station. I fulfilled my commitment and went to work, but it was horrific. On the way back, on a packed train, in and out of tunnels, I was trying to tell my mother that what the journalist was saying to Dad was true, that I was HIV positive, but I would be OK. That moment was taken from me. All I wanted was to sit down when I was ready and say, “You know what? I am not going to die. Your son is going to be around.” To have that conversation on a train, your signal cutting out, it’s not the way I wanted it to happen. It really hurt me. Now, because of what we’ve been through, we are not afraid to educate people, or call people out if they talk about HIV in a discriminatory way. HIV doesn’t just affect gay men or people in Africa, and it can be treated. Family is massively important when it comes to tackling the stigma. The lack of understanding is a generational thing that’s passed down. These days we are all very proud to be armed with this knowledge. It’s made me feel powerful. Yvonne This holiday was the result of a long trek. It’s the only way we could afford to take all our children abroad. But the kids thought it was wonderful. We had chocolate waffles every day. There were wasps chasing us. We had fun. I worked with children in care, as a secretary, cleaned clothes and worked in the shop around the corner, to get extra money to give my three boys what they wanted. Gareth cost us a fortune in sports equipment, and was always in trouble at school. One report says: “Gareth seems to think he’s been put on this earth to entertain everyone” and, “He has the concentration level of a gnat.” It’s just the way he was; we didn’t need telling. He left school at 15, as he never liked it. He did various jobs and was eventually offered his first professional contract – £200 a week and a secondhand Volvo. Barry said: “I’d stick with the Post Office, if I were you. This rugby thing is never going to take off.” Good job he didn’t listen. When Gareth told me about his diagnosis, I assumed that was the end of him, because I didn’t know any better. Since then, we’ve learned a lot. I have been amazed by all the work that’s gone into finding new treatments – it’s never publicised, it’s as if HIV is still taboo. Gareth has had some difficult times – if you thought what he’s said publicly [about his mental health] was bad, privately he was a hundred times worse. But, as a family, we don’t live in the past. What is done is done, and you can’t change it. All you can do is go forward, and even though I’ll never understand why that reporter had to do something so malicious, we’ve lived on, we’re coping with it and I love to see my son as happy as he is now. That’s the main thing. But, my God, we would never go on holiday together again. Me and Barry want some peace and quiet. Barry I remember the journey to the train station like it was yesterday. After the incident with the reporter, Gareth said: “Drive on, Dad, drive on.” Once we’d pulled over, he turned to me and told me: “Dad, I’m very worried. I don’t know what to do.” I said: “You can handle this, don’t worry. We can handle it.” I dropped him at the station and assured him that everything was going to be all right. After I’d got back home, I heard a knock on the door – it was the same reporter with his hand in his pocket; he had a dictaphone in there. I looked him dead in the eyes and closed the door. I didn’t speak a word to the man – the expression on my face said it all: clear off. From the moment our boys were born, we’ve made sure we stay connected as a family, through thick and thin. When Gareth told us he was gay, we wanted to try to take the pressure off him, so we got some champagne to toast the rest of his life. There have been difficult times where Gareth has contemplated suicide. I’ve told him since, if you had done it we wouldn’t have learned anything; about what you were going through, about HIV. It all would have been empty. We’d have no answers, and you’d be gone. And in our family we feel things together. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.An umpteenth revival of a popular work in a classic production – enjoyment guaranteed, revelation not expected. Puccini’s Tosca is back at the Royal Opera House, 10th time round for Jonathan Kent’s staging in Paul Brown’s sumptuous designs (revival director Amy Lane), complete with cast changes too numerous to track. The only comfort for those trying to stage a show in current precarious circumstances is that many involved know how it goes. The bass Jeremy White has sung the character role of Sacristan, with deft geniality, since the production was new in 2006. No doubt by now he could dep for all the parts if required. Familiarity is part of the pleasure. A devotee will know exactly when the hero Cavaradossi, more republican than artist, it would seem, will finally do something with that idle paintbrush; when the Royal Opera chorus (here in excellent voice), children too, will fill the double staircase to sing the grand Te Deum; and when Tosca will stab the evil Scarpia, while trying not to trip up on her awkwardly long gown. A telling moment in this staging is when the heavy red and gold front drapes fall slowly, softly, ominously, timed precisely with the velvety, menacing chords at the close of Act 2. There was always a chance that this run might, against odds, be remarkable. And indeed it is. The Ukrainian Oksana Lyniv, first woman to conduct at the Bayreuth festival, making her Royal Opera debut, registered her fiery presence with the opera’s massive opening roar, the orchestra responding with energy surging, solos eloquently taken, the whole shaped with pace and authority. As Tosca, the experienced Italian soprano Anna Pirozzi grew into the part with each act, voice warming as she made the tricky transition from flighty diva to a woman capable of murder. Claudio Sgura had presence and a strong voice as the chief of police, Baron Scarpia, though the baddie-style acting could be reined in. The real excitement, however, was for Cavaradossi, Freddie De Tommaso, making his role debut, the first British tenor to sing the part at Covent Garden since 1963, and at 28 the youngest. He had upstaged himself already, days earlier, attracting rave headlines by jumping in halfway through for Brian Hymel, taken unwell during the other cast’s opening night. Half Italian but raised in Tunbridge Wells, De Tommaso – remember the name – is hurtling to stardom. Having trained at the Royal Academy of Music, first as a baritone, then switching up to tenor, he won the international Plácido Domingo Tenor prize in 2018 and was quickly signed up to Decca. Bright-toned in the Italianate style, but with heft to soar over the orchestra in mid-range, De Tommaso is not shy to show how loudly, how securely, how effortlessly he can sing. That prolonged, dazzling high A sharp on “Vittoria!” was, to tell it straight, milked. Why not… it was a rare thrill to hear a tenor voice of this ease and brilliance. The new Pavarotti? We’ve heard that before. This time it might just be true. Handel’s Messiah, first performed soon after Easter in 1742 but now an Advent tradition, digs deep into the rhythm of the musical season. The work’s grip, for performers and listeners, is tenacious. Think of the 3,600 people who took part, with arduous recording at home, in the Self-Isolation Choir’s online Messiah in May 2020, repeating the exercise this year. This past week, the Hanover Band, small forces, directed from the harpsichord by Andrew Arthur, bravely scheduled five live performances in 10 days. The second, in the gratifying acoustic of Kings Place, passed, as the text has it, in the twinkling of an eye: not because tempi were fast – though they were – but because the 16 singers, 18 period instrument players and four accomplished soloists (Tara Bungard, Timothy Morgan, Bradley Smith, Edward Price) communicated with such urgency and virtuosity. As an end to 2021’s often bewildering listening year, the concluding fugal “Amen”, with celestial trumpet and thunderous drums, was an appropriate revelation. Star ratings (out of five) Tosca ★★★★ Handel’s Messiah ★★★★ Tosca is in rep at the Royal Opera House, London, until 22 FebruaryAston Villa’s Premier League match against Burnley has been called off less than three hours before kick-off as a result of more Covid-19 cases at Villa. The postponement leaves left one Premier League match remaining from the six that were scheduled to take place on Saturday, with Leeds against Arsenal in the late kick-off the only surviving fixture. A Premier League statement read: “Due to more positive cases in the Aston Villa squad today, the Premier League Board has regrettably had to postpone the club’s home fixture against Burnley, due to kick-off at 3pm this afternoon. “After reviewing all the new information provided by Aston Villa this morning and receiving separate medical advice, the board approved the request as a result of the club not having enough players to field a team. This decision was based on the number of Covid-19 cases, injuries and illness.” The statement continued: “The league understands the decision to postpone the match at such short notice will frustrate and disappoint supporters, and apologises for the inconvenience and disruption caused. The remaining four Premier League matches due to be played this weekend are currently scheduled to proceed as planned. The board assesses applications to postpone matches on a case-by-case basis, based on existing rules and Covid-19 postponement guidance issued to all clubs. “It will assess a number of factors, including the ability of a club to field a team; the status, severity and potential impact of the Covid-19 outbreak at the club; and the ability of the players to safely prepare for and play the match. The board must also consider the wider risks to the opposition and other people the club representatives may come into contact with. “With the health and wellbeing of all players and staff the priority, and in light of the recent rise in Covid-19 cases across the country, the Premier League has reintroduced emergency measures. These include protocols such as more frequent testing, wearing face coverings while indoors, observing social distancing and limiting treatment time.” Villa acknowledged and apologised for the late postponement, but said they acted as quickly as they could. A club statement read: “The results of PCR tests, which were taken yesterday prior to training as well as lateral flow tests, were received this morning and confirmed further depletion of our playing squad, which was already impacted upon for our trip to Norwich in midweek. “All individuals who tested positive are now isolating in line with Premier League and government guidance and protocols. The club is extremely sorry for the inconvenience caused to our own supporters and the Burnley fans due to attend the fixture but acted as swiftly as possible this morning to minimise disruption.” The wider disruption from the pandemic could mean the Carabao Cup semi-finals switch away from two legs. The Telegraph reported that the EFL may be forced to truncate the semis to avoid fixture congestion, with the quarter-finals at serious risk of postponement.Emily in Paris The show that launched a thousand les takes-chaud is back: on Wednesday Emily in Paris lands on Netflix for its second season. The hate-watch programme sees Lily Collins take on more adventures of a gauche American on the Rive Gauche. Josephine in the Panthéon Emily has a plush apartment on Place de l’Estrapade in the 5th arrondissement, which sits virtually in the shadow of the Panthéon, where the great and good of French life are interred. Last month, Josephine Baker was admitted into the mausoleum, making her the first black woman to be so honoured. Cush in character Many have written and performed work about the French-American singer, dancer, actor and resistance fighter. In 2013, Cush Jumbo staged an acclaimed one-woman play Josephine and I at the Bush theatre in London. The English actor earned wider fame for her role as Lucca Quinn in the US legal drama The Good Wife, and its (arguably superior) spin-off The Good Fight. Sheen in politics The Good Fight has had an array of high-profile guest stars, including Michael Sheen with a turn in season three inspired by real-life lawyer Roy Cohn. Regardless of the many varied parts he inhabits, though, Sheen will always seem inextricably linked to Tony Blair, a role he has played in three films. Phil in Switzerland New Labour nostalgists who got moist-eyed at the recent BBC Blair &amp; Brown documentary series fondly recall the moment in 1997 when the party finally swept away the Tories, but not everyone was quite so happy. Phil Collins (he of Genesis, not Blair’s speechwriter) famously declared he would leave Britain if Tony entered No 10 – he later moved to Switzerland. Phil, of course, is the father of Lily, star of Emily in Paris … mais sérieusement. Pairing notes Watch Lily Collins was among the starry cast in Bong Joon Ho’s 2017 “creature feature” meat industry satire Okja (on Netflix), co-written with former Guardian columnist Jon Ronson. Eat The elegant Café de la Nouvelle Mairie sits on Place de l’Estrapade: enjoy a steak hache or just a good sit watching Emily in Paris superfans photograph themselves at key locations nearby.Bryce Bennett added to a long list of American success in Val Gardena by winning the first classic downhill of the World Cup season on Saturday. Bennett joins teammate Steven Nyman (three downhill victories) and Bode Miller (one super-G victory) as American winners at the resort in the Dolomites. For his first career victory, the 6ft 7in Bennett finished 0.14 seconds ahead of Otmar Striedinger of Austria and 0.32 ahead of Niels Hintermann of Switzerland. Aleksander Aamodt Kilde, the Austrian who had won three straight races on the Saslong course, went off line toward the end of his run after posting faster split times than Bennett. Kilde narrowly avoided crashing but could not recover in time to clear the next gate. Bennett had never finished better than fourth (twice in Val Gardena and once in Bormio) and now can go to the upcoming Beijing Olympics with newfound confidence. Goggia and Johnson finish 1-2 at Val-d’Isère Olympic champion Sofia Goggia and her American rival Breezy Johnson finished 1-2 in a women’s World Cup downhill for the third time this season on Saturday. Goggia stretched her unbeaten run in the discipline to a year, having won all seven World Cup downhills she competed in since 18 December 2020. The Italian missed the final two races of last season with a knee injury. Goggia beat Johnson by .27 seconds, with Austrian skier Mirjam Puchner .91 behind in third. The rest of the field finished more than 1.3 seconds off the lead. The result sent Goggia past Mikaela Shiffrin to the top of the overall standings, leading the American three-time champion by 10 points. Shiffrin sat out the race but was set to compete with Goggia in a super-G on the same hill Sunday. Goggia earned her 11th career downhill win and 15th overall with a trademark gutsy run. She jumped farther than any of her competitors near the Telephone turn in the upper part of the course, picked a riskier race line than her rivals in the technical middle section, and reacted fast after her right ski caught a bump to quickly regain her balance without visibly slowing down. Racing in contrasting style, Johnson had a cleaner run, stayed on her race line throughout, and looked in complete control. It was the seventh career podium result for the American, one year to the day after she got her first on the same course. Johnson also has four third-place finishes but is lacking a win so far. Several racers had faster starts than Goggia, but no one matched the Italian’s pace on the more demanding sections of the OK course, which is named after French skiing greats Henri Oreiller and Jean-Claude Killy. Former World Cup downhill champion Ilka Stuhec of Slovenia led by four-tenths of a second and world championship gold medalist Corinne Suter was more than three-tenths faster than Goggia at the second split but both lost considerable time afterward, finishing fifth and sixth, respectively. Suter’s Swiss teammate Lara Gut-Behrami missed the race after testing positive for Covid-19 following the first training run on Thursday, ruling the 2016 overall champion out for the weekend as well as two giant slaloms in nearby Courchevel on Tuesday and Wednesday.The chief executive of the Anti-Defamation League led condemnation of Donald Trump after the former president used antisemitic tropes in remarks about American Jews and Israel. “Insinuating that Israel or the Jews control Congress or the media is antisemitic, plain and simple,” Jonathan Greenblatt said. “Unfortunately, this is not the first time he has made these offensive remarks.” Trump was speaking to the journalist Barak Ravid, author of a book on Trump and the Middle East. Parts of the interview aired on Friday on a podcast, Unholy: Two Jews on the News. “It’s a very dangerous thing that’s happening,” Trump said. “There’s people in this country that are Jewish and no longer love Israel. I’ll tell you, the evangelical Christians love Israel more than the Jews in this country.” Trump also used a line he has delivered before – to a Jewish audience in 2019 – about Israel and Congress. “It used to be that Israel had absolute power over Congress,” he said, “and today I think it’s the exact opposite. And I think Obama and Biden did that. And yet in the election, they still get a lot of votes from the Jewish people. Which tells you that the Jewish people, and I’ve said this for a long time, the Jewish people in the United States either don’t like Israel or don’t care about Israel.” Trump also said “they’re Jewish people that run the New York Times” and claimed the newspaper “hates Israel”. On Twitter, Greenblatt said: “Once again, former President Trump has linked his lack of strong support among most US Jews to their feelings about Israel and used classic antisemitic stereotypes about Israeli and Jewish control of Congress and the press to bolster his argument. “It’s sad that once again we have to restate this point, but the vast majority of American Jews support and have some type of connection to Israel, regardless of which political candidate they vote for. “Let me be clear: insinuating that Israel or the Jews control Congress or the media is antisemitic, plain and simple. Unfortunately, this is not the first time he has made these offensive remarks.” The American Jewish Committee said: “Why is Mr Trump once again fueling dangerous stereotypes about Jews? His past support for Israel doesn’t give him license to traffic in radioactive antisemitic tropes – or peddle unfounded conclusions about the unbreakable ties that bind American Jews to Israel. Enough!” Notably, Republicans who have condemned Democrats including the Minnesota congresswoman Ilhan Omar for allegedly using antisemitic tropes did not rush to respond to Trump’s remarks. Amid widespread anger, the former Obama adviser Ben Rhodes said: “If Ilhan Omar said the same things Trump did it would dominate politics and media for a week, statements issued from every organisation, (bipartisan) resolutions in Congress, etc. What bullshit.” Bill Pascrell, a New Jersey Democrat, said: “There can be no question that the words by Donald Trump are vile, despicable antisemitism … This level of hate is not just tolerated but invited by the modern GOP.” Qasim Rashid, a human rights lawyer and radio host, said: “While American Jews represent only 2% of Americans, FBI data shows Jews suffer more than 60% of religiously motivated hate crimes. “Donald Trump’s reckless antisemitism further endangers Jewish Americans, and the GOP proudly standing by him makes them complicit. Unacceptable.” Like many other authors, Ravid interviewed Trump at Mar-a-Lago after his defeat by Joe Biden in the 2020 election and his attempts to overturn that result including stoking the deadly attack on the US Capitol on 6 January. Ravid’s interview has already made news, after Trump reportedly said of the former Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu, a key ally when in power: “Fuck him.” According to Axios, Trump said: “The first person that congratulated [Biden] was Bibi Netanyahu, the man that I did more for than any other person I dealt with … Bibi could have stayed quiet. He has made a terrible mistake.”Boris Johnsons’s adviser on ministerial interests has been contacted by a parliamentary committee over allegations that he was misled by the prime minister over the funding of the refurbishment of his Downing Street flat. In a letter to Lord Geidt, the crossbench peer who took up the adviser role in April after his predecessor resigned, MPs ask what steps are open to him if he believes he was misled during his inquiry into the handling of the work at the flat. Geidt’s investigation, which he undertook in May, cleared Johnson of wrongdoing over an apparent £52,000 donation to the Conservatives from a long-standing party donor to cover the costs of redecorating the No 11 residence he shares with his wife Carrie and their two children. Geidt reported that Johnson told him “he knew nothing about such payments” until February 2021. However, WhatsApp messages that emerged during an Electoral Commission inquiry into the funding showed that Johnson had been in direct contact with the donor, Lord Brownlow, in November 2020. Downing Street sources have suggested Johnson only knew Brownlow was handling the donations, rather than funding them. William Wragg, the Tory chair of the public administration and constitutional affairs committee, has written to Geidt to ask for his “reflections on several points given the events of the last few weeks”. He states that the Electoral Commission “appears to have had access to information you did not when your own investigation found that [the] ministerial code had not been broken”. He writes: “What investigatory powers do you have available to you? Are you satisfied that they are adequate and, if so, how do you explain the discrepancy between your findings and those of the Electoral Commission? What steps are open to you if you feel that… you may have been misled?” He also asks Geidt whether, after six months in the job, he now needs the power to initiate investigations into potential code breaches. Under current rules, he only has the power to ask the prime minister’s permission. The committee has also asked him how many times he has exercised his right to ask the prime minister’s permission to open an investigation. “Have you used that ‘right’ in relation to the Electoral Commission’s investigation,” the letter states. It goes on to ask: “How satisfied are you that the processes you have followed are sufficient to maintain public confidence that ethical standards are complied with? In the light of your experience of the office and of events of recent weeks, have you now, or will you be, advising the prime minister that the role of the independent adviser needs strengthening and, if so, in what ways?” Geidt is said to have asked Johnson for the WhatsApp messages exposed by the Electoral Commission. He is also said to have been frustrated by the emergence of the new material, with suggestions that he could consider his position if he concludes he has been misled by the prime minister. Downing Street has confirmed that it was in touch with Geidt. Should Geidt reopen his investigation, it would be another blow for Johnson, after the byelection defeat in North Shropshire last week and allegations over parties held in Whitehall and Downing Street last year. A resignation by Geidt would be a further embarrassment. Johnson’ previous ministerial standards adviser, Alex Allan, stood down in November 2020 after the prime minister ignored his findings that the home secretary, Priti Patel, had bullied staff. The parliamentary commissioner for standards, Kathryn Stone, also has the power to open an investigation into the Downing St refurbishment should she believe she has the scope to do so.Matthew Liam Nicholson: Nine Movements (Longform Editions) A 39-minute immersive meditation, Nine Movements is the work of California-based Australian composer Matthew Liam Nicholson, based around the harmonic interplay of singing bowls, LA jazz outlier Miguel Atwood-Ferguson’s strings and babbling-brook percussion. Encounters with this work in the wild include venues as disparate as the Bargello National Museum in Florence, where the singing bowls received their first airing, and a session of the finished work in “full multichannel spatial audio at a massive outdoor temple at Burning Man”. Ambient music can often be theoretical or medicinal; this record is both. Kitty Empire Agnes: Magic Still Exists (Universal Music Sweden) Imagine releasing what sounds like Abba Gold the year actual Abba returned from a 40-year hiatus. It’s a pop miracle delivered by fellow Swede Agnes on her pulsating fifth album. Nestled between disco thumper 24 Hours and the galloping Love and Appreciation sits the towering majesty of Here Comes the Night. Supported by instantly familiar piano trills and glittering, starburst melodies, the track finds Agnes offering solace under the stars. That urgent search for freedom forms the album’s backbone, be it via Moroder-esque Selfmade’s demands for equality, or the inward-looking exorcism of XX’s electronic pulse. A soothing balm perfect for fleeting dancefloor moments. Michael Cragg Big|Brave: Vital (Southern Lord) Signed to Greg Anderson’s Southern Lord, Big|Brave plot a course roughly midway between the experimental metal of their label boss’s band Sunn O))) and the Sturm und Drang of fellow Montrealers Godspeed You! Black Emperor. Their fifth album is their most compelling yet. Immense blasts of slowly mutating guitar noise are complemented by Tasy Hudson’s thunderous, stop-start drums, with frontwoman Robin Wattie offering her most personal lyrics to date, most notably on the exploration of her dual heritage on Half Breed. Played loud, it’s a scarily intense record. Phil Mongredien The Limiñanas &amp; Laurent Garnier: De Película (Because) Andrew Weatherall would have loved psych-rock duo the Limiñanas and DJ Laurent Garnier’s soundtrack to an imaginary movie about teenage runaways on a road trip. Like the much-missed DJ and producer, the French trio find fertile ground between psych and techno in entrancing, motorik repetition. Saul, where Garnier’s signature effects ripple through the muscular groove, is a stunning invention, while Au début c’était le début conjures Serge Gainsbourg making out with Lee Hazlewood. De Película’s greatest triumph is that it’s so vivid and compelling, it doesn’t need a film to accompany it. Damien Morris Stealing Sheep &amp; the Radiophonic Workshop: La Planète Sauvage (Fire Records) Released on Delia Derbyshire Day in November, the Dinked collectors’ edition of this sci-fi treat from Stealing Sheep sold out in record time. It’s a reworked version of a 2014 live soundtrack the Liverpool psych-pop trio made with the fabled Radiophonic Workshop for the 1973 Czech-French cosmic animation La Planète Sauvage, which follows the fate of the future-human Oms, mere pets of a race of giant blue humanoids known as the Draags on the planet Ygam. Sparing snatches of narration illuminate the tale amid lurching, heavy psych-rock, twinkling, excitable synths and fuzzy, loping grooves – a delightful sonic adventure. Emily Mackay Wiki: Half God (Wikset Enterprise) For the past decade, Patrick “Wiki” Morales has been quietly making some of the best rap coming out of New York City, his work often a spirited love letter to his home. Half God takes it further, Morales’s growling vocals weaving together anger and introspection as he ruminates on the changing face of NYC and being pushed out by gentrifiers (“After all the schooling you did, don’t know what community is?”) and the climate crisis too. Delivered over smudged lines and loops of stoner-y jazz from producer du jour Navy Blue, it’s a perfect testimony to the power of storytelling and place in rap. Tara Joshi Rosali: No Medium (Spinster Sounds) Not to be confused with Spanish singer Rosalía, Rosali is the midwestern musician whose startling voice recalls Chrissie Hynde by way of Laura Marling, and whose third album bridges the dust bowl between nostalgia for a broken relationship and trying to move on, empowered. Starlit Americana and howling country-rock is Rosali’s love language here, her songwriting never indulgent yet haunted by a delicate loneliness, with stylistic references including Bob Dylan’s Desire, Bowie’s Hunky Dory and British folk duo Richard and Linda Thompson. She hasn’t yet had a UK breakthrough on a par with Phoebe Bridgers, but in the States she appears to be a best-kept secret. Although not for long: in February, she’ll tour again with the War on Drugs. Kate Hutchinson Piers Faccini: Shapes of the Fall (No Format) An Anglo-Italian songwriter based in France, creator of six albums and a serial cross-genre collaborator, Piers Faccini has been justly compared to Nick Drake for his intricate fretboard skills and melodic vocals. He hits a high point on an album based on the biblical Fall but steeped in today’s eco crisis, and whose musical roots veer between north Africa, southern Italy and Spanish string quartet. “Watch paradise burn,” suggests All Aboard, a track recalling Noah’s ark and migration sea journeys. The mood is variously forlorn, ethereal and hopeful, the lyrics poetic. Entrancing; an album for the times. Neil Spencer Ben Crosland: Solway Stories (Jazz Cat) Bass guitarist and composer Ben Crosland has fond memories of the countryside around the Solway Firth, and they inspired him to write these 12 musical vignettes. They have his typically light touch, the written parts and improvised solos deftly woven so that you scarcely notice the join. The pieces range from gently melodic to driving and intense, with particularly impressive solos by trumpeter Steve Waterman and Steve Lodder on keyboards. The album came out in May, and its sunny tunefulness sounds even more appealing in the dark days of winter. Dave Gelly Ryan Latimer: Antiarkie (NMC) What to do with that set of Christmas juggling balls? The answer is here. British composer Ryan Latimer (b.1990) is also an amateur juggler. His debut album, Antiarkie, opens with Mills Mess – jubilant, bubbling, punchy – its title taken from a popular juggling pattern. Frigates &amp; Folly, written for and performed by the Crouch End Festival Chorus, draws cheer and optimism from Herman Melville’s Moby-Dick. The title work, Antiarkie, with the BBC Symphony Orchestra, is a top-speed musical exchange with cartoon soundtracks – allusive, sparkling and emphatically rhythmic. It’ll get you off the sofa. Fiona MaddocksBefore the pandemic, restaurants with outdoor seating were the exception in New York City. Sidewalk permits were prohibitively expensive, harsh winters were impractical, and muggy summers uncomfortable. But the social distancing rules that closed restaurant dining rooms across the country last year to curb the spread of Covid-19 had a devastating impact on the US restaurant and food service industry, which reported $120bn in lost revenue in the first three months of the pandemic alone (the running total is now $280bn). Outdoor dining emerged as a vital lifeline. To salvage the industry, the New York City government attempted to make it easier for restaurants to seat diners safely outdoors. Mayor Bill de Blasio launched the Open Restaurants initiative in June 2020, which legally permitted roadside dining and simplified the application process. Since then, more than 12,000 restaurants in New York City have been certified for outdoor dining. Outdoor seating across New York City ranges from a handful of tables in an open-air shed to fully enclosed rooms, vestibules, bubbles and greenhouses. Some are on sidewalks while others are directly on the street, precariously sharing the road with cars and delivery trucks. They might serve a fine-dining tasting menu or a simple sandwich from the corner deli. But outdoor dining also came with huge challenges for staff. One chef at an upscale Manhattan restaurant (who wanted to remain anonymous) told the Guardian that last winter was almost unworkable. “We had to keep all the doors and windows open in the kitchen to maintain ventilation, but then for a few months our heating went out so it was around five degrees in the kitchen, the chefs’ fingers were all going blue, oils were solidifying – the restaurant offered everyone Uniqlo quilted jackets but they would burst in the heat and so white feathers were constantly flying around the kitchen.” Things were even worse for the wait staff, who were struggling with fewer customers and fewer tips, but had to remain standing outside without coats to attend to outdoor diners’ needs. “Their hands would go purple, they would come into the kitchen and put them on the plate warmer just to try and get the circulation going again.” Now, facing a second pandemic winter and the threat of Omicron, a more transmissible variant that is going to make diners think twice about eating indoors, operators are busy winterizing their restaurants. The difference this year, however, is that indoor dining is available, as are vaccines, possibly alleviating the demand for outdoor seating. In light of this, restaurateurs across the city are asking one question: if we build it, will people come? Investing in comfort Flushing Avenue in New York City is a nearly five-mile stretch of asphalt that cuts through north Brooklyn and Queens. In certain areas, it’s also a gusty wind tunnel. This wasn’t a big consideration for Cressida Greening when she signed a lease for her restaurant, Winona’s, more than two years ago. But by December 2020, when indoor dining was banned for the second time in New York and as winter was setting in, the strong winds outside Winona’s proved to be significant. “It made things really difficult. There was only so much the heaters could do,” says Greening. In a city that averages highs of less than 4C through January, keeping guests warm is an important consideration for outdoor dining. It’s also the most expensive. Effectively heating outdoor spaces requires a significant amount of electricity, which most restaurants are not equipped to handle. Louis Smeby is the director of operations at Vestry, a fine-dining restaurant in the Dominick Hotel in SoHo, and he recounts spending close to $20,000 to upgrade the restaurant’s electrical panel and wiring last year. “Every outlet needed to be dedicated so that nothing pops when temperatures get really low,” he says. Last year, de Blasio’s government allowed restaurants to use propane heaters, a cheaper and more efficient outdoor heating solution, but the city recently returned to pre-pandemic regulations, which ban the use of propane due to the potential fire hazard. At Harlem Shake, a burger restaurant with locations in Harlem and Brooklyn, owner Jelena Pasic has been toggling between heating options.“We first used propane heaters, which didn’t work due to the fumes. Then we used gas heaters, which were not allowed under a roof. Now we are using electric heaters, which are safer but weaker and demand more electrical supply,” she says. While restaurant owners across the city were making calls to their electricians, Yudai Kanayama had something else in mind. Kanayama is an owner of Dr Clark, a Hokkaido-style tabletop barbecue restaurant in Chinatown. Last year, he had the idea to build Japanese kotatsu tables outdoors. The table is common in traditional Japanese homes, with a built-in electric heater and a blanket that sits over diner’s legs to trap body warmth. “It’s amazing how warm kotatsu can be with much less electricity,” Kanayama says. The restaurant nearly doubled its capacity with outdoor dining, and while Kanayama spent money to import futon blankets and specialty kotatsu electric heaters from Japan, he didn’t need to make a huge investment in upgrading its electric panel. Beyond heaters, operators are finding other ways to keep guests cozy. At Vestry, sheepskin throws are draped over the furniture for insulation, and customized blankets are available for every guest (these are laundered twice a week, and are not reused before a cleaning). German Rizzo is the chef and owner of three Italian restaurants across the city – L’Artista, Vite Vinosteria, and Plado – where he outfits his tables with blankets and initially offered hats – but guests had habit of running off with them so Rizzo opted for an inexpensive blanket from IKEA instead. But while restaurants continue to pour funds into cold-proofing their outdoor eating areas, it remains unclear whether a fully enclosed outdoor structure is capable of preventing the transmission of Covid-19. In a report released by the Aspen Institute’s Food &amp; Safety program earlier this year, Dr Sam Dooley Jr, the report’s primary author and a former CDC epidemiologist, writes that converting open-air outdoor sheds into enclosed rooms for multiple parties offers “no advantage over indoor dining” and requires the same preventative measures. “A lot of people flouted those rules last year and we felt patrons weren’t comfortable with that,” says Greening. Embracing the experience After an isolating year of social distancing, some restaurants found success turning outdoor dining into a destination-worthy experience last winter, which they plan to recreate this year. Industry Kitchen in the South Street Seaport has a 100-seat capacity, but when indoor dining shut down in December 2020, management invested in 11 greenhouses (like little clear-walled cottages) that could seat a party of four on the restaurant’s patio overlooking the East River. “This year, the general manager Aylon Hadar says, the restaurant is gearing up for another big winter season. They’ve added a large format cheese fondue and s’mores to the menu. “People are posting on social media so it’s part of the experience,” he says. “In the evening, when everyone sits down inside those huts and suddenly snow is falling…it’s amazing.” A little further uptown, at Osamil in Manhattan’s Koreatown, Jason Yim, the general manager, was inspired by the pojangmacha style of outdoor dining and drinking in South Korea. These sidewalk stalls are scattered around Seoul, loosely enclosed by flaps of plastic, and even in the wintertime, charcoal grills and body warmth (and a little alcohol) keep the stalls from getting too cold. Some restaurant kitchens are leaning into winter with customized, outdoor-only menus to enhance the experience. Chefs and co-owners Jess Shadbolt and Clare de Boer recently opened a “weekend window” at their restaurant King in the West Village. The walk-up counter sells hot plates of raclette, cake by the slice and hot cocoa exclusively for outdoor diners. (It’s also worth mentioning that the banquettes in the enclosed outdoor sheds at King are outfitted with “underbum” heating and lambswool blankets are available for guests.) Similarly, the Musket Room in Soho recently launched a winter pop-up on the sidewalk, with festive outdoors-only snacks like caviar-topped deviled eggs, sticky toffee pudding and hot spiked cider. Use it or lose it Roni Mazumdar and Chintan Pandya run a homestyle Indian restaurant, Adda, in Long Island City, Queens. Pre-pandemic, Mazumdar and Pandya were accustomed to feeding a big lunch crowd at Adda but now, the bulk of the restaurant’s business is at dinner. To accommodate the overflow, and make up for lost revenue, they need to maintain the outdoor structure. “From an economic standpoint, it matters. That’s kind of how I’m surviving so far,” Mazumdar says. But if operators don’t make the most of changes to the outdoor dining rules, they risk losing it all – the city recently launched a campaign to find and remove unused outdoor sheds. Plus, it’s still a necessary option for Covid-cautious guests and an important source of revenue. Some lucky restaurants have rebounded after a tough start in the pandemic, thanks in part to the expanded capacity provided by outdoor dining. The prospect of another lucrative summer season justifies the expense of maintaining outdoor dining through the winter. At the Queensboro, in Jackson Heights, Queens, Michael Fuquay says the restaurant is doing better business than ever after doubling its seating capacity with outdoor dining, but he wonders if some outdoor structures are better for business than they are for protecting people from catching Covid, especially with Omicron now in ascendence. “I don’t entirely understand restaurants that have fully enclosed outdoor spaces when I have a really comfortable, heated, air filtered indoor dining room.” Kanayama agrees that some restaurants have gone too far. “When outdoor started, we were allowed to do outdoor dining with some regulations like partitions. Everybody tried to make the outdoors like the indoors by enclosing all the sides and then they tried to make it as warm as possible by closing the sides and adding a door. But that idea to me wasn’t smart because it’s not as safe as the outdoors. It’s smaller than the actual indoor restaurant. It could be more dangerous.” Some New York City residents have also voiced concerns about the Open Restaurants program. In a lawsuit filed with the state supreme court in October 2021, a group of 22 petitioners are attempting to block the city from making the program permanent, citing the adverse environmental impact of outdoor sheds in their neighborhoods. One petitioner, Deborah Gonzalez who lives on Stanton Street in the Lower East Side, cited an increase in noise, trash, rat sightings, and a general loss of space and safety on her block. At Winona’s, Cressida Greening is still deciding if she wants to put more time and money into winterizing her outdoor structure to guard against that pesky wind tunnel. The Omicron variant is making a strong case for it. “I’ve already noticed a few more people specifically write to me for outside,” she says. “We’re just trying to figure out what makes sense.” Outdoor dining also doesn’t protect wait staff and chefs, who still have to work indoors. Shortly before this article was published, Winona’s announced it was shutting until after Christmas because of a high number of positive cases among staff. A similar scene is playing out at other restaurants in the city. The Open Restaurants program has been extended to the end of 2022, but what happens after that is still unclear. Just recently, the city revealed that restaurants may have to pay to have outdoor structures, and the rules around construction are changing once again. Attitudes towards outdoor dining in New York City have changed. “New Yorkers are not going to not eat out, right?” Greening asks. “Come hell or high water, they will do what they have to do.” And if hell really does come, say, in a gust of bone-chilling wind, Greening has one failsafe solution: “Just ply them with drinks.”The metaverse’s depressingly predictable misogyny problem Warning: this article contains multiple references to the “metaverse”, which is an extremely annoying buzzword that extremely annoying people love throwing around, normally in conjunction with “blockchain” and “NFT”. If you’re anything like me, then seeing the word “metaverse” makes you a die little bit inside, so I wanted to prepare you in advance. This article also contains multiple references to sexual harassment because, as was utterly predictable, the metaverse has already become yet another place that is deeply hostile to women. Last week, Meta (the holding company known as Facebook until October, when Mark Zuckerberg dramatically rebranded it in an attempt to distract people from the company’s PR problems), opened up a virtual reality (VR) platform called Horizon Worlds to anyone over 18 in the US and Canada. Horizon Worlds is Meta’s first big step towards building a new version of the internet called the metaverse, where the physical and digital worlds come together. Your avatar floats around with up to 20 people and you can play games, hang out, and build custom digital environments. You can also grope people. Last month a beta tester told Meta that she had been randomly groped by a stranger on Horizon Worlds; she later posted her experience in the Horizon Worlds beta testing group on Facebook. “Sexual harassment is no joke on the regular internet, but being in VR adds another layer that makes the event more intense,” she wrote. “Not only was I groped last night, but there were other people there who supported this behaviour.…” Meta’s response to this? A bit of casual victim-blaming. An internal review concluded that the beta tester should have used a tool called “Safe Zone” that users can activate if they feel threatened. The tool essentially sticks you in a protective bubble and stops people from interacting with you until you come out of the bubble. It’s the digital equivalent of telling women that if they don’t want to get harassed while walking down the street then they should just stay at home. It’s old-fashioned misogyny repackaged for the digital age. But, hey, what else would you expect from Meta? Facebook, let us remember, was first born as “Facemash”: a tool where students could rate their female classmates’ attractiveness. Misogyny is in the company’s DNA and, over the years, little seems to have changed. I don’t need to tell you that the company has repeatedly been criticized for ignoring misogyny and sexual harassment on the platform. It was also recently reported that Dani Lever, who is a Facebook communications executive, used to work for Andrew Cuomo and helped the disgraced former New York governor smear Lindsey Boylan, a staffer who had accused him of sexual harassment. “I think we can victim shame on the record,” Lever said of Boylan in a text message made public by the New York attorney general’s office. Sexual harassment in digital spaces has been a problem ever since the advent of the internet. But, as the beta tester who was groped on Horizon Worlds noted, the immersive nature of virtual reality adds a whole new level of violation. The whole point of virtual reality is to trick your brain into thinking your body is actually experiencing something – I don’t need to spell out just how awful that has the potential to be when it comes to online harassment. And yet there are still far too many people who are quick to dismiss or diminish the concept of virtual abuse because there aren’t “real” bodies involved. Regulation also hasn’t kept up with the pace of innovation and harassment in virtual reality is a legal grey area. As MIT Technology Review points out, there is also “no body that’s plainly responsible for the rights and safety of those who participate anywhere online, let alone in virtual worlds.” The likes of Zuckerberg want us to think the metaverse is the future, but it’s just a new venue for age-old problems nobody seems to want to solve. South Korean dairy company apologizes for comparing women to cows Seoul Milk released a very weird advert in which a man secretly filmed a group of women who then turned into cows. This did not go down well for numerous obvious reasons including the fact that South Korea has a massive problem with “molka”, a practice in which women are secretly filmed and the footage uploaded to subscription websites. Indian politician apologizes for saying you should ‘lie down and enjoy’ rape “There is a saying that when rape is inevitable, lie down and enjoy it,” Congress leader KR Ramesh Kumar said during a debate about farmers rights in the state assembly. A bunch of male lawmakers apparently thought this was hilarious and laughed. He’s now given a halfhearted apology for what he called “an off the cuff remark.” Chris Noth accused of sexual assault by two women The encounters, which took place more than a decade apart, have been meticulously reported and are extremely disturbing. In a statement to the Hollywood Reporter, the Sex and the City actor called the allegations “categorically false” and said the encounters were consensual. Noth is already facing new allegations, however, and a newspaper clipping from the 90s detailing accusations against the actor by his ex, Beverly Johnson, is being shared on social media. Claudette Colvin, civil rights pioneer, has arrest record cleared Everyone knows Rosa Parks’ name, but you may well not have heard of Colvin. In 1955, nine months before Parks was arrested for not moving from her seat on a bus, 15-year-old Colvin was charged with the same ‘crime.’ As Gary Younge has written, “local civil rights leadership felt Colvin was too dark, too poor and, once she fell pregnant, too compromised” to be a face of the movement; Parks was a more ‘worthy victim.’ Not only was Colvin denied her place in history, she also retained a criminal record for the incident. That has finally been expunged. “My name was cleared,” Colvin told CBS News. “I’m no longer a juvenile delinquent at 82.” Indian female journalists scammed with ‘Harvard’ job offers Unknown scammers have been going to extreme lengths to try and trick prominent Indian female journalists into leaving their jobs and taking (completely fake) positions at Harvard. No one knows why these women were targeted, although there are theories it could be linked to criticism of the Indian government. It’s a wild story and well worth reading. Jacinda Ardern casually confirms orgies can resume in New Zealand “I can confirm that Tinder liaisons have reopened,” Ardern announced on national TV. “It’s not strictly embedded in the traffic light system but…up to 25 actually, in a red area.” The week in pawtriarchy A highly scientific study has finally uncovered the answer to the age-old mystery: what sort of Christmas music do dogs like best? According to a survey of 1,000 dog owners, our furry friends’ favourite festive tune is Wham’s Last Christmas. Jingle Bells and All I want for Christmas is You by Mariah Carey were runners-up. Arwa Mahdawi’s new book, Strong Female Lead, is available for orderI’ve been broody since I was only one-year-old. My biological clock started ticking almost straight away. Growing up in England I’ve lost a bit of my Greek-Cypriot essence, but it’s there in my obsessive use of lemon and olive oil, and in my desire to be a father from an early age. No matter how shit things are, salvation could be around the corner. My dad grew up in a village with no money, no shoes. He was sent to the UK aged 12 without knowing where he was going or being able to speak English. He lived on the street for a few months until he heard a Greek voice. That Greek family took him into their kitchen and let him wash up for his lodgings. By 18, he was a proper chef in posh central London restaurants. I’m very proud of him for that. It taught me an important lesson. My mum’s responsible for my capacity to love. My dad’s responsible for the way I dress salad. Crisps are the sensory soundtrack of childhood. The noise of crisp-crunching, the oiliness of crisps, the smell of them. As a kid, you’re never more than five minutes away from asking if you can have some crisps. Even if you know the answer’s going to be no. My Baftas are parcel-taped up in a box. I won three for Stath Lets Flats, but I put them away while I was writing the new series, so they didn’t stare at me and keep me up at night. I’ll unveil them to myself again soon, it’ll be a nice reunion. Brined stuff is my guilty pleasure. I’d let the rest of the world go without gherkins if it meant I could have them all. If I could go back in time, I’d go to the early noughties. Just to soak up the feeling of not knowing what social media is. I’d listen to R&amp;B Hits 2002 and enjoy having no idea what everyone I know is up to. Slugs are mad. I can’t be doing with them existing in the same universe as me. I prepare conversations in my head before a social interaction. It’s my worst habit. I clearly haven’t done it here, which is a good sign. There’s a real feeling of adult achievement about choosing your own bedtime. Or watching TV when you want. Or putting things in your supermarket trolley without asking permission. That’s the stuff of childhood dreams. A stranger died in my arms three weeks ago. That was a new and very sad experience. In east London, me and my girlfriend saw what we thought was someone who’d had a few too many, sitting by the road. Everyone was giving him a wide berth as he looked hammered. We went over to check he was all right and saw he was struggling for air. My girlfriend called an ambulance. I ended up doing CPR on him for 20 minutes. We later found out he’d died of a cardiac arrest. Success has made me busier, but it hasn’t changed me. I’ve managed to hold on to the five fundamental components of my personality: scared, salad, tall, talks too passionately about things I’m not sure I believe in, big bum. All episodes of Stath Lets Flats are now available on All 4Millions of daffodil stems will be left to rot in the fields this spring, as growers face a critical labour shortage that they fear could spell the end of the entire industry. “If we can’t recruit more pickers, there won’t be a daffodil industry left. The situation is very grim,” said James Hosking, of Fentongollan Farm, near Truro in Cornwall. Some growers expect up to 75% of their crop will be left unpicked this spring due to a lack of workers. Many smaller growers are planning to give up daffodil growing entirely, with attempts to recruit locals failing to bring enough people to the fields. Cornwall’s mild climate and light intensity make it the heart of the UK’s £100m industry, with around 80% of the world’s daffodils grown in the duchy. Harvesting begins in the first week of January and a workforce of around 2,500 people is needed to pick over a billion stems. Over the past couple of decades, growers have relied on eastern European labour to do the back-breaking work of picking each daffodil by hand in all weathers. The end of free movement following Brexit and Covid restrictions, however, made the 2021 spring season one of the toughest ever for recruiting workers. Around 275 million stems were left in the ground. This coming season looks set to be even more challenging. “If only 50% is picked this spring, the following spring you’re looking at 25% of that. And that means you’re out of business,” said Hosking, who is the fourth generation of his family to grow daffodils at Fentongollan. “There’ll be no alternative but to stop growing daffodils. That’s the end of an industry the UK leads the world in. “Daffodils are a symbol of spring – they bring people cheer and hope when the days are still gloomy. There won’t be as many in the supermarkets this spring if nothing changes. You can’t import daffodils from anywhere else – Cornwall is the only place that can grow them at this time of year. But if you can’t harvest your crop, you haven’t got a business. Full stop.” Hosking and the owners of Varfell Farms in Penzance, one of the largest growers in the country, say they have tried to recruit locals but with very limited success. Varfell recently held an open day at the farm that was widely publicised on local social media groups and newspapers. Only four people turned up. Hosking also struggles to employ locals. “We always have three or four local pickers, but we need 60. At the moment I have about 20 mostly people who return to us every year and who already have settled status to be in the UK,” he said. The best pickers can earn up to £30 an hour and the average wage at Varfell last spring was £14 an hour. But outdoor working in all weathers is not proving attractive. Many farms are also remote, needing its workers to live on site. “These are seasonal jobs that cannot be mechanised and are not attractive to the local labour force,” Alex Newey, owner of Varfell Farms, said. He is expecting to pick only a quarter of this coming season’s crop due to a lack of pickers. The government has promised to extend a visa scheme allowing farmers to bring in seasonal workers from overseas. At the moment it only applies to fruit and vegetables, with non-edible crops excluded. Kevin Foster MP, the immigration minister, however, last week told MPs on the environment, food and rural affairs committee that non-edible crops will be added to the Seasonal Agricultural Workers Scheme (Saws). But with just two weeks to go until picking is due to start and no formal announcement, growers say they need to start recruiting now if they are to save this year’s harvest. “If, next week, the government announces a visa scheme that includes ornamental crops, we could potentially get up to speed with recruitment by early February. At least then the industry has a future,” said Newey. “We’re hopeful it will happen, but it has to happen soon.” “We’ve heard promises from the government before,” said Hosking. “We’re still waiting.” The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs was contacted for a comment but did not respond.Clad in mittens and bobble hats, carol singers are moving back to traditional open-air performance this Christmas in response to health concerns. A string of scheduled professional and amateur choral concerts will now take place outside, while many streets are organising door-to-door carolling for charity. Last year, group singing of any kind was deemed unsafe and, as Covid social restrictions return this December, singing alfresco has emerged as one of relatively few sanctioned communal activities. Choir master and composer Harvey Brough, who leads Vox Holloway in north London, called on occasional singers to embrace the opportunity, adding that a concert changes its nature in the fresh air. “It is a different audience. People stop and sing along with you, although it is hard work for the singers, as the sound drops right to the ground,” said Brough, who performed in the jazz vocal band Harvey and the Wallbangers in the 1980s. Brough and his singers entertained outside a fire station in Stoke Newington, north London, last week: “We did half an hour and it was great. I would encourage everyone to try it. Even those who rarely sing feel emboldened. There is much more spontaneity.” The old custom of wassailing at the close of the year is to be adopted by more than a third of the nation this week, according to research. A new study of 2,000 people conducted by Perspectus Global found that 36% plan to sing carols to make up for missing out last year. And the favourite carol among respondents was one of the most traditional: Silent Night.The tune, composed in 1818 by an Austrian primary schoolteacher, also featured in the line-up of an outdoor concert held on Saturday night in the garden of long-established singing coach Jennifer Lilleystone. “Every year, I hold a Christmas concert for a different children’s charity,” she told the Observer. “Last year, it was to raise money for Place2Be, supporting young people’s mental health. But the lockdown prevented us from performing, so we moved outside, and I promised we would do it properly again this year, especially after the terrible time children and teenagers have had.” Members of the Royal Choral Society are more familiar with the stage of the Albert Hall than the pavement, but the future of their upcoming concerts is unsure. The general manager of the society, Richard Reeves, said he hopes to avoid a repeat of last year, when lockdown was imposed on the day of the dress rehearsal for their series of eight Christmas concerts in the famous Kensington venue. The choir has given some concerts this year, managing a socially distanced performance of Handel’s Messiah in May. But as Reeves’s colleague, Jackie Freshfield, points out, this was unusual: “Most choirs were not able to meet at all in person in 2021 until September, so this Christmas has seen choirs taking every opportunity to sing, and there appear to be concerts every night of the week. There is such comfort in the music of the Christmas season, and everyone loves to share the joy and memories that these familiar melodies evoke. It feeds body and soul.”Decades from now, when some awkward teenager in a biosecure bunker tries to forget about the grimness of the dying planet outside by scrolling through old cricket statistics on their settlement’s offline intranet, they will think that Joe Root in 2021 must have been kissed on the nose by a sunbeam. Not only did he get to spend time outdoors, above ground, with no concern for atmospheric chlorine or flying sharks, but he made runs wherever he went, against all-comers, racing up the record list like a 12-legged scorpion up a respirator pipe. For his final stanza, the tour of Australia, his numbers will carry on the earlier prolific trend, at least through the first two matches in Brisbane and Adelaide. In neither match, though, has he done what he did in almost every other series this year: make centuries. Touring in Asia, three matches brought him 228, 186 and 218. Four matches in England brought 109, an unbeaten 180 and 121. In Australia, his processions have been roadblocked at 89 and 62, scores big enough to reaffirm Root’s current fineness of touch but not big enough to define the matches that contain them. Not that Root’s centuries were always enough to drag his struggling team to victory, but in Australia his two good innings have been curtailed before that even became a chance. Both times, the reason has been Cameron Green. Across the course of three overs to start the second session of day three at Adelaide, Australia’s tall all-rounder gave Root some serious testing around his off-stump. Green bashed the ball into the surface, finding dramatic lift and a bit of movement while staying unerringly accurate in his line. Root groped for a few deliveries, ran one boundary away off the face of his bat, and not long afterwards edged behind trying a similar shot. A small amount of seam movement away from him was enough to do him in at second slip. That made it two dismissals in two innings for Green, after Root had reached for a more conventional delivery in Brisbane and nicked to the keeper. After that Test he gave the young Green some lukewarm praise, saying that he was a “talented” cricketer but that England’s batters would play him better having seen him operate in two innings. Instead of them playing him better, Green bowled better to them. Familiarity certainly did not help Root. The significance, of course, is that Root has twice been able to survive bulk attention from Australia’s frontline bowlers – Nathan Lyon and Mitchell Starc in both matches, Pat Cummins and Josh Hazlewood in Brisbane, Michael Neser and Jhye Richardson in Adelaide – only to fall to the fifth option used. He has faced 281 deliveries across two innings, largely from those principal bowlers, before giving a breakthrough to the relief option. A year ago, in his first Test season, Green’s bowling was stopgap, with his recovery from a back injury limiting him to a few overs of unthreatening medium-fast stuff. This season he has regained velocity and added effort after thundering to the crease, regularly clocking speeds in the bracket reserved for fast bowlers who carry no caveat. He is becoming an option, not a fallback. Bowlers before a series always talk about targeting the opposition’s best bat. Green has been the one to succeed. He may not have made runs yet at No 6, but any player who could offer the wicket of Root in every innings would be worth their place for that alone. Even against a functional team. But this is a team that routinely lose their first two wickets in a matter of minutes to bring Root to the middle, then collapses as soon as he departs. In Adelaide, Root helped add 138 runs before getting out, from which point England lost eight wickets for 86. In Brisbane he added 168 before a collapse of seven for 68. In the first innings, where he made a rare duck, England kept sliding with eight for 136. When Green has dismissed Root, it hasn’t been a matter of felling the queen on a chessboard. It’s removing the base piece from a Jenga tower. All of this is information that our post-apocalyptic kid might never find. Root has achieved wonderful personal results, with only three players left ahead of him on the list for Test runs in a year. But he hasn’t had a wonderful year personally, with the strain of trying to lead a team that crumbles around him like this. His first three big scores created wins in Sri Lanka and in India. In the three remaining India Tests, his team were destroyed. Only one of his home hundreds got England across the line, in a series in effect lost through a cancelled match that will be played next year. The numbers are one thing; the story behind them can be something else. A bowler such as Green – five wickets from six Tests at 34 runs each, a record you would call handy but unspectacular – can attest to that.A frustrated Dawid Malan said England have to stop losing wickets in rapid succession after another batting collapse on day three of the second Ashes Test. Australia made sure the tourists’ hope of reclaiming the urn is fading fast by skittling out England for 236, before moving to 45 for one at stumps, a tidy lead of 282. That was after the day had begun well as Malan (80) and Joe Root (62) led a revival to 150 for two before Australia hit back after lunch. England contrived to lose eight wickets for 86 runs – in Brisbane it was eight for 74 – and Malan was adamant these collapses cannot keep happening. He told BT Sport: “It is a little bit of a trend, it is something we did on the last tour and we did this in the last Test here as well. We get a little bit of momentum and a partnership going and when the Aussies get one wicket they take two or three in clusters and we can go from 150 for two to 180 for six and we are chasing it again. “We need to get better when we lose that one wicket to make sure we get another partnership going as quickly as possible. “After we lost those two wickets last night we needed to get a partnership going, which myself and Rooty got. We got ourselves into a half-decent position and once again when the Aussies got that door open they just jumped straight through it. “It is disappointing, frustrating that we have got ourselves back into the fight but we lost too many wickets in clusters there. “I didn’t play a great shot. When you get to 80 you want to be making them count, especially out here, so to get out how I got out was disappointed. A few of us played shots we will look back and wish we didn’t but that’s cricket.” Malan’s partnership with Root was the second time in the series they have shared a lengthy stand and he enjoys batting with his captain. “He is one of the best batters to have played the game,” Malan said. “If you look at his numbers and where he has done it, to be able to watch him and learn how he goes about it, every innings he seems to find another way to score runs.” England missed a chance to get themselves back in the match as they took only one wicket under the lights in the evening session and Malan accepts avoiding defeat and going two down in the series is going to be tough. “We got that one wicket so hopefully we can have a crazy hour or two somewhere,” he said. “We have to take wickets and to try and put them under as much pressure as we can and then bat for a very long period.” England’s lack of batting fortitude was criticised by their former captain Alastair Cook who said they are making rudimentary mistakes. “It is all too familiar and it is incredibly frustrating for the players, the coaches. You can’t afford to lose wickets in clusters,” he said on BT Sport. “You have got batting coaches saying: ‘If you lose a wicket you have to rebuild’, all the stuff you tell 13-year-olds in team meetings, and unfortunately they are not learning lessons. They are not being good enough when they are put under pressure as a batting unit. “When one wicket falls Australia are brilliant at seizing that opportunity for 20 minutes. Starting your innings on a flat wicket is so important. Australia go all in and England haven’t been good enough to withstand that.” Cook is not holding any real hope for England salvaging the match. “That was the big chance to get back into the series and bat big and Root and Malan were excellent,” he said. “As soon as the talisman went second or third over after lunch, [England lost] four for 19, you just cannot afford to do this on flat wickets time and time again because in 45 minutes the game is almost out of reach already.”Billie Eilish has just turned 20. Last week, talking to the radio host Howard Stern on SiriusXM, she discussed the impact that viewing pornography online, at a young age, had had on her. She explained that she was about 11 when she first saw pornography, and that it had given her nightmares, and affected her understanding and expectations of what sex should be. “I think it really destroyed my brain and I feel incredibly devastated that I was exposed to so much porn,” she said. The statistics about the age at which children first see pornography online, and the speed at which watching porn becomes normalised, particularly for teenage boys, make for grim reading. In 2019, the British Board of Film Classification commissioned a survey that suggested 51% of 11 to 13-year-olds had seen pornography online. In the majority of cases, this was accidental, and for younger children, in particular, it was traumatic. The study also revealed a disparity between what parents and children understood about the culture of sexual content: only 25% of the parents surveyed thought their child had seen pornography online, while 63% of those parents’ children said that they had seen it. The facts are plain, whether they are palatable or not: pornography is easy to access, and is very likely to be seen by those far below any age restrictions, which are hard, if not impossible, to enforce. Also last week, the children’s commissioner for England, Dame Rachel de Souza, urged parents to “talk early, and talk often” to children about pornography and sexual harassment. She acknowledged that the conversation can be hard, but advised that parents and carers should “create the culture before the crisis. Children want to talk to their parents and carers about this. We know this because they’ve told us,” she said. There was a small ripple of backlash to what Eilish had to say, from pro-porn advocates who argued that she was treating all pornography as the same “bad” sort. I’m not sure that she should have had to assess the ethics of types of sexual content at that age, but what matters is that we listen to what she has to say, at 19, about her experiences of easily accessible and socially acceptable viewing of pornography. To hear someone who has recently lived that and is contemplating its impact on her is a crucial piece of the puzzle, particularly for older generations whose experiences will have been so vastly different. It is a tricky conversation, but one that must be had. Gregg Wallace, adjusting the menu to meet shifting tastes It is the time of year for the bombastic television finales to roll out, and after Succession turned a steady season into a magnificent one with a pat of Tom Wambsgans’ shoulder, and Strictly ended what might be its loveliest run in recent memory, MasterChef: The Professionals also crowned its winner with an emotional and tense last episode. I am a huge fan of the Professionals spinoff, which borrows Gregg Wallace from the original as host. The winner, Dan Lee, delighted everyone with his drool-inducing menu. I would like to try pretty much everything he made. As a vegetarian, I will have to make do with drooling; as with most cooking programmes, MasterChef: The Professionals is heavy on meat and fish. Both the Vegetarian and Vegan societies last week criticised the show for its reliance on meat: their analysis showed that by the end of the semi-finals, only 10 out of 100 savoury dishes were vegetarian. Unfortunately, this was just before a finals-week episode in which the Michelin-standard food prepared by the contestants was vegetable-based and zero waste. It looked amazing. While most people still eat meat, I understand that for now the adjustment will probably have to be made by those who choose not to, though I have found a very happy middle ground. Nigella Lawson’s most recent cookbook, Cook, Eat, Repeat, offers a veggie or vegan suggestion for almost every recipe that involves meat. It’s casual and easy, and keeps everyone happy. Isabelle Huppert: in the presence of greatness The only time I meet famous people is when I’m interviewing them, which means that I very rarely get starstruck. In those situations it would be unprofessional, I think, to let my excitable fan-girl out in full. But there have been a couple of exceptions, the most notable of which was Isabelle Huppert. I tried to talk about films, I got tongue-tied, and I did a very poor interview because I was uncharacteristically giddy about being in a room with Isabelle Huppert, trying to talk about films. It was years ago, but I can barely think about it now without cringeing. Then again, she is one of the greats, so perhaps it was forgivable. It was announced last week that Huppert will be given an honorary Golden Bear award at the Berlin international film festival. The lifetime achievement award will commemorate what has been “a career without equal”, according to the festival’s directors. Since it’s looking as though we may be spending a bit more time indoors, might I suggest an Huppert marathon to while away the hours? It might be the only thing that makes the real world look cheerful by comparison. • Rebecca Nicholson is an Observer columnistThe greatest hits approach to this climactic episode of Tom Holland’s incarnation as the web-slinger delivers an overflowing, funnel-web cornucopia of treats for Spider-fans. But amid numerous references to Spideys past, the key influence is the one that is most likely to shape the future of the franchise, 2018’s Spider-Man: Into the Spiderverse. While that thrillingly inventive animation remains the standout film from the Spider-canon – it’s a sleek, conceptually elegant thing compared to No Way Home’s cluttered, more-is-more approach – here, director Jon Watts harnesses the idea of the “multiverse” (an infinite number of parallel universes, each with their own Spider-Man) and satisfyingly puts it to work in the service of a live-action version of the spider saga. It’s all very meta and self-referential; screenwriters Chris McKenna and Erik Sommers hoover up memorable lines from past movies and serve them with a flourish and an exaggerated wink to the audience. It’s also a good deal of fun. The story starts immediately after the events at the conclusion of 2019’s Spider-Man: Far from Home; the dying Mysterio has leaked the identity of the boy beneath the lycra. And thanks to social media-stoked suspicion and conspiracy theories, Peter Parker’s name is mud. He seeks out the help of Doctor Strange, and discovers that although Benedict Cumberbatch’s character may be able to perform magic, sarcasm remains his superpower. Meanwhile, Parker’s appeal continues to be his endearing, puppyish enthusiasm. And for all the Avengers: Endgame-style onslaught of effects and action here, it’s Spidey’s sweetness that is the USP.Mandip Gill, 33, was born in Leeds to a Sikh family and grew up on the estate where her parents owned a newsagents. She studied acting at the University of Central Lancashire and worked in theatre before landing her debut TV role as homeless teenager Phoebe McQueen in Hollyoaks. After leaving the Channel 4 soap three years later, she appeared in Cuckoo, Casualty, The Good Karma Hospital and Love, Lies and Records. Since 2018, she has starred in Doctor Who as the Doctor’s companion Yasmin Khan. 1. Film House of Gucci I was spoiled when it came to films. We had a video rental section in our newsagents growing up, so I watched far too many age-inappropriate films. But I was desperate to see this because Lady Gaga blew me away in A Star Is Born. On screen, she’s just got it. As an actor myself, I overanalyse and it’s difficult for me to get fully swept up but Gaga totally absorbs herself in each role and just becomes the character. I wasn’t familiar with the fascinating story behind the brand and Gucci family. It’s testament to the film that even though it’s two-and-a-half hours long, I didn’t check my phone once and was surprised it was pitch black outside when I left the cinema. 2. Music Jhené Aiko Jhené makes slow R&amp;B and I’ve been listening to her constantly since 2014. I played her debut album, Souled Out, non-stop. Now I keep coming back to it. That album’s going to follow me around for the rest of my life. She’s got a beautiful voice and her lyrics resonate with me: Jhené lost her brother to cancer and my cousin had just passed away too when I discovered her. My musical tastes range from Sam Smith to Dave the rapper. But Jodie [Whittaker] tends to choose the music on the Doctor Who set because she’s so knowledgable. She’s always introducing me to new artists. 3. Podcast Happy Place by Fearne Cotton I have the worst diet, so [Doctor Who co-star] John Bishop recommended Mindful Chef boxes to me. I first put this podcast on when I started making the meals in lockdown and really took to it. Now I associate Fearne so closely with cooking, I can’t dice a pepper without listening to her. The episodes with Suranne Jones, Jesy Nelson and Holly Willoughby are highlights. It’s great to hear people I’ve grown up watching or listening to talking openly about anxiety, impostor syndrome and other mental health issues. Fearne’s a great listener who creates a safe space. 4. TV This Is Us, Amazon Prime I’m not normally a drama binge-watcher – I tend to watch heavy documentaries about murderers – but I’m on series four of This Is Us and have become so emotionally invested. It’s so well written and performed, the characters feel real to me. They’re wholesome but so human, fully fleshed-out, with flaws like any of us. I’ve heard people call it cheesy but the acting keeps it grounded and true. Mandy Moore and Sterling K Brown are so brilliant, I get choked up watching them. It’s also rare to see such a diverse, multi-generational cast in a mainstream drama. 5. Book The Midnight Library by Matt Haig Our Doctor Who costume lady Jen gave me this as a gift and I loved it. It’s quite Who-ish in a way. No spoilers but it’s a fantasy novel about a woman called Nora who goes through something, then wakes up in a library full of books which ponder the infinite possibilities of her own life. Each book she picks off the shelf is a version of what her life could have been. It gets her to question her regrets and choices. I love the idea of life’s endless crossroads – how tiny decisions or chance encounters can have massive consequences. 6. Restaurant Wagamama I mainly eat beige food – chips, pasta, sandwiches – but I love Wagamama and always order the same thing: prawn firecracker with extra sauce. I order it at home, on set, in the Cardiff Bay branch. I must eat it three times a week. They know my regular order now and say: “Extra sauce?” It’s so spicy, it must be uncomfortable watching me eat it. I’m always gasping for a glass of water or milk. I gave up fish for six months after watching [Netflix documentary] Seaspiracy but got lured back by Wagamama. I’ll sometimes order edamame beans with salt on the side, just to mix things up. The Doctor Who New’s Year’s Day special is on BBC One, Saturday 1 January, 7pmFor nearly an hour, the youngsters and part-timers of Cardiff went toe to toe with the champions of England. They had impressed in an unflattering, practically insulting, defeat to the champions of France and Europe last Saturday, but this time they backed up the promise with enough tries to remain level until close to the hour mark. This was not a flattering score-line either, although there was little arguing with the four tries by which a virtually full-strength Harlequins pulled away in the final quarter, two of them for Alex Dombrandt. Still, given the 42 players Cardiff had missing after the dramas of their escape from South Africa and subsequent quarantine, this was some effort by the groundsman, the primary-school teacher and all the other euphemisms for the part-timer, which in this case applied literally. “Massive respect to Cardiff,” said Danny Care. “After everything they’ve had thrown at them the past few weeks, I thought they were brilliant last week against Toulouse. “They pitched up here, played some great rugby and made us work really hard for it.” The future looks bright, too, if the performance of some of these kids is anything to go by, particularly those of the fliers out wide, Cameron Winnett and Theo Cabango, whose older brother, Ben, is a Wales football international. Cabango’s solo try, which drew Cardiff level on the approach to half-time, was a thing of wonder. The 17-17 score at half-time, which held until Dombrandt’s first try in the 58th minute, was no less than the Blues deserved. One of Cardiff’s favourite sons, Dan Fish, has been recalled from retirement to marshal them from fly-half and did so with much wit. His pass set the 18-year-old Winnett through a gap for the game’s first try in the fifth minute. Quins responded with a pair of smart inside balls from Marcus Smith, then Jack Kenningham to release Danny Care. Cardiff’s task was made harder yet by the yellow card shown to Jack Adams, a bona fide Lion among kids, for his tackle earlier in the move. Even down to 14, though, Cardiff remained a threat. They retook the lead from a quickly taken free-kick by Tomos Williams, which paved the way for James Botham to barge over. The game was breathless already, as were plenty of those part-timers. Smith took advantage just before Adams’s return from the sin-bin with a brilliant try, breaking from his own 22 and exchanging passes with Dombrandt to race to the posts. His conversion earned Quins the lead for the first time, but it was a measure of Cardiff’s performance when Smith, the arch sender of penalties to the corner, kicked for the posts just before the half-hour to take the home side five points clear. That margin was gone a few minutes later in a puff of magic by Cabango. He took Seb Davies’s off-load a few metres shy of halfway and left the Quins cover trailing. On the approach to the try-line he stepped inside Huw Jones and through the tackle of Jack Walker to reach for the line. It was a try worthy of any occasion, as his mate on the other wing could have told him. After the break, Cardiff remained competitive, keeping Quins scoreless until Dombrandt broke the deadlock. Quins performed that kick-to-the-corner routine and Dombrandt burst over after a punishing carry from a youngster of their own, the replacement hooker, Jack Musk. The fun was over as Quins settled into their status as uber-favourites. A brilliant cross-kick by Smith was claimed by Joe Marchant, a couple of phases after Smith’s excellent pass had released him down the left. Dombrandt muscled over again from another attacking lineout, before André Esterhuizen did much the same, after Tyrone Green was scythed down inches short by a superb tackle from the kid who had replaced the kid at full-back, Ryan Wilkins. They deserved better, those kids. They will be better too. Quins, meanwhile, look set for the last 16.A sensitive, geeky youth, stuck on a lonely cattle ranch, might understandably yearn for a kindly uncle figure; someone to confide in, or be mentored by. But the companionship actor Benedict Cumberbatch offers his brother’s stepson, Peter, in the widely Oscar-tipped western Power of the Dog is a very long, precarious horse ride away from anything avuncular. In fact, Cumberbatch’s portrayal of the emotionally thwarted Phil Burbank is a study in twisted misery. In one early scene, Burbank notices some fragile paper flowers the teenager has made to decorate a dinner table at his mother’s canteen. But, instead of praising them, “Uncle Phil” is driven to publicly sneer. Cumberbatch’s nasty, tortured performance is one of a choice selection of unhappy and warped souls played by British stars and vying for awards this season. Olivia Colman’s haunted, guilty mother in The Lost Daughter is also being hailed as one of the top screen appearances of the year. Last week, both stars and both films dominated nominations for the influential upcoming Golden Globes and Critics’ Circle awards, seen as bellwethers for the Academy Awards in Los Angeles in late March. Leda, Colman’s character in The Lost Daughter, is choked by memories of her maternal failures and observes all the family activity around her during a Greek island holiday with a toxic mix of pain and panic. The Washington Post has acknowledged Colman’s “shattering” handling of a woman “who is spikily self-protective and deeply vulnerable”, and admires her skill at driving scenes that are “a chamber piece of passive-aggressive subtext”. The film is based on a novel by the Italian author Elena Ferrante and is a directorial debut for established anglophile actor Maggie Gyllenhaal, who also wrote the screenplay. Colman has revealed that what she first liked about the script was the moral messiness it afforded an actor. For Guardian critic Peter Bradshaw, the treacherous nature of Colman’s mental landscape is the key to the film’s success. “What is great about Colman’s performance is that it is always teetering on the brink of some new revelation about Leda: her face is subtly trembling with … what? Tears? Laughter? A scowl of scorn?” he wrote. There is clearly a very strong appetite for bleak nuance in current American entertainment, typified in long-running popular television series such as Ozark and Fargo. These dark, dark stories stand at the other end of the streaming spectrum to jolly hit shows such as Bridgerton or Emily in Paris, but they obviously also meet a public need. They paint in a shady palette that suits actors who are relaxed about complexity and contradiction. Nick James, former editor of Sight and Sound magazine, wonders if the “otherness” of British stars can also operate as a shortcut, or at least a shorthand, so that the American viewer knows this is a character they should be worried about. “It’s possibly also that the current need to therapise the bad guys, to give them a broken home type motivation (as in Joker), requires that the US audience detect strangeness in them. Brits are strangeness in this context,” he said. When director Jeymes Samuel, also known as The Bullitts, wanted to cast a perturbing presence in the role of a cowboy who is capable of not just killing but of carving a cross into the forehead of a boy, he turned to Britain’s Idris Elba, who cloaks his British otherness in this film by playing the part in a Texan drawl. Whether audiences know that Elba is British or not, Samuel’s western The Harder They Fall, which was released on Netflix last month, is both violent and entertaining. This can be an uncomfortable combination for some performers and yet falls easily within Elba’s range. So it seems that, when Hollywood needs an actor who can communicate dubious motivation, not to say downright cruel dysfunction, Britain is now the place to look. The final episode of series three of Succession, which aired on both sides of the Atlantic to great acclaim last week, only confirms the trend, with its malign central patriarch Logan Roy, played by Scot Brian Cox. The American market in perverse screen anti-heroes has, for now, been cornered. James views this hit series – which was conceived by Jesse Armstrong, British creator of Peep Show, and written by a team that includes acclaimed British playwrights Lucy Prebble and Lucy Kirkwood – as an example of true cultural cross-fertilisation, with British voices providing much of the expertly trained malevolence. “There’s something about the difference between British and American satire, where ours is more vicious and theirs is usually relatively polite/toothless,” he said. “Succession is the exception, which makes me think the presence of British actors allows American productions to go deeper and darker. American actors would worry such roles would damage their careers.” This is not to undervalue the vile poison that emanates from siblings Shiv and Roman Roy, played by Australian actor Sarah Snook and American actor Kieran Culkin. But for sheer seething ambiguity, it would be hard to trump the performance given by British actor Matthew Macfadyen as the wounded but scheming Tom Wambsgans. The tradition of allowing a British actor to represent untrustworthiness is, of course, as old as Hollywood. A clipped English accent has often been the marker of evil on screen, and particularly in opposition to an American man or woman of action. From James Mason in North by Northwest to George Sanders’s rolling vowels as Shere Khan in The Jungle Book, the key Manichean struggles played out in American cinema have repeatedly located the devil as the product of the public school system in the south of England. Across American culture, since the war of independence, the British have stood, at some subconscious level, for duplicity as well as for the alarming affectations of book-learning. It is probably significant that Colman’s Leda is an academic researching her next book, and Cumberbatch’s Burbank is described as a former scholastic talent who has since fallen low. His character makes the perfect contrast to the warmer, chaotic and depressive emotions laid out so plainly by Kirsten Dunst, who plays Peter’s mother, Burbank’s brother’s bride. Her arrival in this carefully balanced world of anguish is the straw that threatens to break everything apart. Director Jane Campion based her film on a 1967 novel by Thomas Savage. It is a book admired by Annie Proulx and it shares the themes of repressed sexuality in a brutal, macho world, that were to recur in her later book, Brokeback Mountain. Phil Burbank is described by Savage as someone who “had loathed the world, should it loathe him first”, and Cumberbatch nails this protective reflex, stoking the narrative with what the New York Times calls “virtuosic control”. If doling out all these unpleasant roles to British stars looks like a backhanded compliment, with its roots in years of simmering contempt, it matters little to the actors concerned. Cumberbatch and Colman are likely to find themselves saluted by their peers when the awards are given out this winter. It may be a bit of stereotyping that has become self-fulfilling, but it is also quite useful. Actors who can at least claim to have been raised on a mixed diet of savage wit and suppressed mental turmoil are ahead of the pack as far as casting directors are concerned. As Colman, who after all began her screen career in Peep Show, has said: “My thing is dark comedy. I love it. It’s the whole gamut of humans. We are all a bit of everything. I find a drama with no laughs at all is maybe not as hard-hitting.”Chris Bryant, the chair of the committee on standards, has called for an independent investigation into the alleged Christmas parties held across Whitehall and insisted ultimately it should be led by the police. The cabinet secretary, Simon Case, on Friday night quit his role leading the investigation into whether three alleged Whitehall parties breached Covid restrictions after it emerged an event was held in his private office last December. Rules in London at the time banned indoor social gatherings. Sue Gray, a top civil servant in the Department for Levelling up, Housing and Communities, has taken over Case’s role to investigate the alleged gatherings – two of which are said to have taken place in Downing Street on 27 November and 18 December and another at the education department on 10 December. Bryant told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Saturday: “In the end, I think it should be the police investigating. “But maybe the first stage of getting all the facts and figures together needs to be done by a completely independent figure, not somebody who is in the midst.” In a separate interview with BBC Breakfast, the Labour MP said that “if the rules are broken … in any other line of work, the police would be investigating and I don’t know why the police aren’t investigating this situation. “In the end, the final analysis has to be done by [a] completely independent person. I think that that should be the police.” Any evidence of lawbreaking, he added, should be handed over to the police. Bryant also said there was a “good argument” for the chair of the committee on standards in public life, Jonathan Evans, to take on the role of leading the investigation. “I think quite a lot of people had a bit of anxiety anyway about Simon Case taking on the job [of the investigation] because it felt a bit like getting the housekeeper to investigate whether the housekeeper has had a party,” he said. Bryant said Gray was likely to know “every single one” of the people she will be investigating, adding: “I’m not convinced that this is the right direction. And this is the kind of problem that you have with a completely dysfunctional Downing Street.” The Scottish National party’s Westminster leader, Ian Blackford, also said the investigation should be led by someone outside Whitehall, adding “having somebody else from the civil service marking their own isn’t good enough”. He told the BBC’s Newsnight there should be a “judge-led inquiry”. Meanwhile, Gavin Barwell, the former Downing Street chief of staff to the then prime minister, Theresa May, backed Gray for the role. “I can’t think from my time in government of a better person to put in charge of this review than Sue Gray,” he told the BBC. “She had the role in charge of propriety and ethics in government when I was chief of staff. “I saw her handle a number of investigations in a way that was completely independent and her determination always to get to the truth and present the prime minister with all of the evidence.” He added: “I think that she is exactly the right kind of person and we can be confident that we will get the facts.”After nearly two years of disruption, Covid-19 has changed how we shop for ever. It has altered not only what we buy, but how we buy it. Big purchases involve clicks, not shopping trips, and remote working has turned the home interiors market into the new fast fashion. It has also signalled the end of overwhelming choice for consumers, analysts say, as gaps on shelves and long delivery times for items such as cars and sofas become a frustrating fact of life. Lifestyle changes due to health or environmental concerns are also helping new services get off the ground. Investors are pouring billions into rapid grocery delivery, while buying secondhand clothes and renting furniture is entering the mainstream. On high streets, cheaper rents are starting to attract independent stores. Here is a look at some of the big changes taking place. Grocery shopping The pandemic has caused major upheaval in the UK’s £212bn grocery industry. The return of the weekly shop during the strictest periods of lockdown looked as though it had saved the big supermarkets from a midlife crisis, only for an army of rapid grocery delivery firms, such as Getir, Gorillas and Jiffy, to emerge with the promise of delivering your groceries in less than half an hour. The IGD, the trade body for the food and consumer goods industry, says this so-called quick commerce has “exploded” on to the scene and is now a “channel in its own right”. It estimates 13% of UK shoppers now use these services, with sales hitting £1.4bn this year and on track to double within five. Bryan Roberts, an analyst at Shopfloor Insights, says the health crisis has created the kind of market conditions where people are “willing to pay a delivery fee for a 20-quid, 15-minute, delivery experience”, although he adds: “Time will tell if these models are going to be sustainable.” The expanded online services offered by the big chains have also won millions of new customers during the pandemic, but with inflation running at a 10-year high, the sands are shifting again, with discounters such as Aldi and Lidl the likely winners in the coming months as Britons seek out cheaper stores. There may be more ways to shop these days, but the supply chain problems in the background have prompted the major grocery brands to take a leaf out the discounters’ book and reduce their ranges to become more efficient. Richard Wilding, professor of supply chain strategy at Cranfield School of Management, says that the “abundance of choice we’ve had is going to change”. “You used to be able to buy 60 different types of pasta in the supermarket: then, during the pandemic, manufacturers started rationalising their ranges so all of a sudden you could only get 20 types,” he says. “Having new and interesting products has traditionally been a way of creating consumer demand, but companies are basically saying ‘we’ve got to focus on the higher-margin things’.” Working from home The shift to home working has had such a profound impact on how we live that it has become a retail super-trend in its own right. It has altered spending priorities, as money usually spent on foreign holidays or commuting is ploughed into home furnishings and revamps. Being home 24/7 has also resulted in an acceleration of the shift to online shopping. It took eight years for online sales to double their share of spending to 20%, but within just nine months during the pandemic, that figure touched 36% last year. This year’s easing of restrictions saw it fall back to a still substantial 26%. “Working from home has changed both the pattern of shopping and the pattern of demand,” says Richard Hyman, an independent retail analyst. “The shape of markets like fashion, food, beauty and homewares have changed, but the question is: have they alighted on a new, permanent position? It’s still very fluid because no one knows what proportion of people are going to continue working from home.” The profile of consumer spending has changed dramatically: for example, shoppers have spent an extra £503m in DIY stores this year, according to figures from retail data firm Kantar. Britons also took up new pastimes: 1.2 million new gardeners spent an extra £51m on plants and related paraphernalia. “Not everybody’s job is home-based but generally the way we are socialising and shopping is much more centred around the home,” says Joanna Parman at Kantar. “We are travelling less far at the weekend for shopping trips or to eat out. So we’re much more likely to be visiting local or independent stores than before.” She adds: “Lots of people are divested in how they look and invested in how their home looks so it is Instagrammable and is looking nice in the background when you’re on your phone or video call. They are investing a lot more in their homes and you could argue we are seeing some ‘fast homewares’ trends coming through.” Fashion Britons have swapped style for comfort during the pandemic: witness the 88% increase in loungewear sales last year. The closure of high street stores for long periods forced shoppers to buy the clothes they needed online and there may be no going back. The data firm Retail Economics estimates that half of the £51bn spent on clothing this year will have been bought on websites. Come 2025 it thinks that figure will be two-thirds of the total. This is already the case for electricals, which has been one of the fastest markets to move online. “What’s clear from the pandemic is that we as a nation have been able to adapt and shift our behaviours, sometimes overnight,” says Parman. “There’s not a lot of policy saying we shouldn’t socialise but people have already stepped back from eating out. We drive a lot of the change in our habits and the longer they are in place, the more likely they are to stick.” There are other big forces at work in this market too. The fashion industry is a big polluter and under growing pressure to get itself on a more sustainable footing, so more companies are experimenting with selling secondhand clothes or even renting them out, a model that has previously focused on outfits for special occasions. The UK’s biggest clothing retailer, Marks &amp; Spencer, is running a small trial to test demand for renting its dresses and coats – a trend that is more advanced in furniture, where the likes of John Lewis are renting out sofas, sideboards and desks. As always, fashion-conscious teens got there first and are already spending their cash on secondhand clothes sites such as Depop and Vinted, which are reporting big sales increases. Parman thinks the clothing rental market is a “trickier” model but predicts the pre-loved fashion market will take off even more in 2022. Cars The secondhand boom has already arrived in the car market, where soaring used car prices, up 31% since April, are stoking inflation. Usually about 2.5 million new cars a year are registered in the UK but that number sank to 1.6 million in 2020 with a similar figure expected this year as a shortage of computer chips hits production. This shortfall is one of the factors pushing up secondhand prices. Ian Plummer, commercial director of the Auto Trader marketplace, says Covid has forced a reluctant industry to embrace the web. Buyers want to be able to do more of the legwork online, from getting a valuation for their current car to applying for finance. However, given the cost involved – in expenditure terms, a car is second only to a home for the average household – “seeing, touching, smelling” your chosen vehicle remains an important final step. There has been some upside to the tumult, with the most recent figures showing a doubling of sales of electric vehicles. Almost 22,000 pure electric vehicles were registered in November, more than double the figure in the same month of 2020. “A new electric vehicle launched every 10 days in the course of 2021 and there are even more cars coming next year,” says Plummer. “It’s a big shift in the market: more supply, more marketing, creating more excitement, which has been spurred on by the fuel crisis.” Stores The rapid spread of the Omicron variant has been devastating news for store-based retailers as shopper numbers tail off on what are among the most important trading days of the year in the run-up to Christmas. With the Covid crisis seemingly far from over, the jury remains out on what the long-term consequences will be for the high street. The stream of household names that failed pre-Covid was accelerated by the lockdowns. Recent British Retail Consortium data shows the number of empty stores sitting at a record high of 14.5%. The crisis has pulled down rents but eye-watering business rates remain a big problem that the government seems reluctant to deal with. There are glimmers of hope, though, with the same data pointing to a declining vacancy rate in some regions, as independents move in to fill the spaces left by defunct chain stores. But there is, without question, more painful change to come. Hyman points to the £90bn of non-food sales that have moved online over the past 20 years, a period when there has been no “meaningful” reduction in store space. “The cost of selling something in a shop is now much more expensive because you’ve got a high fixed cost base and lower sales,” he says. “When all this is over, we are still going to have too many shops and too many websites.”The beauty market has had a makeover during the pandemic. Department stores are losing what remaining influence they have, and social media is increasingly the place to try out and buy skincare, cosmetics and fragrance. With TikTok and Instagram now holding far more sway than the white-coated beauty counter assistants, it is perhaps no surprise that Boots is up for sale, Debenhams – once one of the leading beauty retailers in the UK – has left the high street and House of Fraser and John Lewis are in retreat. Against all that, Peter Macnab is trying to lead a high street fightback. The boss of the Superdrug and Savers chains is on a mission to knit bricks-and-mortar stores together with the online world. The 64-year-old Scot started his career at now-defunct supermarket chain Safeway in 1972, carrying paper bags of shopping out to customers’ cars. Today he’s overseeing a digital integration project that allows Superdrug to offer two-hour delivery for online orders or pick-up in store within 30 minutes. Last month the 800-store chain introduced the “endless aisle” – where shoppers who can’t find what they want in the shop can order it at the till for home delivery. Macnab calls it “o plus o” – online plus offline working together. “People are worried that o and o is diluting offline but it isn’t,” says Macnab, as he weaves around the Superdrug in Northamptonshire’s Rushden Lakes shopping centre. “The online shopper spends more with us if she’s also offline than if she’s online-only.” This co-ordination has proved essential given that shoppers have not returned to the high street in the same numbers as before the pandemic. Macnab says the cancellation of many Christmas parties means customers * * * CV Age 64 Family married with two adult children plus two grandchildren. Education Victoria Drive secondary school, Scotstoun, Glasgow. Pay “We are a private company.” The highest-paid director received £1.45m in pay and perks last year. Last holiday A family trip to Mallorca: “It was wonderful.” Best advice you’ve been given “Listen to your customer. This is something I’ve tried to carry through all stages of my retail career. I still spend much of my time travelling the country, going into our stores and walking the shop floors – it is by speaking to customers that we’re able to react, evolve and succeed.” Biggest career mistake “I left AS Watson in 2005 for a few years.” Word he overuses “That’s a difficult question, but I hope it’s thank you. I think it’s so important to pause, recognise and thank. Thinking about it though, those two words can never really be overused.” How he relaxes Spending time with the grandchildren. * * * are also less likely to be buying mascara and lipstick, but he still expects a “good Christmas”. While some businesses are scaling back, discount chain Savers is planning to open 50 more shops. Superdrug is to open 15 mainly larger stores, where it can offer more services to draw in trade. Macnab says he’s “not depressed about high streets”, but thinks the government must support retailers by doing something about “incredibly high” business rates. “We have stores which pay more rates than rent and that was never the intention. This is a really urgent situation. Many businesses, not just small independent businesses, need to see a much fairer application of rates.” He is not a fan of an online sales tax – a possibility the government is exploring. Macnab says this would just be passed on to consumers. Instead, he would prefer much more frequent revaluations of business rates, potentially every year compared with the current five years. Macnab’s other tactic to draw in punters is an array of services that can’t be found online. Superdrug offers ear piercing in more than 200 stores, has 300 nail bars, and is experimenting with barbers or hairdressers in several locations. It has also trained 200 pharmacists to offer free consultations on skin conditions such as acne – the kind of service it may be difficult to access via a GP. During the pandemic, Superdrug’s 100 nurses have been offering vaccinations. The business has jabbed more than 200,000 people and was the first high street chain to offer boosters. Nevertheless, the pandemic has taken its toll on the beauty empire, which is owned by Hong Kong conglomerate CK Hutchison Holdings. Sales were down 15% last year – to £1.1bn from £1.3bn a year – and Superdrug permanently closed a net 13 stores. Pre-tax profits fell by 79% to £18.8m. At Savers, sales fell 6% to £536m while pre-tax profits were down 20% to £40.3m. Supply chain woes and fears about the Omicron variant have hit overall trade again this year, but there are some bright spots: fragrance sales are up more than 10% on last year, as shoppers who couldn’t sniff out their favourite scent during the 2020 lockdown returned in droves. Superdrug is gunning for Debenhams’ £800m share of the beauty market, a chunk of which is up for grabs since it quit the high street under new owner Boohoo. “That’s a lot of business to go by the way,” says Macnab. “Some will have gone online but when it comes to Christmas, people trust going into stores more. That is an opportunity for us.” Macnab’s near 50 years of shop floor experience, including decades in beauty retail, have helped him marshal the fightback. He joined Savers in 1997, when it had just 24 stores, and was on the management team when it was bought out by Hong Kong retailer AS Watson in 2000. He took the helm at Savers in 2011, helping the upstart chain gain a big chunk of market share before adding Superdrug to his duties three years later. Skipping around the Rushden Lakes store, Macnab clearly delights in finding ideas that will draw in punters and fill gaps in the market that bigger rivals have missed. Every store has Facebook and TikTok feeds that anyone can post on, so staff can talk to customers about deals or products that will appeal locally. Macnab’s highlights are Japanese skincare brand Hada Labo – which Superdrug stocks exclusively in the UK – and own-brand skincare label B, which aims to create creams that compare well to much more expensive versions. “What I enjoy is the effect beauty products have on people. It is amazing how they lift the spirits,” he says. • This article was amended on 23 December 2021 because an earlier version rendered the phrase “o plus o” (online plus offline working together) as “o and o”. The former is the term used by MacNab.Ian Rankin, author It was the last week of my junior high school, so probably June 1974. After the summer I would be heading to senior school. The last week was pretty relaxed and one of our science teachers suggested we bring in board games and the like, since there was no actual teaching to be done. We had a chess set at home – I think it was donated to us by a family member. I said I could bring that in. The teacher was very enthusiastic. “I’ll give you a game, Ian!” he said. Only thing was, I couldn’t play. No one in my household could. But I had agreed to the game and I wasn’t about to own up to being clueless, so I went home and grabbed our copy of Pears Cyclopaedia. It contained a short chapter on the rules of chess. Brilliant. I set the board up and tried to memorise where each piece went at the start of a game. Then, reading the instructions, I started moving the pieces around. Pawns could progress one square at a time (two on the first move). The queen could go pretty much wherever she liked. The knight did something that made almost no sense to me at all. And as for castling… The next day the chess set was produced in the science class. Everyone stood around to watch. It took the teacher about two moves to realise I didn’t know what I was doing – probably helped by my cry of “checkmate” after my opening move. But a few of my classmates did know the game and after the laughter died down they proffered advice, all of which I followed. Mate came as a blessed relief. Ditto the end of term. Samira Ahmed, broadcaster I used to watch a huge amount of dystopian science fiction: Space: 1999; The Andromeda Strain; 2001… I spent most of my free time as a child constructing my own versions of these worlds on my bedroom floor. During the school holidays one year, I built my greatest ever creation, using every game counter, figurine and stationery item I could lay my hands on. At its heart was a space station complete with a decontamination chamber: think pencil case rubbers as sofas. It was truly a sight to behold. After what felt like endless hours of work, the night before I was set to return to school it was finally completed. I went to bed knowing the following afternoon I could play to my heart’s content. Returning home from school, I felt such a sense of excitement, only to push my door open and find the carpet was bare. Not even swept to the side, my magnum opus had been destroyed. My mother had decided, at random, to choose this day to enter my room and vacuum, which was entirely out of character. I didn’t even bother to fight or argue with her; I was simply devastated, knowing my masterpiece was gone for good. It still haunts me to this day. I’ve never mentioned it to Mum; no doubt if I did we’d end up arguing. With my kids, I vowed to never touch any of their play things without permission. The worst part is I never even took a picture of what I’d made in my bedroom – it only lives on in my mind. Samira presents Front Row on Radio 4 and Newswatch on BBC1 Sadiq Khan, Mayor of London Christmas with the Khans is the time we all play games as a family. I don’t talk about it often, but my dad was a bus driver, which meant that Christmas Day was one of the few days he was guaranteed time off. I’m one of eight children and, although it was sometimes chaotic, we enjoyed spending the day together. As we got older we tended to gather with all our kids and have a big meal before watching the Queen’s speech. The Queen’s message was the one tradition Dad never let us skip. It was his favourite part of the day. And, though he’s no longer with us, we all still love watching it. The afternoon would be given over to board games. The big one was Monopoly, which got ridiculously competitive. If my brother Tariq was the banker, there was always cheating involved. This year, with both me and Mum having had our vaccines, boosters and flu jabs, we’re really looking forward to gathering with the wider family for a proper celebration – it feels as though the nation deserves it after the two years we’ve had! And no doubt Tariq will try to cheat, again, when the time for Monopoly comes round. Esther Freud, author Travelling through North Africa as children, my sister and I relied on words to entertain us. We told each other stories, invented songs, collected snippets of French, Arabic and Berber, mixing them up with the lyrics of the Egyptian singer Umm Kulthum, whose voice floated above the souks in Marrakech. We took to chanting phrases – helufa, roofrack, majoun – as we played or walked or waited for the adults to finish whatever they were doing, and out of this accumulation we alighted on two favourite words: hideous and kinky. We liked their sound, and the rhythm that they made. First heard through a haze of hashish, we assumed they were illicit, and they soon became our code – our way of alerting each other to whatever was confusing or amusing. “Hideous,” we’d catch each other’s eye, and the other could be relied on to respond, “Kinky.” Back in England we continued to use this talismanic phrase, although for a time it was demoted in favour of the re-written lyrics from Jesus Christ Superstar: “I don’t know how to love him” changed to “I don’t know how to hate her!” We’d wail, ending in a scrum of laughter as we fell upon each other. But we soon reverted to our trusted favourites to express the ongoing chaos and hilarity of our lives, and it wasn’t until I published my first book and, unable to find a title, gave it the name of our own private game, that the words stopped being ours. Craig Charles, DJ I grew up on Liverpool’s Claremont Road, where there were back-to-back terrace houses with tiny alleyways between them. My brother Dean and I played football in them when I was 10 or 11. They were so slim, you could touch the houses on each side with your hands. We’d drive our neighbours nuts with our kickabout. All they could hear as they watched Coronation Street was the ball thumping against their walls. I feel sorry for them now, of course. We were terrors, but there was this one bloke who was a real spoilsport. He’d be vicious. He stabbed our ball once, bursting it. We’d smashed his window – he wasn’t happy. One time he’d finally had enough and chased us, so we started running. My brother got run over, a car coming round the corner knocking him into the air. Luckily, he didn’t break anything, being a bouncy 13-year-old. Still, he was roughed up. And we couldn’t tell Dad he’d been hit, because he’d have had no sympathy and battered us both for being nuisances to the neighbours, and furious with us playing in the first place. So we pretended nothing had happened, despite his injuries. And, when the wounds had healed, we just carried on as before. Reginald D Hunter, comedian As a kid, I was obsessed with being the fastest at everything. There was a competitiveness to my entire outlook. If I was eating dinner, I’d desperately try to finish first, not that my dining companions were remotely bothered. I was always determined to be the first to make it to church, school or the store. In short, I had a real “I won” complex, even when I was the only person playing the game. I blame growing up on 70s TV; everything was always a race against time. My favourite game was Reg v Toilet, it was simple to play. If I was ever in a new bathroom I’d not used before, I’d compete against the toilet in a time trial. Before starting to pee, I’d press the flush button down – this was kick off. Then I’d try my hardest to urinate and finish before the toilet bowl refilled. I learned pretty quickly that some toilets are faster than others. And honestly? I still play it now. Reginald D Hunter is touring the UK in 2022 with Bombe Shuffleur from February 2022. More information at mickperrin.com Jess Phillips, MP It’s probably a Birmingham thing, but as kids we played this game called Tracking, also known as Aki 123. I’m not sure about the spelling. It’s like hide and seek, but we had a base, say a tree in the park. The idea was to get back there, before anyone searching for you could find you. If you were caught, you became a seeker, too. We’d play for hours and hours, me, my brothers, and all the kids from our street. The game would stretch for two square miles. We’d run behind the houses through what we called gulleyways, alleys that ran behind the gardens. We’d hide in people’s bushes, often hopping between gardens and jumping over fences, interrupting blokes doing their gardening or family barbecues. And this was the 1970s, when there were loads of derelict houses, before Tony Blair came along and they were bought up. We’d break in all the time before being chased out. They made for perfect hiding places. I was the youngest of four kids; my parents had long given up keeping track of me. They treated us like cats – banging a pan when it was time to come back. The caretaker at my kids’ school was also in the job back then, 35 long years ago. He still constantly likes to remind my husband that he knew me when I was hiding on the school roof. Russell Howard, comedian I’m not sure which sport our kitchen-floor creation resembled most. It was a mishmash of everything, really, with a sprinkling of sibling-on-sibling violence. It was like table tennis, but on the floor. There were two dog bowls at each end of the room – they were the goals. It was a two-player game and you took turns to knock a pingpong ball through the other person’s bowls to score a point. Whoever was defending would sit in their goal. There was a bonus point up for grabs if you hit the ball hard enough to leave a mark on the other person’s skin, with a whopping five points for what we called – to give its proper technical term – a “significant bollock shot”, known as an SBS to us seasoned players. An SBS was rare – few and far between - and they only really counted if your opponent let out a genuine yelp of pain on impact. Most of the time, therefore, the goal was ignored and we just tried as hard as we could to whack the ball at each other. Mum was locked into Emmerdale, like a child glued to Peppa Pig. However loud the screams, she never noticed. Russell Howard’s standup special and documentary Lubricant is now on NetflixAnya Hindmarch, designer I love thoughtful touches on a Christmas table. This year my table will be laden with our crackers, complete with funny (hopefully!) jokes, hats and stickers. There will also be one of our ceramic baubles at each place-setting – a little something to decorate their trees for years ahead. Twig Hutchinson, Minford journal Add impact and colour without splashing out on new table linen by using wrapping paper as an oversized place setting for each of your guests: marbled papers from Compton Marbling or Shepherds bookbinders. Cut a standard sheet in half and then lay your placement on top, including the cutlery, etc. Also, vintage madeleine moulds, easily found on Etsy or eBay, make the prettiest tapered candle holders. Charlie McCormick, gardener Our Christmas table is a white tablecloth, on which we have lots of candles and narcissus paperwhites – a type of daffodil which you can force to flower inside during the winter months and which I sometimes put into smaller silver cups. But really I love just foraging for anything I can find – rose hips look great. Paula Sutton, Hill House Vintage I think napkins are great at elevating a table. I have napkin rings of every kind, but otherwise make your own with twine or string. Look for bay leaves or holly to thread through the twine. Better still, if you find a leaf that is large and flat, you can write your guest’s name on it as a place-card for a very special touch. Phil John Perry, florist A centrepiece down the middle of your table can be created with minimal effort with whatever you can find outside – holly, spruce, bay leaves and herbs – and by tangling the stems of one flower into the next. I like things at different levels to have different focal points; use upside down bowls or vintage glasses as plinths on which to rest other bowls of fruit or nibbles, to create an interesting “up and down” effect. Laura Jackson, Glassette I always do DIY crackers (from any great craft store). It’s a way of giving a lovely present which isn’t nail clippers. I always paint them myself (or this year my daughter is helping) with bold stripes of acrylic paint and then I tie around coloured chunky velvet at either end for something very personalised. Caroline Kent, Scribble &amp; Daub I’m all about paper for decorating – it’s affordable and sustainable. Find vintage streamers online and at vintage markets which you can weave over the table, adding bowls of marzipan fruits and sugared almonds for an extra treat and some fun festive colour without resorting to the usual clichéd shades. Tina Vaia, designer A Christmas table has to be fun – and starts with a great tablecloth. I love creating a high/low effect with tapered candles and branches, as it makes a good visual landscape and you never want anything that cuts off the person opposite. My platters and bowls are raised, too, so you can squeeze other dishes alongside, as there is never enough space. Milli Proust, florist I love using straw flowers because they shine in the candlelight and they make a beautiful scene for as little as £10 a bunch. Cut them to different heights and stick them in bottles or stoneware vases, place them next to different candles and they will glow so beautifully. They also work well with wintery foliage. Skye McAlpine, food writer I always want my table to look bountiful, as if it’s from a painting. This means lots of candles at different heights and stacked-up cake stands on which I stick pears, apples, grapes or leafy clementines to create a sense of abundance. Smaller bowls of nuts, chocolates and gold coins strewn down the centre of the table can also look very festive.In one of those delicious coincidences that warm the cockles of every tech columnist’s heart, in the same week that the entire internet community was scrambling to patch a glaring vulnerability that affects countless millions of web servers across the world, the UK government announced a grand new National Cyber Security Strategy that, even if actually implemented, would have been largely irrelevant to the crisis at hand. Initially, it looked like a prank in the amazingly popular Minecraft game. If someone inserted an apparently meaningless string of characters into a conversation in the game’s chat, it would have the effect of taking over the server on which it was running and download some malware that could then have the capacity to do all kinds of nefarious things. Since Minecraft (now owned by Microsoft) is the best-selling video game of all time (more than 238m copies sold and 140 million monthly active users), this vulnerability was obviously worrying, but hey, it’s only a video game… This slightly comforting thought was exploded on 9 December by a tweet from Chen Zhaojun of Alibaba’s Cloud Security Team. He released sample code for the vulnerability, which exists in a subroutine library called Log4j of the Java programming language. The implications of this – that any software using Log4j is potentially vulnerable – were stunning, because an uncountable number of programs in the computing infrastructure of our networked world are written in Java. To make things worse, the nature of Java makes it very easy to exploit the vulnerability – and there was some evidence that a lot of bad actors were already doing just that. At this point a short gobbledegook-break may be in order. Java is a very popular high-level programming language that is particularly useful for client-server web applications – which basically describes all the apps that most of us use. “The first rule of being a good programmer,” the Berkeley computer scientist Nicholas Weaver explains, “is don’t reinvent things. Instead we re-use code libraries, packages of previously written code that we can just use in our own programs to accomplish particular tasks. And let’s face it, computer systems are finicky beasts, and errors happen all the time. One of the most common ways to find problems is to simply record everything that happens. When programmers do it we call it ‘logging’. And good programmers use a library to do so rather than just using a bunch of print() – meaning print-to-screen statements scattered through their code. Log4j is one such library, an incredibly popular one for Java programmers.” There are something like 9 million Java programmers in the world, and since most networking apps are written in the language, an unimaginable number of those programs use the Log4j library. At the moment we have no real idea of how many such vulnerabilities exist. It’s as if we had suddenly discovered a hitherto unknown weakness in the mortar used by bricklayers all over the world which could be liquefied by spraying it with a specific liquid. A better question, says Mr Weaver, is what is not affected? “For example, it turns out at least someplace in Apple’s infrastructure is a Java program that will log the name of a user’s iPhone, so, as of a few hours ago, one could use this to exploit iCloud! Minecraft and Steam gaming platforms are both written in Java and both end up having code paths that log chat messages, which means that they are also vulnerable.” It’s a global-scale mess, in other words, which will take a long time to clear up. And the question of who is responsible for it is, in a way, unanswerable. Writing software is a collaborative activity. Re-using code libraries is the rational thing to do when you’re building something complex – why start from scratch when you can borrow? But the most persuasive critique from the software community I’ve seen this week says that if you’re going to re-use someone else’s wheel, shouldn’t you check that it’s reliable first? “Developers are lazy (yes, ALL of them),” wrote one irate respondent to Bruce Schneier’s succinct summary of the vulnerability. “They will grab a tool like Log4j because it’s an easy way to handle logging routines and someone else has already done the work, so why reinvent the wheel, right? Unfortunately most of them will not RTFM, so they have no idea if it can actually do the things it was designed to do and thus, [they] don’t take any precautions against that. It’s a bit of a Dunning-Kruger effect where devs overestimate their abilities (’cuz they have l337 coding skillz!).” Well, he might say that, but as an unskilled programmer I couldn’t possibly comment. What I’ve been reading It’s getting meta all the time Novelist Neal Stephenson conceived of the metaverse in the 90s. He’s unimpressed with Mark Zuckerberg’s version. Read the transcript of his conversation with Kara Swisher on the New York Times website. Words to live by This Is Water is the title of David Foster Wallace’s commencement address. The only one he ever gave – in 2005 to graduates of Kenyon College, Ohio. Doom and gloom Visualising the end of the American republic is a sombre essay by George Packer in the Atlantic.A woman who was arrested after a fire that killed four young children has been bailed. The 27-year-old, who was arrested on suspicion of child neglect following the blaze in Sutton, south London, on Thursday, will return to a police station in mid-January, the Metropolitan police said. On Friday the father of the four boys said the family was “utterly devastated”. Dalton Hoath, 28, described the four brothers, named by family members as Kyson and Bryson, four, and Leyton and Logan, three, as “bright, caring, lovable boys”. About 60 firefighters reached the scene in under three minutes and tried to rescue the children, who were given CPR and taken to hospital, where they died. The cause of the blaze on Thursday evening is being investigated by fire teams and the Metropolitan police. Hoath said in a statement given to MailOnline: “Myself and my family are utterly devastated by this tragic loss. “They were bright, caring, lovable boys, but most of all sons, brothers, grandsons, great-grandsons, nephews and cousins. “We would like to thank all the emergency services who did so much to try and save our boys, and also the local community who have come together at this difficult time. “I would ask that my family are given time to grieve in private. They will be forever in my heart and thoughts, love Dad.” Ch Supt Dave Stringer, borough commander for Croydon, Bromley and Sutton police, confirmed that the children were related. He told reporters at the scene on Friday afternoon: “There was nobody else inside the property at the time of the fire.” The boys’ grandfather, Jason Hoath, a security officer at AFC Wimbledon, a League One football club, said on Friday: “I’ve just left my son. He’s devastated. We all are. I’ve lost four grandchildren and he’s lost his kids as well. “It’s all the more heartbreaking because their presents were piled under the tree, ready. We don’t know what happened and are just waiting for the police to get back to us.” In a post on Facebook, the grandfather wrote: “I am devastated to say that the horrendous house fire that took place in Sutton last night leading to four children loosing their life’s [sic] were my amazing smart and beautiful grandsons. “[They were] taken too soon they will always be in our hearts and thoughts. Boys I love you forever. Grandad xxx” A statement released by the football club said: “Everyone at AFC Wimbledon would like to extend our deepest sympathies to Jason Hoath following the tragic deaths of his four young grandsons in a Sutton house fire. “Jason has been our deputy safety officer for over 12 years and all our thoughts are with him at such a distressing time.” A minute’s silence to remember the boys was observed before Sutton United’s League Two match with Harrogate Town on Saturday.The Plaza Mayor, where tourists gather to drink steep beers and feast on overpriced paella, may be better known. So may Puerta del Sol, where locals ring in the new year by eating a grape on each of the 12 chimes. But Madrid’s Plaza de Colón, a 25-minute walk from these spaces, has come to play its own special part in the social, political and historical life of the capital – and the rest of Spain. It is here, beneath the statue of Columbus – after whom the square is named – and in the shadow of the enormous Spanish flag that measures 294 sq metres and weighs more than 30kg, that the country’s right likes to congregate to defend the glories of the past and bemoan the humiliations of the present. In February 2019, the leaders of the rightwing People’s party (PP), the centre-right Citizens party, and the far-right Vox party, joined tens of thousands of protesters who were furious over what they saw as prime minister Pedro Sánchez’s capitulation to Catalan separatists. This June, the three parties returned to Colón with supporters to demonstrate against Sánchez’s controversial decision to pardon the 12 Catalan independence leaders convicted over the failed secession attempt almost four years earlier. The lure and symbolism of Colón are not hard to fathom, especially at a time when Spain’s right and far-right parties are embarking on another voyage of historical revisionism and imperial nostalgia. Not for them the toppling of statues, offers of apology, or bouts of national introspection. In August, Vox marked the 500th anniversary of the conquest of Mexico by claiming Spain had “succeeded in liberating millions of people from the bloody regime and terror of the Aztecs”. A few weeks later, Isabel Díaz Ayuso, the rightwing president of the Madrid region, took the Pope to task for having the temerity to apologiseing for the church’s behaviour in Mexico, arguing that Spain and Roman Catholicism had brought “civilisation and freedom to the American continent”. Not wanting to be left out, Pablo Casado, the leader of the PP, boasted that the process begun by Spain’s conquest of the Americas had resulted in “the most important historical event since the Roman empire”. Less than a fortnight before Spain’s national day – which is celebrated on 12 October, the date when Columbus arrived in the Americas – one of PP leader Pablo Casado’s predecessors mocked calls for a colonial apology from Mexico’s president, Andrés Manuel López Obrador. It was a bit rich of the Mexican premier to moan about Spain given his names, said José María Aznar. “So Andrés came from the Aztecs, Manuel from the Mayans?” Casado, who was sitting next to Aznar, joined in by suggesting López must be an Inca name – apparently forgetting, or unaware that that empire rose and was toppled by Francisco Pizarro and his conquistadors on an entirely different continent. López Obrador’s party hit back, saying it wasn’t wholly surprised that the former leader of a party that emerged from the Franco regime “should deny the indigenous genocide on our continent”. It also referred to Aznar as a “bellicose instigator” over his support for the 2003 Iraq war. Whatever emotions the Spanish right’s proclamations stir in many Latin Americans, shock doesn’t seem to be one of them. “You just feel embarrassed for them and all their imperial ravings,” says Gabriela Wiener, a Peruvian writer who has lived in Spain for the past 18 years. “They’re still in the grip of a Francoist daydream and can’t see what’s right in front of them.” Wiener points to the most obvious signs of Spain’s fetishisation of its colonial glories, from the country’s national day to the Plaza de Colón. “You’ve got to have a really fucked-up fatherland complex to need a flag that big and all this pomp and ceremony,” she says. Wiener’s latest book, Huaco Retrato, is an unflinchingly personal reflection on racism, identity, desire, bereavement, polyamory, jealousy, betrayal and abandonment. But it also explores what it means to bear a European surname and to be a Latin American woman in 21st-century Spain. The book – which takes its title from the ceramic portrait vessels of the pre-Columbian Moche culture – begins with the narrator visiting the Musée du quai Branly in Paris. There she peers through the display cases and contemplates some of the many figurines brought to Europe by the Austrian-French adventurer Charles Wiener – who also happens to have been the author’s great-great-grandfather. In their brown skin, their noses, cheekbones and “their eyes like small, shining wounds” the protagonist sees echo after echo of her own face. The encounter gives rise to an inevitable question: how she can reconcile those features with that surname? As the narrator searches for answers, she decides to confront the figure of Charles Wiener and to dig beneath the family pride – and the internalised racism – long stirred by the European interloper who is now best known as the man who almost rediscovered Machu Picchu. While she sees some evidence of a slow and overdue process of decolonisation in the US, the UK and France, Wiener isn’t holding her breath for similar efforts in her adopted home. “I don’t think Spain has really started its process of historical memory – even when it comes to the bodies of those who died in its own territory and lie buried in ditches. How can we expect this country, which is still so wrapped up in an imperial, Francoist vision, to look into how to make amends to other people elsewhere?” What’s more, she adds, while much of Spain’s wealth still derives from its colonial relationships, the country, like many others, is still loath to own up to its sins. Look at the treatment of migrants on, and within, its borders. “Everything that’s happening in the world today is a consequence of colonial policies. You go to the global south, plunder, kill and sell people, turn communities against one another, sell them arms and leave a terrible mess. And then, when they come knocking on your door, they get a rubber bullet to the face.” The revisionism, however, isn’t confined to Spain. Jair Bolsonaro, Brazil’s far-right president, was pictured wearing a Spanish football strip and beaming at the camera when Vox’s leader, Santiago Abascal, travelled to meet him earlier this week. Meanwhile, the Cross of Burgundy – a banner associated with Spain’s monarchy and the country’s imperial exploits – has been cropping up at demonstrations in Peru and is popular among those who embrace its colonial, Catholic history. As Wiener notes, there is an enduring paternalistic narrative over the conquest of the Americas – “all the talk about how we did so much for these people because they were a blank page, or were savages who ate each other”. The Nobel-prize winning author Mario Vargas Llosa – by some margin Peru’s best-known living writer – recently caused a stir when he said that voting the right way in elections was more important than having free elections. Vargas Llosa, who staged an unsuccessful bid to become president of Peru in 1990 – and whose fiction has repeatedly dissected the uses and abuses of power in his homeland and beyond – has drifted further to the right with age and found himself addressing the PP’s national convention in October. “Latin America will undoubtedly emerge from [a very difficult situation] when Latin Americans discover that they’ve voted badly,” he said. “The important thing in elections isn’t that there’s freedom in those elections; it’s voting well – and voting well is something that’s very important because countries that vote badly, as has happened in some Latin American countries, pay dearly for it.” For Wiener and for many other Latin Americans – especially women – the denial of the past continues to poison the present. The poem that comes towards the end of Huaco Retrato offers a vivid and bitter articulation of life in Spain for so many Latin American female migrants: of being told that the Spanish you speak is wrong; of being complimented on how well you can make fried chicken and on how pretty your dark little hands are; of having your history and culture denigrated; and of being seen as suited to nothing but cleaning, or changing the nappies of Spain’s babies and its elderly people. “The relationship Spain has with these migrant people is totally temporary,” says Wiener. “They’re treated like children and patronised. They’re thanked but no one’s signed the deal to improve their rights.” Wiener hopes Huaco Retrato, to be published in English in 2023, will serve to counter the prevailing paternalistic and revisionist narrative. But she says Spain would do equally well to stop reimagining the past, and to acknowledge, respect and listen to the Latin American migrants on whom it has come to depend. “Spain lives under a self-delusion. What can it resolve if it won’t even look at all the violence it caused and continues to cause? We’re here to remind them a bit of all that.”More than 10,000 additional confirmed cases of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 have been reported across the UK bringing the total confirmed cases to 24,968, official figures show. Data from the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) said there were 10,059 UK Omicron cases and that the number of deaths of people with the new variant in England has now risen to seven from the previous figure of one. The number of confirmed Omicron cases in England stood at 23,168, up 9,427 on the previous day’s total, official figures showed. Cases in Northern Ireland rose to 827, an increase of 514. Scotland’s cases have reached 792, an increase of 96, and in Wales there are 181, up 22 on the previous day. Meanwhile, hospital admissions in England for people with confirmed or suspected Omicron rose to 85, from 65. The new figures come as a leading government adviser said the most effective way to stop the spread of Omicron would be to have a circuit-breaker lockdown before Christmas. Stephen Reicher, professor of social psychology at the University of St Andrews and member of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), said it was clear that Plan B measures alone would not be enough to stop the spiralling numbers of cases. Reicher, who was speaking to Times Radio in a personal capacity, said the time to act was now. He was responding to reports that officials are drawing up draft plans for a two-week circuit-breaker lockdown after Christmas. Reicher said: “The only way really, or at least the most effective way, we can have an immediate effect is to decrease the number of contacts we have. “In many ways, the most effective way of diminishing contact is to have a circuit-breaker. “Now, you could have it after Christmas, the problem is after Christmas it’s probably too late, it’s probably by then we will have had a huge surge of infections with all the impact upon society. “When people say ‘look, we don’t want to close down’: of course we don’t want to close down. But the problem is at the moment, things are closing down anyway, because of the spread of infection. “So I think we need to act now.”Adam Kay, 41, trained as a doctor and worked for the NHS for six years before quitting to become a writer and comedian. Both his memoirs, This Is Going to Hurt: Secret Diaries of a Junior Doctor and Twas the Nightshift Before Christmas, were bestsellers, with several million copies sold, making him the first author to have simultaneous No 1s for hardback and paperback nonfiction titles. He turned both books into hugely successful standup shows. Twas the Nightshift Before Christmas is touring the UK and a BBC Two series of This Is Going to Hurt, adapted by Kay and starring Ben Whishaw, is coming in 2022. He has also started writing children’s books, publishing Kay’s Anatomy last year and, in September, Kay’s Marvellous Medicine. What made you want to write children’s books? I have always been fascinated by the human body; I think it is the most extraordinary bit of kit ever. But it’s never had the same cool billing among kids as outer space and dinosaurs, probably because they’re forced to do biology in a rather dry way at school. So I thought I’d have a go at getting across my enthusiasm for the topic, with some jokes thrown in. Do jokes help children to learn? They absolutely do. It’s a confidence trick. They think they are getting a book full of any number of disgusting facts and jokes but hopefully in there is also an enormous amount of useful stuff about human anatomy and the way bodies and medicine work. Can puzzles and quizzes play a role in learning too? I think gamification is crucial to learning. Whatever age you are, game-playing and adding in a bit of competition to life are great ways of getting yourself to face a challenge. My Fitbit has turned exercise, which I hate, into a game. It nags me to get on the treadmill and to do my 10,000 steps and I do it because I want to win. Did you like playing puzzles and quizzes when you were growing up? We were very much a board-game family. My favourite was called the Game of Knowledge, a kind of knock-off version of Trivial Pursuit, where you travelled round the galaxy answering questions and picking up planets instead of triangles. Cluedo was a big one for us, although I was rubbish at it, and Scrabble, which I was also pretty bad at. What about now? I still play a lot of Scrabble but now mainly on the app, so I am able to lose to Scrabble-playing friends all over the world while distracting myself from work. I limit the number of games I have on my phone because having too many could throw an entire book out. I like playing games with friends in real life, too. There’s a brilliant trivia game called Linkee, which is a big favourite round here when people come over. You’re currently touring with your one-man show, Twas the Nightshift Before Christmas. How’s that going? It’s a 25-show tour ending up at the Hammersmith Apollo on 22 December. It’s lovely to be on a stage again and I think people are just glad to be out. The show is, once again, a confidence trick. It’s billed as funny, disgusting stories from working in the NHS at Christmas time, and it is that, but it is also a big love letter to the million-and-a-half people who give up their festive period to keep the rest of us on the road, particularly after these past couple of years. Twas the Nightshift Before Christmas is at Curve, Leicester, 19 December; and Hammersmith Apollo, London, 22 DecemberOf all the Christmas TV specials on repeat or catchup, the one I find most poignant, and funniest, is that episode of Rev in which Tom Hollander spectacularly fails to conjure some authentic spiritual feeling in his drunken congregation at midnight mass. The beauty of that series was that even in comically eviscerating the pieties and hypocrisies of the Church of England, Hollander never gave up on its potential for delivering simple human kindness. When that episode came out, a decade ago, the census figures showed that 59.3% of the UK population still thought of itself as Christian. The most recent figures (from 2019), have seen that number dwindle to marginally over half of the country – 51%. Meanwhile, the proportion of those who profess “no religion” has risen six percentage points to 38.4%. As someone who ticks that latter box, the only time I’m ever at a church service these days, beyond weddings and funerals, is for an annual nine lessons and carols. This year, as always, I was fascinated by how readily my memory inhabited even the more obscure of those sung verses. “Veiled in flesh the Godhead see/Hail the incarnate deity,” I sang, with all the other once-a-year attenders. And as ever, I sensed a flash of nostalgia for those childhood certainties – attributable, no doubt, to Charles Wesley and his peerless gift for rhyming propaganda. Those in peril A couple of weeks ago, I was in Dunkirk, talking to some of those desperate people, young men and families, who were determined to head to the beaches in the dark and try their luck in navigating the 21 or more miles of the Channel crossing. Afterwards, I walked along those beaches in the sleet and bone-chilling wind. Standing looking out at the grey ocean, it seemed barely comprehensible that anyone’s life – not least those of the people with whom I had just been chatting – could be so bleak that climbing into an overloaded rubber dinghy offered the best hope for the future. In recent days, in response to the drowning of 27 people at the beginning of the month, the EU border force has stepped up its efforts to prevent the crossings, employing a “hi-tech spotter plane” belonging to the Danish air force. Though the plane prevented a couple of launches, some dinghies still got across the Channel to the UK, while other groups, including young children, were rescued by the RNLI. The planes further militarise what is a humanitarian crisis – safe routes for asylum seekers are the best (and cheapest) way to disrupt the traffickers and prevent more deaths this winter. Let it snow Snowflakes have, in some political circles, acquired a bad name in recent years. One man who is at pains to restore to them their former magic is Kenneth Libbrecht, professor of physics at the California Institute of Technology. In the course of 20 years’ research, Libbrecht has rewritten the science of ice crystals. This week, in time for Christmas, he will publish what is billed as the grand unified theory of snowflakes (a £98 stocking filler). Libbrecht’s principle discovery is that there are two very distinct ways in which ice crystals are generated, which has to do with the complex structure of their surfaces and how they change with temperature. He also, Grinch-like, disproves the single “fact” that every child knows: in producing “designer” snow crystals, he has shown that, under lab conditions at least, two snowflakes can be exactly alike. • This article was amended on 23 December 2021. An earlier version incorrectly referred to “the latest census figures, released last week”. In fact the figure quoted is from 2019 ONS figures, the most recent data available. • Tim Adams is an Observer columnistAfter months of hand-wringing and flip-flopping, the Bank of England has settled on a plan. Following a whopping eight-to-one vote in favour at a meeting last week, the monetary policy committee decided the pandemic was over and now was the time to begin pushing interest rates back to pre-Covid levels. The decision to become the first major central bank to raise interest rates since Covid-19 struck in 2020 was greeted with a whiff of derision in some parts of the City. It could simply be a pride thing, after the governor, chief economist and a couple of committee members spent months saying action was needed, but did nothing. The Bank would prefer us to believe that pride has nothing to do with it and that the shift is a lofty and coherent strategy, designed to ward off the threat of runaway prices. But in fact the move to higher borrowing costs prevents inflation – currently 5.2% and rising – from hurtling further above the 2% level allowed over the medium term by the Old Lady of Threadneedle Street’s rulebook. Either way, and almost overnight, a policy of “risk management” that had rate-setters erring on the side of caution found itself supplanted by an aggressive stance and a rate rise. British households that had come to rely on the Bank to bail them out in difficult times might understandably feel abandoned. Suddenly, it is more concerned with its own issues than the wider economy. British businesses, many of them over-indebted and in some cases on the brink of collapse after the spread of the Omicron variant, must be coming to the same conclusion. There is a strong case for more flexibility around the 2% rule. Inflation fell almost to zero earlier this year and the Bank considered pushing interest rates into negative territory, before backing away. Once the Omicron variant began to tear through the population and put hospitals at risk again, that same flexibility might have applied. But no. Over at the Treasury, which stood shoulder to shoulder with the Bank when the pandemic hit, the need to protect vulnerable businesses and households has been downgraded, in this case by a determination to balance the books and stash away any spare cash. Rishi Sunak has made it clear to Tory backbenchers that he wants to keep down the UK’s debt-to-GDP ratio – the overall debt mountain as a proportion of annual income. The chancellor wants the ratio to stay below what he believes is the psychologically important 100% barrier. He also argues that any spare funds should be used to cut taxes before the next election, a mission that limits what will be available in the latest round of Covid support. Again, it’s not what most people want to hear. When times are tough and borrowers need the great institutions of state on their side, the signal should be clear that the two organisations with overarching control of money are doing all they can. Borrowers, after all, drive the economy with their propensity to spend. Accusing the Bank of overreacting might seem strong when the base rate, which determines to some extent the cost of borrowing from banks and building societies, has only increased from 0.1% to 0.25%. Not many businesses are going to stumble and collapse because their credit bill is hit by a 0.15-percentage-point rise. Likewise, most mortgage payers are on fixed-rate loans and those who are not can probably afford to pay a few extra pounds a month. It is not so much the increase itself as the message it sends of a certain detachment – when business cashflows are running dry and countless households are struggling to make ends meet. Even some of the most cautious economists have asked why, when wages and inflation figures are still distorted by the pandemic, the central bank would behave as if there were a coherent economic story from which to build a fresh monetary policy. To just take one example, clothing sales were disinflationary at the beginning of the year because prices were compared with pre-pandemic levels. Meanwhile, shopping habits were changing from month to month, blowing out previously reliable seasonal adjustments. In the last inflation figures, shoppers had returned to old seasonal habits, with a rush of Christmas spending, but the comparison with a year ago was with the most miserable November in recent memory, blighted as it was by the second lockdown. The Bank wants to calm a situation it barely understands with a policy that is only going to depress an economy which, judging by the latest GDP figures, is already slowing to a standstill. It looks like there will be more flip-flopping to come.Open a door on an Advent calendar and you find a pleasant surprise. A pep-up to put a spring in your step in the approach to Christmas. Unfortunately, the ECB’s autumnal supermarket sweep went a little awry and England have ended up in Australia with a defective calendar, containing chocolatey treats only behind numbers three and four. The other doors? Empty. England’s collapse from 150 for two to 236 all out was badly timed for the UK television audience. Eggs-over-easy from Dawid Malan and Joe Root while everyone was in bed; a Jenga-esque collapse in time for morning coffee and mince pies. Stragglers may have made it down to see those two stalwarts Stuart Broad and Jimmy Anderson at 10 and 11, getting a battering from Mitchell Starc. No country for old men, this. The trusty Malan and Root had done well enough on Friday to see England through until the lightning storm wiped out the rest of the day. And for the first session on Saturday there was hope, enough to string a shiny bauble on a eucalyptus. England’s two best batters at ease on a nice batting wicket. Eyes in, sun out, Australia’s bowlers awkwardly not quite right. Pat Cummins and Josh Hazlewood missing, Steve Smith having to search for inspiration, not just reach. Root tucked into Nathan Lyon, Malan did his Malan thing through force of intensity and a sprig of luck. The partnership had grown to 128 as they drifted in for the first break. Maybe then, you breakfasted with confidence – if it wasn’t for that nagging doubt at the back of your mind. What if Root gets out? The answer came soon enough, and it was quite as calamitous as you had imagined. In the fifth over after high tea, Root suspiciously eyed up Cameron Green and edged him to first slip where Smith was waiting. Seven runs later, and after six successive maidens, Malan followed, cutting a fat full one from Starc into the waiting paws of the prowling Smith. From there it was only a matter of time. A jumpy Ollie Pope charged at Lyon but could only collar him to short-leg, not long after successfully reviewing something almost identical; a chastened Jos Buttler chased a wide one in search of redemption; Chris Woakes, after a flurry of flighty boundaries, was also undone by Lyon. Ollie Robinson was lbw to a ripper to give Lyon his third wicket and England their 48th Test duck of the year – the record of 54 is definitely within reach. Ben Stokes played on, selflessly, after having a slog in vain. Then the two old warriors ducked and dived heroically before Broad was finally caught having a swing. And that was that – eight for 86 in little more than a session and a stretch. The only relief came when the openers David Warner and Marcus Harris sprinted off the pitch: Australia were not going to enforce the follow-on. But the relief will be short-term – the punishment just suspended until the light fades on Sunday evening and the flash of the pink ball returns to haunt English dreams. The fragility of the batting lineup is not just an Advent problem but a long-term condition, one with no real solution in sight. As Root eyes up the most runs in a calendar year, needing another 182 before New Year’s Eve to beat Mohammad Yousuf, he is not just the best batter in the team, but the best in the world. But he remains alone on his celestial plane, quietly contemplating his lack of an Ashes century. Malan has proved to be just the doughty fighter and technician England wanted when they sent for him in a tight spot against India, but there is no other ready-made Test batter out there. Moeen Ali, who surely would have played here if he’d toured, has had enough. England have tried giving youth its head this year. Dom Sibley was dispatched back to county pastures. James Bracey had a miserable time. The two spare batters on tour, Dan Lawrence and Zak Crawley, are works in progress. Lawrence has not quite swashed as his buckle suggests and Crawley has never again touched the heights of his magnificent 267 against Pakistan, though his technique – unlike any of the rest bar Root – did receive the blessing of the late Ted Dexter. The Lions squad contained Josh Bohannon, Old Trafford’s punchy little street fighter who has pulled Lancashire out of numerous holes, but he has flown home with the rest. Two Lions remain in Australia: Tom Abell with Brisbane Heat and the Cricket Writers’ Club young cricketer of the year, Harry Brook, with Hobart Hurricanes – but plucking them from the Big Bash into the Ashes would be quite the challenge. The answer will inevitably be bigger than any short-term solutions. A newfound respect for county cricket and space to breath in the player schedules would be a start. In the meantime, England have a match to save, a tour to complete and a scoreline to write. It will not be pretty.Sue Gray is the top civil servant who has been tasked with leading an inquiry into alleged Christmas parties at Downing Street and the Department for Education in November and December last year, at a time when indoor socialising was banned. Gray, once described as “deputy God”, has been roped in to replace the cabinet secretary, Simon Case, who quit leading the inquiry after claims emerged that he had held a party himself. Gray, 64, is the second permanent secretary at the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities and was previously director general of propriety and ethics in the Cabinet Office from 2012 to 2018. She also sits on the panel deciding on who will be next chair of the media regulator Ofcom, and was once described by a former BBC Newsnight policy editor as “the most powerful person you’ve never heard of”. Gray is seen as a authoritative figure who would not pull any punches in an inquiry, a field she has experience in: she oversaw the Plebgate inquiry in 2012 after the former chief whip Andrew Mitchell was accused of calling a policeman a “pleb” at the Downing Street gates. The same year, then Labour MP Paul Flynn referred to Gray as “deputy God” in a meeting of parliament’s public administration committee. The former Tory MP and Cabinet Office minister Oliver Letwin reportedly said of Gray: “It took me precisely two years before I realised who it is that runs Britain. Our great United Kingdom is actually entirely run by a lady called Sue Gray, the head of ethics or something in the Cabinet Office. Unless she agrees, things just don’t happen.” The Tory MP Richard Holden told BBC Newsnight on Friday that Gray was “formidable” and described her as “not a pushover”. Gray was brought in after the Guido Fawkes website reported on Friday that two Christmas parties were held in Case’s department, the Cabinet Office, in December 2020, when restrictions were in place. Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, said it was Gray’s job now to be thorough and restore public trust. Rayner said: “At the moment, people are saying ‘Which department didn’t have a party?’ “It’s incredibly disappointing because we all know what was happening when these parties were going on, people couldn’t see their loved ones who were dying, and were making incredible sacrifices. “So I do think that the investigation has to get to the bottom, but I think that the evidence already is showing that Boris Johnson has set a tone for this government and has allowed this to happen under his watch.” She added that Gray should hand over any evidence of lawbreaking she might uncover to the police.About one in 13 people who have received two doses of a Covid vaccine are reluctant to get a booster jab, research shows. A study by academics at University College London (UCL) found that 4% of 22,139 people taking part in its Covid Social Study were unwilling to get a booster, and a further 4% were uncertain whether they would do so. Those who were hesitant were more likely to be from poorer backgrounds, have lower levels of education, and be under 45 years old, the study found. Those who had been less likely to comply with government guidelines were also more reluctant to have a booster and so may contribute to spreading the virus, the researchers said. People who had previously been reluctant to have a first dose were more than five times as likely to be uncertain or unwilling to have a booster, a finding that underlines fears raised by behavioural scientists and public health experts about making vaccinations mandatory. Ministers should rethink how the booster campaign is conducted because of the risk of increasing inequality if people from poorer backgrounds are less likely to have boosters and therefore more likely to become ill with the virus, according to Dr Daisy Fancourt, who co-authored the study with Dr Elise Paul. The study has been published as a pre-print and has not yet been peer-reviewed. “The Get Boosted Now campaign is very broad and it’s essentially set out as telling people what to do,” Fancourt said. “But it’s not addressing the barriers or perceived obstacles that people might have to getting a booster. “We’ve shown that actually there are inequalities in terms of who is getting these booster vaccinations that threaten to increase socioeconomic inequalities in the effects of the pandemic. “And also, unfortunately, it seems that lots of people not going for boosters are the people who are most likely to be spreading the virus most at the moment.” The UCL Covid Social Study, involving 70,000 adults, is the UK’s largest inquiry into how people have reacted to the threat of Covid-19 and the restrictions imposed to reduce the spread of the virus. Public health officials have emphasised that getting a booster jab makes people substantially less likely to become seriously ill if they are infected with a Covid-19 variant. A booster provides a 70-75% level of protection against symptomatic infection with the Omicron variant, and 90% against Delta, according to the UK Health Security Agency. People may be reluctant because they feel they have enough immunity and have “done their bit”, Fancourt said. “They now feel like it’s asking too much of them,” she said. “We really need to understand more why some people aren’t getting boosters.” In January, low-paid workers were avoiding Covid tests because of a lack of financial support. People on zero-hours contracts are now worried about becoming ill from side-effects of the booster and missing days of work – a particular problem before Christmas, Fancourt added. “We need to be cautious about making people feel forced into this decision now, but instead need to be focusing on fostering trust, which unfortunately has been eroded so much recently, and fostering a sense of community and doing your part, for the long term. [People feel that] if you’re having to coerce me into it then there must be a reason that you think I wouldn’t get it on my own – there must be something bad underlying this that you’re not telling me. “Most people who are vaccine hesitant or unwilling aren’t actually anti-vaccine, they just have very legitimate, various concerns that they need to address themselves.”The Christmas lights are twinkling and there is even an energetic fiddler playing a jaunty folk tune in the heart of Yeovil – but voters in this Somerset town have little festive cheer for Boris Johnson’s beleaguered government. Alison Johnstone, 60, can no longer bring herself to vote Conservative. The last straw was the sight of scores of Conservative MPs voting against public health measures proposed by the government last week. “It was so wrong,” says Johnstone, a physiotherapist at Yeovil hospital. “I’m NHS, and it doesn’t make sense to not bring in all the extra precautions – and you can’t help thinking: is it because they wanted to keep partying?” She is not sure who she would vote for now, but the newly invigorated Lib Dems are an option. “Hand on heart, I don’t think I could [vote Conservative]. Boris sees himself as another Churchill, and I don’t think he’s up to it,” she says, adjusting her face mask. “If we had someone like Paddy Ashdown standing again, I might very well vote for him.” Yeovil, which was once the stronghold of Ashdown, who helped establish the Lib Dems as the third force in British politics, turned Conservative in 2015, electing Marcus Fysh. The area voted Brexit by almost 60% the following year, and the majority for Fysh has grown with every general election. But damaging scandals over Covid rule-busting parties and MPs with second jobs are pushing some Tory voters back towards the Lib Dems, who are viewed once more as serious challengers in many Conservative seats after the party’s spectacular byelection victory last week in North Shropshire. The Lib Dems have caught the eye of Jane Dart, a Tory voter. She lives in the same village outside the town where Ashdown died in 2018. “I could be swayed. I’m one of those people who are ripe for change,” she says in a decorated pedestrianised shopping centre. “I would love to be a convinced Conservative, but I am beginning to wonder now about the viability of them and their leadership.” Dart, 51, who teaches in a private school, also highlights the vote on the government’s plan B Covid rules, which required Labour support to pass. “How viable is [Boris Johnson] as a leader if he can’t control his own party? I’m never going to vote Labour but I could be persuaded [to vote for another party] if there was a viable alternative.” Other traditional Conservative voters are more forthright. Lee Benneworth, 42, is praying for someone in the party to take over from Johnson. He mentions the prime minister’s faltering Peppa Pig speech to the CBI and the doomed attempts to change parliamentary lobbying rules to save Owen Paterson from suspension. “I have no confidence in [Johnson]. He is just a joker,” he says, on a shopping trip with his family. “He is a liar. He has a track record of telling lies.” Victoria Benneworth, 35, cannot forgive the alleged lockdown Christmas parties in No 10 and elsewhere in government. “I know several people who were not able to see loved ones before they died in hospital,” she says. “I would definitely not vote Conservative. It would either be Labour or the Lib Dems.” There is also revulsion at the rhetoric deployed by Fysh last week against the latest public health restrictions. “I wouldn’t vote for [Fysh] after he said vaccine passports were the same as Nazi Germany,” says one shopper, who usually votes Conservative. “He is vile.” There are, however, pockets of support for the Tories. Annie Price, 48, a horse-riding coach, is more sympathetic. “Their job is pretty hard,” she says while browsing an estate agent’s window. “Whatever they do is wrong. Parties here and parties there … it doesn’t interest me. We’ve all been through so much. Does it really matter that they have bent rules, if they did?” But they are outnumbered by angry, disillusioned Conservative voters, who do appear to mind. “I was very cautious going out. I missed seeing most of my family last Christmas. My dad worked in a care home, so I hardly got to see him,” says Karl Shortland, 29, while his children play on benches near the town’s poppy-covered war memorial. “When I found out [about the parties] I was fuming. Absolutely fuming.” Some in the town are relieved that the political tide appears to be finally turning against the Tories. Gillian Hoskins, 60, is haunted by the footage of the PM’s former press secretary Allegra Stratton joking about a lockdown party. “I had my mum in a home. I didn’t get to say all that I wanted [to her]. It was gutting that I couldn’t see her [when visits were banned] and then only see her for half an hour a week. I lost her this year,” she says, tears welling up in her eyes. “And that woman was laughing … it was hurtful.” The byelection shock in North Shropshire has changed the perception of what is possible in Yeovil. Hoskins, who raised her family in the area, could imagine the town electing a Lib Dem again. “I think that things are going to change,” she says, as a soft dusk falls on the streets. “I think Boris most probably has had his day.”That old adage of Marx insists that historical events occur first as tragedy, then as farce. The government’s handling of the pandemic in the UK long ago undermined that progression: tragedy and farce have, since the very beginning of the crisis, always been a double act. The clashing tone of current events feels like a dispiriting festive repeat of all-too-familiar dramas. A week that began with the exposed scandal of Downing Street lockdown parties, and ended with chief civil servant Simon Case stepping down as investigator of those scandals, because of a party in his own office, was also yet another week in which the alarming progress of the virus outpaced government rhetoric and claimed another thousand lives. This weekend sees a rerun of scrambled Cobra meetings in which once more, despite all recent assurances to the contrary, “nothing is not on the table”. If you have felt that yawning sense of “here we go again”, then that national deja vu is supported in the news archives. Turn the pages back to the Observer of exactly one year ago, and you will find headlines that read: “The new variant, the risks and the vaccine” and “Shops and businesses in despair as curbs halt Christmas bonanza … ” and “Johnson U-turn leaves nation’s plans for Christmas in tatters”. It is, make a wish, still too early to cut and paste the paragraphs that followed those headlines. But given the unprecedented pace of infection – new Covid cases in the UK seem certain to break daily records until the end of the month, with consequent self-isolation ravaging supply chains and emergency services and businesses – only a diehard optimist would bet against some version of the following from that December 2020 paper being employed in the coming days: “After a week which saw hospital after hospital cut routine operations, the prime minister said he had ‘no alternative’ but to act against a mutation that was ‘up to 70% more transmissible’ than earlier versions. ‘Given the evidence we have on this new variant of the virus and the potential risk it poses, it is with a heavy heart that I must tell you we cannot carry on with Christmas as planned,’ the prime minister said … The libertarian wing of the Conservative party has bridled against the restrictions, asking for exemptions … ” There are of course some very significant differences to the context of such doomy precedents – most notably the buoyant life raft of the vaccine. Last Christmas, only 350,000 UK citizens had received their first dose of the jab. The miracle of medical research and the logistical efforts of the NHS mean that about 80% of the population is now double-jabbed and, thanks to the accelerated push of the past week, more than half of British adults have now received their potentially Omicron-arresting booster dose. Even so, with the highly contagious variant moving through vulnerable populations, and perhaps 6 million eligible citizens still stubbornly unvaccinated, the gloomier forecasts of Sage epidemiologists have become harder to dispute. * * * How are we coping? Among those who have attempted to keep the closest track on the nation’s mental health since the start of the pandemic is Dr Daisy Fancourt, professor of behavioural science and epidemiology, who leads the Covid-19 Social Study, which has monitored the daily anxieties and attitudes of tens of thousands of Britons. “Something that is really striking this time,” Fancourt told me on Friday, “is that, in general, stress about Covid has stayed really low in recent weeks, despite cases once again getting really high and rising. “I think that’s partly because people are more used to the disease than they were 20 months ago, and partly the confidence of getting vaccinated.” Some of the other significant changes in mood are more sobering. “Something that stands out this morning from the latest ONS data is that the number of people who believe that the pandemic is going to go on for ‘longer than the next 12 months’ has doubled in the last year,” said Fancourt. “It was about 20% last Christmas, and it’s now nearly 40%.” The other big – and depressing – shift, she says, “is that the appreciation of the work of frontline health and social care workers has almost entirely vanished.” We are no longer all in it together. This collective loss of empathy is linked, her data suggests, to political moves like denying the pay increase in England that put a tangible value on the work of NHS staff, and the divisive narrative targeting GPs over face-to-face consultations. On Friday, I also spoke to two of the people who were at the very sharpest end of the earlier stages of the pandemic, and who have lived to tell the tale. Jim Down is a consultant in anaesthesiology and intensive care at University College Hospital in London, and author of the graphic and moving diary of the Covid frontline, Life Support; Michael Rosen, the celebrated children’s author, was himself on life support and in an induced coma for 40 days after contracting the disease in March 2020. Both men are, inevitably, already feeling extreme versions of the anxieties that many of us may be beginning again to sense. Down is bracing himself for a sequel to his Covid story. “Alongside the worry about how many patients may soon be arriving, there’s also the fear about how many staff will be off with the virus,” he says. “That’s the bit that is already biting quite hard.” Does the fact that he and his colleagues have all been here before help or exacerbate those anxieties? “On the whole, it helps,” he says. “The first time, I think we were terrified; terrified of the unknown and the scale, and I suppose of the potential risk to ourselves. The second time, we were much better organised. We weren’t worried about running out of ventilators and PPE, but the size of it was huge. Now everyone’s got this sense of: surely not again.” His intensive care unit has not seen any Omicron patients yet, but there remains a daily flow of Delta-infected patients, most of whom are unvaccinated. “There is always a lag between infections rising and patients coming to us,” he says. “As I understand it, the predicted peak is now for the second week of January.” The fact that once again those who are most likely to be admitted are those who have refused vaccination for whatever reason must be hard to witness? “It is not our position to judge people,” Down says. “There is a lot of misinformation – and, anyway, by the time most people come to us they are unconscious. But you can’t help but be a bit frustrated. I find it as difficult when people don’t wear masks, though – because I’m so used to wearing one all the time, and it’s such a simple thing to do.” One of the things that really comes across in Down’s book is how the sudden scale of mortality affected him. He was haunted by individual deaths, and by conversations with relatives left behind. Can he face another wave of that? “It’s fluctuated, I’ve had bad periods, one earlier this year, where I had a big mental health deterioration. But at the moment, I’m OK. “A lot of people have had similar things, where it’s crept up on them. I think we have at least got better at talking about it.” For now, they are planning a regular rota over Christmas, but he has little doubt that will change. “I think it’s particularly hard for nurses,” he says. “Covid patients are so sick and need such a very intense sort of care. And they have certainly seen a lot of people do badly, which is really tough for them. And now it’s happening again.” Rosen was among those who received some of that care – his book about his illness, Many Different Kinds of Love: A Story of Life, Death and the NHS, includes the moving series of letters that intensive care nurses wrote to him at the end of night shifts at his bedside while he was in a coma. He came out of that state much changed – with impaired sight and partial hearing loss – but with his creative life force intact. He talked originally about it as feeling like a shellshock experience after the first world war. With the news full of Covid again, is he experiencing a kind of PTSD? “In the period when I came out of the coma,” he says, “I was full of muddle and anxiety. I call it ‘lonely corridor syndrome’ – I don’t want to dignify it as post-traumatic stress disorder, which is an awful thing – but it’s certainly not nice to hear of the great new wave because it does bring back all those memories.” The lonely corridor he refers to is partly the geriatric ward he was placed in after his coma because of a lack of beds. He came to surrounded by people with severe dementia. “I really had no idea why I was there. And also, I didn’t understand that I’d actually been unconscious for 40 days.” Rosen replays vivid dreams of his recovery; when he watches Downing Street briefings, he finds himself assailed by the phrase “a little knowledge is a dangerous thing”. It frightens him to imagine those same hospital wards gearing up for Omicron cases. “My ward was supposed to hold 11 people and they had 24, and half of us were dying. The way one consultant put it to me was: ‘You could be talking to someone and you go out for a pee, and when you come back that person’s gone.’ It was so quick.” He stays in touch with one intensive care nurse, who kept a journal in which the names of patients were changed. “I was Mr Jacobs,” Rosen says. “There’s two entries that I absolutely adore. One of them is: ‘I said some hail Marys over Mr Jacobs, even though he’s Jewish’. The other says, ‘I walked past Mr Jacobs’s bed. Mr Jacobs is still alive.’” Rosen is halfway through writing a book on the theme of “getting better” in all its meanings. “My theory is that everybody is trying to get better one way or another,” he says. You would have to argue that at least one individual in this ongoing national tragedy seems stubbornly immune to that particular strain of self-improvement. Our attention-deficit prime minister has always wanted to present the pandemic as an event with a beginning, a middle and an end. As virologists have long insisted, though, this is to wilfully misunderstand the nature of the challenges. The idea that it would be over by last Christmas or this one (or the next) was always a predictably false promise. “The pattern,” the Observer’s chief political commentator Andrew Rawnsley wrote of Johnson’s failures of leadership in this paper a year ago, “is one of resisting taking the necessary steps at the time when they would have been most effective, and being compelled to implement them late with more damaging effect.” Twelve months on, that destructive pattern shows no sign of changing. And the results are something that we all continue to live with.Many children are facing their “most dangerous Christmas yet” as uncertainty over Covid and the cumulative pressures of the pandemic heighten internal family tensions, the NSPCC has warned. The charity’s chief executive, Peter Wanless, said a “toxic cocktail” of accumulating financial pressures, disrupted festive plans and strained relationships threatened to create unsafe environments for some children and young people. “We know that in a normal year, Christmas can be a tense and difficult time for children, but this year there’s an extra toxic cocktail of facts and uncertainties that place many children in a difficult situation,” Wanless told the Observer. “It’s going to be a pretty miserable Christmas for many children and a dangerous one for some – potentially the most dangerous yet.” Wanless also urged people not to shy away from contacting the authorities in the wake of the two recent shocking cases where a toddler and a young child were killed despite social services being repeatedly informed both were in danger. Earlier this month, details emerged of the murder of six-year-old Arthur Labinjo-Hughes from Solihull, West Midlands, who was poisoned, starved and beaten during a campaign of abuse by his stepmother and father. Social workers, notified of bruising to the boy, found “no safeguarding concerns” despite visiting him two months before he was murdered. And last week, renewed outrage greeted the death of 16-month-old Star Hobson, who was murdered by her mother’s partner after months of “neglect, cruelty and injury” and despite five referrals from concerned family members to social services. Wanless said he was concerned that the authorities’ response to the two deaths may deter people from coming forward. “Some people may be worried about a child but think that if they vocalise their concerns nothing’s going to happen anyway,” he said. “We are saying please speak up or speak out – don’t wait. It’s important that throughout this Christmas period people look out for children in their communities.” The NSPCC is also urging the government to introduce a contingency plan to ensure that children do not become “hidden victims” of any future Covid restrictions or even another lockdown. Georgia Macqueen Black, senior policy officer at the charity, said: “The government needs to be responding to the Covid data coming out and ensure that if children aren’t allowed to return to school in January, core agencies like the police, social care and schools come together to put in place robust multi-agency plans to safeguard children. We can’t reach a situation where children are allowed to slip off the radar.” Arthur’s abuse began after the start of the first lockdown in March 2020 when he was moved into the home of his father’s girlfriend Emma Tustin, 32. His father, Thomas Hughes, 29, was sentenced to 21 years after being found guilty of manslaughter over the torture and killing of his six-year-old son. Tustin was sentenced to life in prison with a minimum term of 29 years for inflicting the head injury that killed Arthur. Last Wednesday, Savannah Brockhill, was jailed for a minimum of 25 years for inflicting “catastrophic” injuries on toddler Star, her partner’s daughter. The attorney general has since been asked to review the sentence of Brockhill and that of Star’s mother, Frankie Smith, 20, who received eight years for causing or allowing her death. Fears of tighter Covid restrictions are caused by data showing that serious child harm cases reported by councils in England rose by nearly 20% during the first year of the pandemic, including a 19% rise in child death notifications. There were 536 serious incident reports in England during 2020-21, up 87 from 449 in the previous year and an increase of 41% on the number of incidents recorded five years ago. Last Christmas, the NSPCC’s childline provided 6,000 counselling sessions over the festive period, with the charity not expecting to record a lower figure during the weeks ahead. Childline spokesperson Wendy Robinson said: “Children are going to be at home during a period when family life might be stressful and when there’s a real pressure for them to be happy. If you’re struggling with your mental health or things at home then it’s 10 times worse at Christmas.” The warnings come days after the Children’s Society said that another lockdown could put young people at further risk of exploitation from county lines drugs gangs. The charity said the issue had grown in the last five years but that the pandemic and festive period could escalate the situation.Guests invited to a holiday party at the home of the leading anti-vaxxer Robert F Kennedy Jr were urged to be vaccinated or tested for Covid-19 because, Kennedy said, he is “not always the boss at my own house”. Speaking to Politico, which reported the request before the party in California last week, Kennedy said his wife, the actor Cheryl Hines, was behind it. He also said no effort was made to check if guests had been vaccinated or recently tested. Amid widespread criticism, Doug Heye, a Republican operative, wrote: “The ol’ blame-the-wife-for-wanting-people-to-be-safe-when-you’re-an-anti-vaxxer move. Classy.” Hines did not comment. Kennedy, 67, is a nephew of President John F Kennedy and the second son of Robert F Kennedy, the US attorney general, New York senator and candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination who was assassinated in 1968. The younger Kennedy has campaigned on environmental issues but is also a leading vaccines conspiracy theorist and activist against shots including those approved to combat Covid-19, which has killed more than 805,000 in the US and more than 5.3 million worldwide. Earlier this year, Kennedy was removed from Instagram, for sharing misinformation about Covid-19. His Facebook page remains active, as does his Twitter account. Last month, Kennedy released a book in which he attacks targets including Joe Biden’s chief medical adviser. Its title, The Real Anthony Fauci: Bill Gates, Big Pharma, and the Global War on Democracy and Public Health, has been no obstacle to bestseller status on Amazon. Earlier this week, the Associated Press reported that Kennedy’s anti-vaccination non-profit, Children’s Health Defense, more than doubled revenue in the first year of the pandemic, reporting $6.8m raised. Earlier this month, Kennedy told Gawker CHD “got funding from independent funders, from people whose children have been injured by medications, from people who want medical freedom”. Questioned about his decision to title a section of his book Final Solution: Vaccines or Bust, Kennedy said: “I don’t think the vaccines have anything to do with eradicating the Jews.” According to the AP, CHD has recently expanded the reach of its newsletter, launched an internet TV channel, started a movie studio, opened new US branches and established outposts in Canada, Europe and Australia. The AP also said CHD had become a leading “alternative and natural medicine site”, with millions of users, in part by targeting groups that may be more prone to distrust vaccines, including mothers and African Americans. “With the pandemic, [Kennedy has] been turbocharged,” Dr David Gorski, a cancer surgeon at Wayne State University School of Medicine in Detroit and a critic of the anti-vaccine movement, told the AP. Dr Richard Allen Williams, a cardiologist and founder of the Minority Health Institute, said Kennedy was leading “a propaganda movement” and “absolutely a racist operation” particularly dangerous to Black Americans. “He’s really the ringleader of the misinformation campaign,” Williams said. Kennedy did not comment. His sister, the human rights campaigner Kerry Kennedy, said: “Failure to take vaccines puts people’s lives at risk. It not only impacts the person who refuses the jab but imperils the community at large.” She also said: “I love Bobby. I think he’s just completely wrong on this issue and very dangerous.” The Associated Press contributed to this reportWhen you’re one of the most famous darts players on the planet and you want to pop to your local cafe in Milton Keynes without being recognised, there is a certain protocol to be followed. A mask at all times. A big beanie hat to hide your blonde hair. No make-up, obviously. Even then, it’s far from foolproof. “Every time I go in someone recognises me,” says Fallon Sherrock, sighing. “As soon as I take the hat off, people are staring. I’m like, I just want to eat my burger …” Fame hit Sherrock like a hand grenade. In a way, she’s still processing the aftershock. Nothing could really have prepared her for what followed her groundbreaking run at the world championship in late 2019, becoming the first woman to reach the third round. There were TV bookings, invitations, photoshoots, messages by the thousand. Then came the vultures and the internet men, with curiously pointed opinions on everything from her darting ability to her appearance. For a regular 27-year-old with no particular craving for public attention, it was a lot. “When it first started happening,” she says euphemistically, “I just got thrown in at the deep end. I had to learn how to deal with it.” She has a management team now, who filter her social media feeds so she can still see the deluge of positive messages without having to sift through the trolls. But she’s still too timid to Google herself. “I’m scared of what I might see,” she says. “I’ve come off all the darts groups on Facebook. Otherwise I’m just sitting there looking and then I’ve wasted three hours.” Does she get recognised a lot? “Sometimes. Not all the time. Sometimes when I’m at the pub, people will ask if I want to play a game of darts and if they don’t know who I am I’ll say I’m not very good.” Hang on. You hustle them? “Yeah, I love it. I last did it a couple of months back. But before lockdown I used to do it all the time. Just for a fiver. Or a drink. And then they go: ‘Oh, you’re actually quite good.’ And then I say: ‘Google me.’” This is the point when you realise that there is more to Sherrock than meets the eye. For the past two years, you feel the entire sport of darts has been learning a similar lesson. Sherrock’s world championship success was widely written off as an unrepeatable fluke. But in September, at the Nordic Masters, she became the first woman to reach the final of a televised PDC event, beating the world No 5, Dimitri Van den Bergh, and leading the great Michael van Gerwen 6-3 before losing 11-7. Then last month, at the Grand Slam, she shocked us again. In her final group game, she played the imposing Gabriel Clemens. With the German on 68, needing one more leg to progress, Sherrock pulled off an incredible 170 finish – two treble-20s, then the bull – to win. In the video of her checkout, which has been viewed almost 2m times online, you see her contorting herself in disbelief, unable to grasp how she had done it. “I’d not taken out 170 in about three years,” she says. “Like, it doesn’t happen.” She went on to reach the quarter-finals, where she pushed the world No 2, Peter Wright, all the way in a 16-13 defeat. The curious part of all this is that there was very little in Sherrock’s record to suggest any of this was feasible. She was a decent women’s player – good enough to reach the Lakeside world final in 2015 – but still some way behind Lisa Ashton and Deta Hedman, legends of the game. Week to week, in the smaller “floor events” that form the bread and butter of the tour, she generally posted three-dart averages in the 70s and 80s: competent, but hardly elite. But on the biggest stages, under the biggest pressure, she becomes something else entirely. Clutch doubles are nailed. Everything goes where it’s meant to. Against Wright she averaged 99, a shade under Gerwyn Price’s winning average in last year’s world championship final. Put her on the stage, with a crowd at her back, and she ascends to the godly plane. It is, quite simply, one of the most breathtaking and baffling phenomenons in the world of sport. Ask Sherrock why it happens and she’s not really sure. “People ask me and I cannot explain,” she says. “Because on the floor, I can’t do it. I feel like I’m at the same level as everyone else and they’re all looking at me and I don’t like people looking at me. I get distracted. My head’s away. But when I’m up on the stage, even though there’s cameras and millions of people watching, I just feel like I’m ... away from everyone. There’s so much space. No one can get me. I don’t understand it.” Often you hear darts players talk about inhabiting a character: a stage persona that allows them to shed their inhibitions and be whoever they want to be. A disguise, almost. For Sherrock, the distinctive pink shirt and men’s prescription glasses (women’s glasses don’t suit her face, she says) are her costume. “I put the glasses on, and it’s like tunnel vision,” she says. All of which leads to the question preoccupying the sport: is this simply a brilliant purple patch? Or on the other hand, is there still more magic to be unlocked? In short: how good is Sherrock? “I don’t know,” she says eventually. “I’ve never been asked that one. I know I can average 100, same as every other player. If you can do that, you’re in any game, unless your opponent does something ridiculous. So I’d say I was confident, but realistic at the same time. “I’ve shocked myself at how I’ve dealt with situations. I don’t think I’m any better than anyone else. I just think I can play the game to the same standard as everyone else.” For the first time, Sherrock arrives in London for this year’s world championship with expectations to fulfil. Her performances in recent months have made her one of the headline attractions in a sport that has never knowingly passed up an opportunity to broaden its reach. There is growing pressure on the PDC to admit her to next year’s Premier League, a lucrative invitational competition featuring 10 of the world’s best players. There are 128 players on the main PDC tour and Sherrock is not one of them. Every year, hundreds of hopefuls compete in a mass qualification event called Q-School in an attempt to secure one of the handful of available tour cards. It is a brutal, exhausting process and for the past three years Sherrock has come away empty handed. Her major tournament appearances have come either by invitation or through women-only qualifying series. For some this is evidence enough that she still needs to learn, hone her game, do her time, before being allowed to leapfrog more established players into the Premier League. “She’s definitely got the game,” Price, the world champion, said recently. “It’s just whether she can do it week in, week out. If she earned a tour card, she could go up against all those boys in the floor tournaments. I think she’d do really well. But she needs to earn it.” Sherrock has largely tried to ignore the background chat. “I try not to get involved in the politics of it all,” she says. “I wouldn’t say no to it, of course I wouldn’t.” But she’s also living proof of the idea that often it is opportunity that drives potential, not the other way around. Had the PDC not set aside two world championship places for women in 2018, we would never have discovered how good Sherrock could be. Given further opportunities, what else could we discover? Who else could we discover? “It’s harder to try and promote the women when they haven’t got the confidence,” Sherrock says. “Because a lot of them are like: there’s no point, we’re not good enough. But you can be good enough. You just need to put the effort in, get the opportunities, put yourself in that scenario. That’s when you find out what you’re capable of doing. This is how the world is now. If a woman does something, the world’s going to go mental.” Doubtless we can expect more hoopla if Sherrock gets past Steve Beaton in her first-round match on Sunday evening and more still if she beats Kim Huybrechts of Belgium three days later. If she reaches the fourth round she will almost certainly end the year in the world’s top 64, earn her tour card and avoid the lottery of Q-School in January. “I don’t doubt I can make a massive dent in the tournament,” she says. “But if I don’t get a tour card, then at least I can play on the [second-tier] Challenge Tour and develop my game a bit more.” It is the gift and the curse of all prominent sportswomen to become standard-bearers for their gender, whether they want to or not. Over the past couple of years Sherrock has got used to being judged, being talked about, being seen. But – as opponents, pundits and the startled pub patrons of Milton Keynes have discovered over the years – you underestimate her at your peril. Perhaps ultimately, you are as good as the stage you’re given. And Alexandra Palace in December is perhaps the biggest of them all.The first senior grand slam experience of Emma Raducanu’s career played out on court 18 in the quiet west side of the Wimbledon grounds this year. The crowd, not too familiar with the No 338, were drawn to Raducanu only by the flag beside her name. Raducanu faced the Russian Vitalia Diatchenko, the 150-ranked qualifier, and after a tight opening set that went to a tiebreak a soon-to-be-familiar sight unfolded. Raducanu permanently took her place inside the baseline and ruthlessly tore through the second set without the loss of another game. Considering her total inexperience as a professional, had that one first-round win at Wimbledon ended up being Raducanu’s greatest achievement in 2021, it still would have been an immense success. Coming into Wimbledon, she had earned £29,889 prize money in her young career but her first-round win netted £75,000. She had made her tour-level debut a few weeks earlier as a wildcard in Nottingham, where she lost in straight sets. Before that she had played 16 tournaments, all in the lower levels of the sport. Having spent the previous 16 months inactive on the international tours as she focused on her A-levels, Raducanu did not play in 2021 until 18 March. She had no reason to expect she would achieve anything at the top level this year. And yet, that win at Wimbledon would mark the beginning of one of the most startling breakthroughs in recent memory. After Diatchenko came wins over the former French Open finalist Marketa Vondrusova and Sorana Cirstea, the hype finally rising in the latter match as Raducanu dismantled her seasoned opponent on No 1 Court. It was the first spectacular glimpse into her all-round talent; her ability to dictate to top opponents with her sweet backhand and early ball-striking, her suffocating return of serve and the natural athleticism that already underpins so much of what people love. The way her Wimbledon ended, with Raducanu being forced to retire in the fourth round against Ajla Tomljanovic with breathing problems, only highlighted how little experience she had. Raducanu demonstrated what her game looked like in ideal conditions, but it said little about how she would handle the day-to-day grind. She had never spent an extended period of time competing abroad, an elementary feature of her nomadic profession but one that can be draining and difficult to manage. Raducanu had assumed it would take time for her to learn the ropes and gain experience, so she opted to work with her former coach, Andrew Richardson, a familiar face who could help her as she learned about life on tour. What Raducanu achieved at the US Open remains astounding. She said before the tournament that she was so unfamiliar with Flushing Meadows that she had to ask other players for directions just to reach the players’ canteen. Her flights home were booked at the end of the qualifying week, an understandable and realistic precaution for someone who had never competed in an overseas qualifying tournament. Instead, she won nine matches in a row and she did not drop a single set as she clinched a grand slam title. After navigating the crowdless qualifying tournament without incident, each time the challenge before her increased in the main draw she stepped up against her experienced foes and dominated more. Her return of serve was untouchable, constantly arresting her opponents with deep, early returns that robbed time away from all. Her frontrunning ability was tremendous. In back-to-back matches against Sara Sorribes Tormo and Shelby Rogers – conqueror of the top seed, Ashleigh Barty – she tore through 11 games in a row. She led Sorribes Tormo 6-0, 5-0 and match point before conceding one game. Raducanu did not have had a lick of experience behind her, but she showed her ability to adapt and learn from victories and defeats immediately. Her trip to the US began with lower-level tournaments in Pittsburgh and Chicago, where she won matches, banked the necessary experience and then carried on. As she marched through the US Open, Raducanu demonstrated her composure and in-match intelligence, making small adjustments throughout. The crowd responded by supporting her from the beginning and the tournament culminated in an unlikely meeting between two teenagers as Raducanu faced the Canadian Leylah Fernandez, 19, in the youngest grand slam final in more than two decades. The pair generated so much attention that their final produced higher television ratings in the US than the men’s final between the top two players in the world. In Britain 9.2 million viewers tuned in to Channel 4, which bought the rights from Amazon Prime, as Raducanu became the first qualifier to win a grand slam title in the Open era and the first player to win a major in her second grand slam tournament. Raducanu’s draw was kind to her and a reflection of a particularly open period in women’s tennis. She played two top-20 opponents in New York and she is still yet to face a top-10 player, although her semi-final opponent, Maria Sakkari, is now ranked No 6. But she left little doubt about her stratospheric level of play by obliterating everyone in her path. She conceded 34 games and nobody managed to win five games against her in a set. Most players’ lives instantly change when they become grand slam champions, fulfilling a lifelong dream as they definitively move out from the chasing pack and become one of the hunted. But few lives have changed as drastically in such a small space of time as Raducanu’s. She entered the US Open in the qualifying draw and a day after it ended she was an invitee to the Met Gala, where celebrities were seeking her out. She will inevitably be one of the highest earners and most prominent players on the tour for years to come. Asked recently to describe her year in a word, she shook her head. “A journey,” she said. “That’s the biggest word. If you were to draw a road or a journey it would just not make sense, the trajectory and where I went.” As reactions to her retirement at Wimbledon and her level predictably dropping after the US Open show, Raducanu will have to grow accustomed to her name being on everyone’s lips. After winning a grand slam tournament before her first WTA tour match win or competing in any three-set match at the top level, she will have to go back and take all of the necessary steps. The losses to come, inevitable for all, will be as essential to her growth as any further early success. It has been one of the most astonishing breakout years and her place as the heavy favourite to win BBC’s Sport Personality of the Year is undeniable.Be it the crest of an icy mountain peak, the depths of the dense native bush, or the slopes of sleeping volcanoes, New Zealand’s wild and remote landscapes are coveted by outdoor enthusiasts the world over. But what really sets the country’s nature apart from the rest is what is at one’s disposal when nature calls – spectacular loos with views. These scenic spots – small, remote, and lacking in plumbing – are a curious quirk in New Zealand’s landscape, and offer up some of the best panoramas in the country. “It’s pretty funny when you get to the end of an amazing track, you get to a hut, and it’s just absolutely stunning, and that view is not lost from the long-drop,” keen tramper and photographer Julie Gursha says. Originally from Portland, Oregon, Gursha moved to New Zealand just prior to the pandemic. She has hiked all over the world but says New Zealand’s loos with views stand out. “There are 360 degree views in a lot of places in the States, but I have been backpacking there with my tent. Having the option to be in a hut that comes with a nice loo, that is definitely unique to New Zealand and pretty special,” she laughs. Her personal favourite is at the Cameron Hut in the Hakatere Conservation Park, near Ashburton in the South Island. “That one is just a little more off the beaten path – it’s a really special one.” The department of conservation is responsible for the extensive network of landscape latrines and holds the unusual gong of “managing more toilets than any other organisation in New Zealand”. “The department of conservation manages 2,200 toilet buildings, with about 3,500 toilet pans … many of these sit in stunning locations,” says Steve Taylor, its heritage and visitors director. The department has been appealing to trampers to please “poo in the loos”, saying while most do take the opportunity to relieve themselves in the toilets provided, others sometimes use the walking tracks. Last year, the department reprimanded New Zealanders for not respecting their back yard, as closed borders ramped up domestic tourism. “If it’s done in nature, it can be unsightly, smelly and unhealthy,” a 2019 campaign video states. Taylor said: “There aren’t many toilets in our wild places. Remember to always go before you start your trip and if you’re heading out for a longer walk, be properly prepared and use a loo when you can.” Many of the impressive long-drops are linked to some of the 970 huts dotted through the more remote and striking parts of the country, and require helicopters to fly the waste out. The department says it is looking at ways of reducing helicopter flying to reduce cost and carbon emissions. In some places where the climate is suitable, roughly 100 composting toilets are used, though these are based at more accessible campsites. The oldest toilet is believed to be a 90-year-old pit toilet at an old farm homestead now managed by the department as part of Rakiura national park called “Island Hill Run” on Rakiura/Stewart Island. The toilet with the most impressive altitude is at Empress Hut, 2,500m up New Zealand’s highest mountain, Aoraki/Mt Cook in the Southern Alps.It’s hard to find much good news among the waves of grim statistics that have washed over the nation since the emergence of Omicron. Once again, the NHS is threatened and again, the prospect of a new year lockdown looms. We seem to have gained nothing in the battle against Covid-19 during the past 12 months. Such an interpretation is harsh, however. Yes, we are again facing a serious medical crisis, but a number of factors suggest there may be some ground for a little optimism, though scientists are careful to add the key caveat that we are only at the beginning of our dealings with the Omicron variant. Anti-viral drugs Over the past year, a number of anti-viral drugs, such as Xevudy (sotrovimab) and Lagevrio (molnupiravir), have been shown to ward off serious illness and have been earmarked in the UK for vulnerable people – those being treated for cancer, for example – who subsequently become ill with Covid-19. Both drugs reduce the amount of virus produced in the body after infection and lessen the chance that patients will need hospital treatment. “Those most at risk, such as cancer patients, are the most likely to need health service care, so with this new, highly infectious strain, these drugs should help reduce the burden of Covid-19 on that population and have a knock-on effect on the health service as well,” said Professor Penny Ward of King’s College, London. “On top of booster vaccines, these drugs will provide important additional protection for those who are most at risk.” South Africa Omicron was first pinpointed in South Africa, which then experienced a very rapid rise in numbers of Covid-19 cases. But now these case numbers appear to have peaked, while early indications also suggest that deaths could be lower than they have been for previous waves. Thus, the country is experiencing a relatively brief wave of milder infections. Health officials have also reported that people appear to recover more quickly from Omicron compared with Delta, whether they were in hospital or not. It remains to be seen whether these figures mean Omicron produces milder illness than previous variants in other countries, including the UK. Nevertheless it remains a possibility with some scientists expressing quiet optimism, though others are more cautious. “In South Africa, they had a very large wave of Delta only a few months ago, so they are likely to have a fair amount of immunity lingering in the population and that could be providing protection,” said Lance Turtle, senior clinical lecturer in infectious diseases at Liverpool University. “In the UK, our protection might have begun to weaken, so we might see more serious cases.” This point was also made by the government’s scientific advisers, Sage. “Even if there were to be a modest reduction in severity compared to Delta, very high numbers of infections would still lead to significant pressure on hospitals,” it noted in minutes for its meeting last Thursday. However, Professor Martin Hibberd, of the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine, was still optimistic. “We are in a better position than a year ago, as most people have now had at least some vaccine, or previous infection, which may help to reduce the severity experienced by many people.” From the laboratory A third piece of hopeful news is that scientists have uncovered a possible biological explanation for Omicron’s apparent reduced severity. This work was carried out by Michael Chan Chi-wai at the University of Hong Kong who found that although the new variant is much more efficient, compared with Delta, in reproducing in the upper respiratory tract, where it can be coughed out onto others, it is far less efficient in spreading in the lungs where it would pose the greatest danger to an infected person. In this way, the variant may spread between individuals far more quickly but not reach more vulnerable parts of their anatomies. This would reduce the severity of illness it can trigger. However, Chan has counselled caution in interpreting the implications of his work. “By infecting many more people, a very infectious virus may cause more severe disease and death, even though the virus itself may be less pathogenic,” he said. “The overall threat from Omicron variant is likely to be very significant.”Tougher measures could be introduced to stem the spread of the Omicron coronavirus variant, with reports that plans are being drawn up for a two-week “circuit breaker” after Christmas. Ministers are due “imminently” to present draft regulations that would mean England returning to restrictions last seen in April, according to the Times. The measures could ban meeting other people indoors except for work purposes for two weeks after Christmas, with pubs and restaurants limited for the fortnight to outdoor service only. However, the paper reported that Boris Johnson has not approved the plans, and on Friday he insisted he was not “closing things down”. Meanwhile, leaked minutes seen by the BBC of a meeting of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) said that without government intervention beyond the recently announced plan B measures, hospital admissions in England could reach “at least” 3,000 a day. The minutes of the Sage meeting held on Thursday said: “If the aim is to reduce the levels of infection in the population and prevent hospitalisations reaching these levels, more stringent measures would need to be implemented very soon.” They continued that introducing measures equivalent to those in place after step two or step one of the roadmap in England could “substantially reduce the peak in hospital admissions and infections compared with plan B alone”, the BBC reports. Step one and two of the roadmap for easing lockdown banned indoor hospitality and indoor social mixing between households. “The timing of such measures is crucial,” the Sage minutes said, adding that delaying until 2022 would “greatly reduce the effectiveness of such interventions and make it less likely that these would prevent considerable pressure on health and care settings”. The Financial Times reported that Johnson was presented with a number of options on Friday under a so-called plan C, ranging from “mild guidance to nudge people, right through to lockdown”. Quoting allies of the prime minister, it said that while Johnson still wanted to go down the guidance route, he needed to be realistic about the threat of Omicron. Johnson has called a Cobra meeting this weekend with the devolved administrations of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, in response to the rising cases of the variant. Victor Adebowale, the chairman of the NHS Confederation, backed a circuit breaker to tackle the spread of the Omicron variant. He told Times Radio: “I would support the circuit breaker. My members would support the circuit breaker. We’ve been calling for plan B for some time now and we’re glad that it was voted through. I think the government has to be prepared to recall parliament if further interventions are needed.” He described the leaked modelling by Sage as “very worrying”. He said: “The fact of the matter is we should be taking the precautionary principle. We should be protecting our NHS and our public services. We have no economy without health.” However, Prof Stephen Reicher, a leading government adviser, said a post-Christmas circuit breaker could be too late. Reicher, a member of the Sage subcommittee advising the government on behavioural science and a professor of social psychology at the University of St Andrews, told Times Radio: “The only way really, or at least the most effective way, we can have an immediate effect is to decrease the number of contacts we have. In many ways, the most effective way of diminishing contact is to have a circuit breaker. “Now, you could have it after Christmas. The problem is after Christmas it’s probably too late; it’s probably by then we will have had a huge surge of infections with all the impact upon society.” Reicher, who was speaking to Times Radio in a personal capacity, said the time to act was now. A further 90,418 cases of Covid-19 in the UK were reported on Saturday, and 125 deaths within 28 days of a positive Covid test, according to the government’s latest daily figures. The official data showed that 900 Covid patients had been admitted to hospital in the latest 24-hour period. Saturday’s number of daily cases marked a slight drop compared with Friday, when 93,045 daily cases were recorded – the highest daily total since the beginning of the pandemic. The number of people in hospital with Covid-19 in London, which has seen some of the biggest rises in cases in the last seven days, increased to 1,534, up 28.6% on the previous week. Across the UK, 7,611 people were in hospital with the virus on Friday, a rise of 163 patients (2%) on the previous week.Defending a client charged with crimes modern society finds more terrible than murder, who might face the rest of her life in prison, Ghislaine Maxwell’s defence in New York opened with a nice lady who hadn’t seen anything, a travel agent who booked flights years after they mattered and a professor of BugsBunnyology – and none of them cut the mustard. At the end of the defence’s first day, Maxwell was seen holding her hands up in despair at her fancy attorneys who have cost her, according to her own estimate, some $7m. Juries in US federal trials must be unanimous and there are legal grounds for knocking out some of the charges, but it looks bleak for Maxwell. First on was Cimberly Espinosa, who had worked in Jeffrey Epstein’s Madison Avenue office from 1996 to 2002. But the key witnesses, “Jane”, who says she was then 14, “Kate”, then 17, Carolyn, then 13 or 14, and Annie Farmer, then 16, who say they were groomed by Maxwell leading to sexual abuse by her paedophile one-time lover, Epstein, never said anything happened in that office. Much of it was in his Palm Beach house, one he shared with Maxwell for years. In their cross examination, the prosecution asked Espinosa: “Have you ever been to Palm Beach?” “No.” “No further questions.” The second witness was a travel agent who booked flights for team Epstein from 1999 onwards. Jane, Kate and Farmer all flew on Epstein’s dime in the mid-1990s – ie, his evidence could not knock out what they had to say. (Carolyn never flew because she was, in her mother’s view, too young at 14 to get a passport.) So the travel agent was irrelevant to the killer point a good defence would seek to make, that the victims and/or Epstein and Maxwell were in a different place when the abuse was supposed to have taken place. The third witness was Professor Elizabeth Loftus, a psychologist and specialist in false memory. An expert witness in perhaps as many as 300 trials, she asserted that fake facts could be implanted in people: “False memories … can be very vivid, detailed. People can be confident about them, people can be emotional about them, even though they’re false.” She told the jury “emotion is no guarantee that the memory is authentic”. Prosecutor Lara Pomerantz noted that Loftus was being paid $600 an hour by the defence and that she’d written a book, Witness for the Defense. “You haven’t written a book called ‘Impartial Witness’, right?” said Pomerantz, whose voice is so high-pitched she sounds like a very scary bat. “No,” said Loftus, glumly. Pomerantz moved on to Loftus’s research. She got the professor to cite the catchphrase of a figure in one of her studies– “What’s up, Doc?”. Loftus had shown that 16% of people said they’d seen Bugs Bunny at Disneyland, a false memory because the fictional rabbit is a Warner Bros character, correct? Correct, the witness had to agree. Hanging in the air was the thought that 84% didn’t see Bugs Bunny at the wrong theme park. Next, we were on a second study, where Loftus and co had tried to implant the false memory of people having had a rectal enema. No one did so, the point being that people remember trauma clearly. False memory did not have a good day in court. No wonder Maxwell seemed distraught. The second day was no better. The key witness for the defence was Eva Dubin, a former Miss Sweden, ex-girlfriend of Epstein and still good friend of Maxwell. Jane had said that she had taken part in orgies with a woman called Eva. One of Maxwell’s lawyers, Jeffrey Pagliuca, asked: “Have you ever been in a group sexual encounter with the person that we are calling Jane?” “Absolutely not,” Dubin replied. Prosecutor Alison Moe asked, her voice oozing sarcasm: “Do you know the first names of everyone Jeffrey Epstein has ever met?” No, she replied. Maxwell spoke to the court to say that the prosecution had not proved their case beyond reasonable doubt, so there was no reason for her to testify. And that was the end of the defence case. In the lift on the way out, I was holding forth to some other reporters, saying that the reason there is no defence is because there is no defence: that is, Ghislaine Maxwell is guilty. Then the lift door opened and her sister Isabel Maxwell got in and we all fell silent. The trial – and the tragedy – continue. John Sweeney is the host of two podcasts, Hunting Ghislaine, and Hunting Ghislaine, The Trial. His book, also called Hunting Ghislaine, will be published next year.The drummer of the British band the Wurzels has died in hospital after contracting Covid-19 while on tour. Somerset musician John Morgan, originally from Lydney, Gloucestershire, became ill with coronavirus after the Wurzels played at Manchester Academy earlier this month and died at the age of 80 on Friday in Gloucester Royal hospital, surrounded by his family. The band’s manager said he was the “oldest drummer in captivity” and had been performing with them for more than 40 years, from 1981 until two weeks ago. Band member Tommy Banner said in an online tribute: “We can’t believe we shan’t ever see you behind those drums again – we thought you were indestructible.” The band, which celebrates rural life in the west of England, rose to fame in the 1970s with hits such as I Am a Cider Drinker and The Combine Harvester. The Wurzels are also popular with supporters of Bristol City FC, with their song, One for the Bristol City, being the official club anthem. The football club paid tribute to Morgan in a tweet: “The Wurzels rings round Ashton Gate in memory of John Morgan. Rest in Peace.” Banner said Morgan will be missed, adding: “With your sharp, quirky Forest wit – oh, you were also a great drummer, just like your hero, Charlie Watts.” Banner told ITV that Morgan, known as “Morgy”, loved his home in the Forest of Dean, and was “a real Forester”. “I’m not an envious person but I was always envious of John, that he could still make his living by being among his own,” Banner said. Sil Willcox, the band manager, said: “We are all in shock; Morgy had the driest of humour and the kindest of hearts and all our thoughts are with his family. “The band intend to continue but John will always be remembered and loved by his fans, friends and band.”Adele, Ed Sheeran, Little Simz and Dave have topped the largest-ever field of nominations at the Brit awards, as the ceremony moves beyond gendered categories. Each artist earned four nominations, including in the new “artist of the year” category that has replaced “British male” and “British female”, and for album of the year. New awards have been added this year to highlight excellence in genres: alternative/rock, hip-hop/grime/rap, dance, and pop/R&amp;B. The change to the gendered awards came after criticism of the 2021 ceremony by non-binary singer Sam Smith, whose gender identity meant they couldn’t be nominated in the male or female artist awards. They said: “I look forward to a time where awards shows can be reflective of the society we live in.” Brit organisers replied that they were “committed to evolving the show”, and announced a consultation, eventually unveiling the changes last month. Tom March, co-president of Polydor Records, who is this year’s Brit chair, said: “It is important that the Brits continue to evolve and aim to be as inclusive as possible.” There was a risk that the abolition of gendered awards, would see the new mixed categories skewed towards men, who have dominated some recent ceremonies – but more solo female artists and all-female groups have been nominated this year than at any time in the past decade. There are some familiar successful artists among the nominees – Dua Lipa appears in the pop/R&amp;B and song of the year categories despite releasing very little new music – but there are also a number of first-timers. South Yorkshire pop singer Self Esteem, who was awarded album and song of the year by Guardian critics, is nominated for best new artist, alongside Central Cee, Griff, Joy Crookes and – six years after her debut album – Little Simz. Self Esteem, AKA Rebecca Taylor, said on Instagram: “Props to Brits for having 35 year old woman representation. We don’t just become obsolete!” Central Cee picks up three nominations overall in his first Brits appearance, capping a breakthrough year for the 23-year-old drill rapper that saw him dominate the Mobo and Rated awards for Black British music, and score two top 10 hits. Veteran dance producer David Guetta is also nominated three times, for his contributions to three joint-effort dancefloor tracks: Bed, Heartbreak Anthem and Remember. Geordie singer-songwriter Sam Fender also earned a trio of nominations, including in the prestigious artist of the year and album of the year categories – he said he was “completely overwhelmed and honoured” to be recognised. There is a diverse span of artists in the running for group of the year, with four-time winners Coldplay extending their record number of nominations in the category to nine, plus rap duo D-Block Europe, indie rockers Wolf Alice, dream-poppers London Grammar and Little Mix, who in 2021 became the first female group to win the award. Up for the international artist award, which again replaces two gendered awards, is an all-American lineup of Taylor Swift, Olivia Rodrigo, Billie Eilish, Lil Nas X and Doja Cat. The international group category is more globe-trotting, with Abba – who were nominated for this award at the first-ever Brit ceremony in 1977 – appearing alongside Italian Eurovision winners Måneskin, K-pop megastars BTS, US AOR band the War on Drugs, and Silk Sonic, the nostalgic funk supergroup formed by Bruno Mars and Anderson .Paak. One Brit award has already been handed out: the rising star award for newly tipped talent, won by pop singer Holly Humberstone. Fender won this award in 2019; last year’s winner, Griff, receives two nominations elsewhere this year, as does previous rising star nominee Crookes, whose debut album Skin reached the UK top five. Awards for producer and songwriter of the year will be announced in January, before the ceremony on 8 February at the O2 Arena, which is presented for the first time by comedian Mo Gilligan, with support from Maya Jama and Clara Amfo. Overall, there are 15 awards up for grabs, the most in Brits history. The awards are voted for by the Brits Academy, comprising musicians alongside music industry and media figures, though the genre categories will be voted for by the public via TikTok. Nominees in the two song of the year categories are determined by UK chart performance, but the winner is picked by the Academy. Adele will likely become a quick favourite in her four categories, after she re-established herself alongside Ed Sheeran and Lipa as the UK’s biggest contemporary pop star. Her fourth album, 30, was released six fractious years after her previous one, 25, during which time she divorced her husband, Simon Konecki, the father of her son, Angelo. The album charts the relationship strife and its fallout in typically candid and emotive terms, and has been phenomenally successful since its release last month, becoming the biggest selling album of the year in the US in just three days. If she wins all four of her categories, she will have the joint-highest number of Brit awards ever alongside Robbie Williams, with 13. Sheeran will be keen to add to his six previous wins in the year he released his fifth album, =, and Dave could potentially win album of the year for the second time in three years, after his debut Psychodrama took the prize in 2020. In joining them at the top table of British pop, Little Simz marks her passage from cult artist to mainstream star. The critically adored rapper, celebrated for how she deploys a high level of technical skill into self-searching lyricism, had barely touched the UK charts with her first three albums, but reached the UK top five with her fourth, Sometimes I Might Be Introvert. There are no glaring snubs, though major stars Justin Bieber, Drake and the Weeknd all might have hoped to get a nomination for international artist. 2022 Brit award nominations Artist of the year Adele Dave Ed Sheeran Little Simz Sam Fender Group of the year Coldplay D Block Europe Little Mix London Grammar Wolf Alice Album of the year Adele – 30 Dave – We’re All Alone in This Together Ed Sheeran – = Little Simz – Sometimes I Might Be Introvert Sam Fender – Seventeen Going Under Song of the year A1 &amp; J1 – Latest Trends Adele – Easy On Me Anne Marie, KSI &amp; Digital Farm Animals – Don’t Play Becky Hill &amp; David Guetta – Remember Central Cee – Obsessed With You Dave &amp; Stormzy – Clash Ed Sheeran – Bad Habits Elton John &amp; Dua Lipa – Cold Heart (Pnau remix) Glass Animals – Heat Waves Joel Corry, Raye &amp; David Guetta – Bed KSI – Holiday Nathan Evans – Wellerman (220 Kid &amp; Billen Ted remix) Riton &amp; Nightcrawlers – Friday (feat Mufasa &amp; Hypeman) Tion Wayne &amp; Russ Millions – Body Tom Grennan — Little Bit of Love Best new artist Central Cee Griff Joy Crookes Little Simz Self Esteem Alternative/rock act Coldplay Glass Animals Sam Fender Tom Grennan Wolf Alice Hip-hop/grime/rap act AJ Tracey Central Cee Dave Ghetts Little Simz Dance act Becky Hill Calvin Harris Fred Again Joel Corry Raye Pop/R&amp;B act Adele Dua Lipa Ed Sheeran Griff Joy Crookes International artist Billie Eilish Doja Cat Lil Nas X Olivia Rodrigo Taylor Swift International group Abba BTS Måneskin Silk Sonic The War on Drugs International song of the year ATB, Topic &amp; A7S – Your Love (9pm) Billie Eilish – Happier Than Ever Ckay – Love Nwantiti (Ah Ah Ah) Doja Cat &amp; SZA – Kiss Me More Drake &amp; Lil Baby – Girls Want Girls Galantis, Little Mix &amp; David Guetta – Heartbreak Anthem Jonasu – Black Magic The Kid Laroi &amp; Justin Bieber – Stay Lil Nas X – Montero (Call Me By Your Name) Lil Tjay &amp; 6lack – Calling My Phone Måneskin – I Wanna Be Your Slave Olivia Rodrigo – Good 4 U Polo G - Rapstar Tiësto – The Business The Weeknd – Save Your TearsProsecutors and lawyers for Ghislaine Maxwell convened on Saturday in front of the judge in the Briton’s sex trafficking trial in Manhattan federal court, to discuss how jurors would be instructed. The attorneys and Judge Alison Nathan hashed out what Nathan will tell jurors before they start deliberating next week, such as which allegations against Maxwell correspond to specific counts against her. In such proceedings, typical in US jury trials, both sides are able to object or make suggestions about proposed wording for jury instructions. The judge ultimately determines which requests will be met. Maxwell’s charge conference unfolded without notable incident. Some changes to the proposed jury instructions were agreed. Changes included referring to the Briton as “Ms Maxwell” rather than “the defendant” and refining when specific age cutoffs would be used instead of “minor”, in references to alleged victims. Maxwell’s lawyers had lobbied for stricter language surrounding descriptions of sex-trafficking. Maxwell, 59, was apprehended in New Hampshire in July 2020. She is being tried on six counts in relation to alleged involvement in Jeffrey Epstein’s sexual abuse of minor teens. Maxwell has pleaded not guilty. She alluded to this on Friday, telling Nathan she would not take the stand in her own defense. “Your honor,” she said, “the government has not proven its case beyond a reasonable doubt, and so there is no need for me to testify.” Epstein, Maxwell’s long-term boyfriend and a convicted sex offender, counted Prince Andrew and former presidents Bill Clinton and Donald Trump as associates before killing himself in a New York jail in 2019, while awaiting his own sex trafficking trial. Maxwell’s defense rested on Friday. One of their key witnesses was Eva Dubin, a former Miss Sweden. Dubin testified that she dated Epstein on and off from 1983 to about 1991, and traveled with him on his private planes. Following her marriage in 1994, she said, they stayed friendly. Dubin also said she and her husband were comfortable with the relationship between their children – two girls and a boy – and Epstein. “They called him ‘Uncle F’,” she said, adding that she never saw Epstein engage in inappropriate conduct with teenage girls. Closing arguments are scheduled to begin on Monday. Nathan told attorneys she wanted outstanding legal issues worked out, warning: “I don’t want objections during closings.” Maxwell’s lawyers have contended that she is a surrogate for Epstein, who cannot be prosecuted in death. On Friday, Nathan told Maxwell’s lawyers: “There will be no argument on the government’s motivations.”Last year, when Josh Western and Andrew Bacon set up their company Space Forge, they had a garage to work in and little else. Today, the two Cardiff-based entrepreneurs have a staff of 25 and are now planning further expansion after raising £7.6m of international seed-funding. The financing – to be announced later this week – should allow the company to start a remarkable aerospace endeavour: deploying satellites in which new alloys, medicines and semiconductors can be manufactured in outer space and then brought back to Earth. The first missions are now planned for the end of 2022. “Earth is a wonderful place to live on but terrible for manufacturing so many things,” said Western. “You have to fight gravity and the dense atmosphere while trying not to cause pollution. But in space you have no gravity to interfere with the mixing of materials, while you have a pure vacuum and no atmospheric pollution. And you also turn your instruments towards or away from the Sun to heat or cool them rapidly.” Getting into space is the issue. Space Forge, which has already received backing from the UK Space Agency and the European Space Agency, believes its reusable factories will provide the answer. These oven-sized craft, called ForgeStar orbital vehicles, will be launched into orbit more than 300 miles above Earth. They will exploit the simple launch systems that aerospace companies such as Virgin Orbit are developing. Small rockets are carried into the upper atmosphere on jumbo jets and then fired into space. Once in orbit, ForgeStar vehicles will circle Earth for one to six months. Inside the little craft, automated robotic systems will direct the manufacturing and testing of alloys, pharmaceuticals and electronic components that cannot be made on Earth. It should transform the way materials are manufactured in microgravity. “Experiments on the International Space Station have shown the value of space manufacture,” said Western. “Fluoride glass fibres used in communication systems provide an example. Made on Earth, they tend to be a bit cloudy. Those made on the space station are crystal clear and 10 to 100 times better at transmitting signals. “Our ForgeStar vehicles are designed to make materials like that.” This week, Space Forge will release details of the finances it has raised from US, UK and other investors, including the US-based SpaceFund and the Berlin-based World Fund, which backs companies pioneering new green technologies. “Clearly, international investors are impressed,” said Paul Bate, chief executive of the UK Space Agency. “The investment was four times oversubscribed and millions of pounds secured to support the company on the next steps of its journey.” This point was backed by Western. “Hopefully, we will now be able to get our first ForgeStar into space by the end of 2022.”Picture the chaos at the next general election. Officials refuse to allow voters into polling stations because the Johnson government has denied democratic rights to everyone who cannot or will not produce photo ID. Some are angry because they don’t have the required documents. Others sound paranoid as they tell reporters they don’t want to show passports and driving licences because they fear state surveillance. If nothing else, Covid has taught us the extent of the conspiratorial mentality. On election day the government reveals it is content to encourage a climate of paranoia, if it will give the Conservatives an advantage. Trust in the integrity of the election withers as the scale of voter suppression becomes apparent. Last Monday, the Commons public administration and constitutional affairs committee, chaired, I must emphasise, by a Conservative MP, William Wragg, said that if Northern Ireland were a guide, ID checks would cause turnout to drop by 2.3%. On this measure, the Tories would disfranchise about one million of the 47.6 million people registered to vote. Unlike Northern Ireland, the rest of the UK has no record of sectarian gerrymandering and civil war to justify controls. The facts of recent history do not concern Michael Gove. He has pursued vote rigging with Gollum-like obsessiveness since 2019. His oppressive intent is evident in the failure to produce proof that frauds are turning up at polling stations and stealing the identities of honest citizens. The protests of people denied the ballot would be everywhere in the media if that scare story were true. As it is, there was only one conviction for impersonation after the 2019 election, and the Commons committee described the government’s pretence that there was a hidden epidemic of voter fraud as “simply not good enough”. It is evident in the speed with which the government is forcing its elections bill through parliament. It is evident in the lack of public consultation and bipartisan support. It is evident, above all, in the government’s choice of targets. In a satirical twist, the Conservatives have assigned the task of ending the level playing field of free and fair elections to Gove’s Department for Levelling Up. They believe people without driving licences or passports will be poor and less likely to vote Conservative. I wouldn’t count on that in every Leaver town, and nor do ministers. They are leaving nothing to chance. Expats, who are more likely than not to be Tories, will be able to vote, however long they have lived abroad. All foreign nationals will be denied the vote, however long they have lived in the UK. People over 60, who disproportionately vote Conservative, will be able to use their travel passes as photo ID. The young, who don’t, won’t. If this were happening in Hungary or Zimbabwe, we would know what to say: a corrupt clique was bending the rules to maintain its power. We don’t know what to say when election rigging happens in our own country because a self-satisfaction born of the UK’s lucky history holds that “it can’t happen here”. Even when it is happening here. Protests about the elections bill are confined to a nerdish group of politicians, journalists and academics. The fate of the Electoral Commission ought to shake the complacent. Boris Johnson is threatening the independence of the referee that protects against corruption. The elections bill allows ministers to set the “strategy and policy” the commission must follow. The government claims it has been forced to act because of loss of confidence in the commission. The Commons investigation said there was no more evidence that the public had lost faith in the commission than there was of hordes of frauds at polling stations. It warned instead of the danger of the government abusing its power to help it stay in office, even if abuse means undermining “public confidence in the effective and independent regulation of the electoral system”. We risk becoming like the US where every vote is disputed by the losing side, and impartial arbiters are replaced with political lackeys. Indeed, we are already on that path. Whether in the courts, broadcasting or the regulatory system, undermining checks and balances has been the modus operandi of this government. The scandal that led to the Conservatives losing North Shropshire began when the cabinet organised an assault on Kathryn Stone, the parliamentary commissioner for standards. She found against Owen Paterson for promoting companies that were paying him £110,000 a year for his bespoke services. Johnson, himself the subject of Stone’s inquiries, wanted the rules changed to give him and his colleagues more freedom to sponge at will. Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, showed his unfitness for public office by saying he found it “difficult” to see how Stone’s career could survive such an impertinence. Stone saw off her enemies. By contrast, Lord Geidt, Johnson’s ministerial standards adviser, now cuts a pathetic figure. The credulous man actually believed the prime minister when he said he knew nothing about a businessman buddy, Lord Brownlow, paying for the refurbishment of his Downing Street flat until the media mentioned it in February 2021. A scrupulous investigation by the electoral commission found Johnson was tapping Brownlow for money in November 2020. Now Johnson wants to punish the Electoral Commission. On Tuesday, Wragg wrote to Geidt to ask how he was independent when he did not appear to have the power to conduct proper investigations. “What steps are open to you if you feel that, in the course of an investigation, you may have been misled?” The answer this government wants to hear is “none”, and not only from Geidt. Once cautious Conservatives worried that, if they used their majority in parliament to hound their enemies, their opponents would one day turn the weapons they forged on the right. Perhaps today’s Conservatives believe there will never be a Labour government that treats the Tory press the way they treat the BBC, or twist the rule of law and regulation of elections to suit the Labour rather than the Tory cause. After the revival of Labour and Liberal Democrat fortunes, you might find it ludicrous for Conservatives to think they can be in power for ever. If so, I urge you to look at how they are playing with electoral law to give themselves the best possible chance of doing just that. • Nick Cohen is an Observer columnistI have spent a lot of time picking up rocks. This is not what I dreamed about doing as we sat in Melbourne during the city’s sixth lockdown and waited out the three-month settlement period to move to our new farm in central Victoria. That time was spent on cottagecore fantasies and planning out wildly unrealistic renovation schedules. Then we took possession in October and I’ve been picking up rocks ever since. Rocks and sticks and, for one particularly disgusting week before we had scrubbed down the house, a series of dead starlings that had become stuck in the fireplace and under the oven. My back hurts. My knees hurt. My knuckles are cracked and bleeding. I’ve never been happier. The farm is not really a farm. It’s barely 15 acres – not even enough to be called a hobby block. It came complete with an extraordinary array of sheds and what to me is a classic Australian farmhouse. By which I mean it is a moderately ugly, poorly-aspected collection of enclosed verandahs, complete with accordion door off the living room and old lino that has worn away under the kitchen sink from hours and hours spent washing dishes. Add 300 novelty teapots and it could be my grandparents’ house. To most people at the open house inspection, including my partner, it was a knock-down job. He’s since come around. Once we cleaned it up and got rid of the dead birds it was quite comfortable. You can barely tell there were once goats living inside. Officially, we decided to move to the country and buy a farm in May. Unofficially, I decided when I was three that I wanted to live on a farm and own horses, and all the work that my parents did to convince me otherwise, work that I steadily reinforced throughout adulthood, crumbled in the face of a global pandemic. It was very important, when I finished high school, to move to the city and leave my country upbringing behind. But now the world was ending and I didn’t even have a pony. What was the point of any of it? An absurdly privileged position, but there you have it. People were dying, and I wanted a pony. Before Covid, moving to the country to get a horse felt like a career-killing move. It took a pandemic and nationwide work from home orders to convince me – and thousands of other city-types who moved regionally in the past two years – that it might be possible to keep working and live where we wanted to live. And that, if we were going to try to have both our careers and our preferred lifestyle, we may as well do it now rather than waiting for that fantastical moment when things would be more settled, when the mortgage would be less crushing, the renovations more affordable. So we leapt before we were ready, before we could change our minds. Everything on the farm needs fixing and the cost of fixing anything seems to come to about $3,000. We’ve started referring to $3,000 as one farm unit. A new water tank is one farm unit. Fixing the gutters is one farm unit. Installing solar is two farm units. A secondhand ute is five farm units, so we’re carting fenceposts in my three door Kia Rio. We have got the important costs covered. I bought the horse (one farm unit) in the first week. His name is Mickey. Then we got a friend for Mickey, named Rev. We’re currently considering getting a third horse to be a friend for Rev. This is horse maths, a person on Twitter told me. The correct number of horses is always n+1, where n is the number sitting in the paddock right now. Sometimes, if it is warm and I interrupt Mickey’s nap, he lets me sit next to him while he sleeps. He stretches out in the sun in a daily ritual that, thanks to a horse on Tiktok called Squidward, we call carcass time. And I don’t know, really, how I convinced myself for so long that I didn’t want this life. Mickey is very good at locating rocks. He steps on them all. And I follow behind picking them up.Two nationally significant wetlands in far north New South Wales will be added to the national parks estate as part of a 33,000ha land purchase by the state government, Guardian Australia can reveal. The property, Brindingabba-Bindra, is 150km north of Bourke in the Cuttaburra basin, and part of the Paroo and the Warrego floodplains in the Murray-Darling’s northern basin. The acquisition includes the Lake Wombah wetlands on the Queensland border, and more than 7,000ha of the Yantabulla Swamp. These wetlands are a vital breeding ground and habitat for birdlife, including black swans, pink-eared ducks, herons and Australia’s rarest waterfowl, the freckled duck. The wetlands are estimated to host some 70,000 waterbirds, as well as an array of small native mammals and insects. NSW National Parks have also confirmed that the property is home to a rare and endangered marsupial, the kultarr – a small sandy coloured mouse-like mammal with a white belly. Other threatened species include the grey-crowned babbler, the hooded robin and the brolga. The area is traditional country for the Budjiti and Barkandji people, and the property is believed to contain extensive evidence of cultural artefacts and other items of significance. “With this acquisition, 597,000 hectares have now been reserved or acquired for reservation since March 2019 –an increase of 8.3% to our national parks estate,” the NSW environment minister, Matt Kean, said. The acquisition is the latest in a series of land purchases since 2019, which brought to an end the long hiatus in national parks estate acquisition since the Coalition took power in NSW more than a decade ago. Since 2019, the NSW government has added almost 600,000ha of land to its conservation estate, nearly tripling its initial target of 200,000ha by 2022, and bringing the state closer to its historical average of approximately one million hectares a decade. The acquisition has been met with enthusiasm by environmental scientists. Prof Richard Kingsford, river ecologist and conservation biologist at the University of NSW, said the wetlands in the area were “magnificent”. “This is part of the Murray-Darling that’s in really good health and that’s largely because there’s no river development upstream, and Queensland and NSW have agreed to keep that a free-flowing river,” Kingsford said. “It’s a really great example of prevention being better than cure in terms of conservation.” Kingsford said he had been surprised by the government’s increased national parks estate acquisitions, but said it was good to see the program targeting areas that have not been traditionally well-represented, such as arid and semi-arid zones. Wetlands are vital habitat for threatened and endangered species and, because many of the more remote locations haven’t been intensively studied, there will likely be “surprises in terms of biodiversity” at the new sites, Kingsford said. “It’s always one of the challenging things with conservation, to add to the protected area estate, but it’s one of the most important ways of carrying out conservation,” Kingsford said. Guardian Australia has previously reported concerns that the state’s national parks service would require significantly more resourcing to manage the increased estate properly.Australia could take until well into next year to hit an 80% booster vaccination rate, with the rollout currently ranking almost last out of 70 countries, Guardian analysis shows. Boosters are now available to anyone who has had a second dose of a Covid vaccine more than five months ago. However, Australia’s slow initial vaccine rollout meant that more than half of all second doses were administered in the final four months of 2021. So with a five-month dosing interval, the people who received their second doses late in 2021 won’t be eligible for a booster until February. Experts warn that a shorter interval between second and booster doses could mean the immune response is not as high or long lasting. “We do know from evidence from the first two doses that a longer interval between the first dose and second dose gives you higher antibodies, higher protection,” says Cyra Patel, a PhD candidate at the Australian National University. “And that is consistent with our knowledge of immunology as well. We have seen that with other vaccines a longer interval gives you a better boosting effect. It’s really a balance between getting you protection from another dose earlier and giving you better protection if you have a longer interval.” Analysis of vaccination data shows that roughly the same number of people have now had booster shots as were fully vaccinated about 170 days ago. This means the booster rate is still on track with a six-month interval. The move to a five-month gap has increased the daily booster rate from about 20,000 a day to more than 100,000. But the Christmas break could see this rate slow again as distribution points close or scale down. Australia’s booster shot program kicked off at the beginning of November, initially targeting those in residential aged care and disability facilities. Booster shots were available to anyone over the age of 18 who had received their second dose at least six months prior. Patel says the initial six-month interval came from the clinical trials. “That’s the time period that the clinical trials use. So we have got clear evidence and that has been reviewed by the TGA and other regulators that definitely at six months you are definitely going to see a boosting effect.” The Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisations (Atagi) recently reduced the recommended period between doses from six to five months. Other countries have cut the dosing interval even further in response to the Omicron variant, either because there is more virus circulating in their communities or because they are heading into winter. Both Ireland and Sri Lanka are administering boosters to those who had a second shot at least three months ago. “Some of those decisions about shortening it to three months are based on expert opinion about the amount of disease that is circulating, about creating access to vaccines and taking away some of the barriers to getting the booster dose,” says Patel. “But there really is not much evidence that a booster dose at three months is better than six months.” Israel and Iceland are building on their initially successful vaccine rollouts, and have already administered boosters to more than 60% of the fully vaccinated population. Australia has administered Covid boosters to 5% of the population. Of the almost 70 countries for which there is data on booster shots, Australia ranks near the bottom. Vaccination data shows fewer than 170,000 people had been fully vaccinated at least six months before the booster program began. Since then the number of people receiving boosters has tracked roughly in line with the initial vaccination rollout. The government says reducing the gap to five months means that almost 4 million people will be eligible to receive a booster dose by the end of the year. But Australia will come nowhere close to this mark at the current rate of around 100,000 boosters administered per day.What Almas Nizamidin knows of his wife’s arrest and disappearance is second-hand: the harried reports relayed by his relatives as it rapidly unfolded. The police came for Buzainafu Abudourexiti at her home in Ürümqi as she was travelling to a doctor’s appointment on 29 March 2017. Her family called, she cancelled her appointment and hurried home. There, the police shoved a bag over her head, forced her into a car and drove her away. Her husband, her family, and her friends have not seen her since. She remains incarcerated in Xinjiang Women’s Prison, sentenced to seven years’ jail on “disturbing social order” charges her family says are baseless. The purpose of the doctor’s visit that day was to confirm what she’d earlier discovered with a home test: she was pregnant with her first child. The fate of that unborn baby is unknown. But half a decade and half a world away, Nizamidin is certain his child was lost. “My wife was newly pregnant, very new. Maybe she was shocked by the arrest and lost the baby or maybe … I believe they performed a forced abortion. That’s what they do to Uyghur women, to our people in that place.” ‘I have to speak out’ It’s a sunny Adelaide morning when the Guardian speaks with Nizamidin under the shade of a eucalypt, in a park close to his home. “It’s a very quiet city,” he says. “But beautiful, very peaceful. Every day, I love it.” It is a joyous day for the Uyghur community of 300-or-so families in the city. That afternoon there is a wedding, a “big celebration”, Nizamidin says, a chance for his people to be together in happiness. But these are occasions laden with sadness for Nizamidin. He has not seen his wife in nearly five years. “Even the photos I have, they are from five years ago,” he says quietly. “Sometimes, I feel really guilty. My parents, my love, they are forced into detention. They can’t even see the sunshine. I feel really guilty for them, that I can’t bring them here. “It hurts. Always. Even if you’re living in a free country, inside you’re not free. Something is catching you, you know? That’s why I speak out, for them, I have to.” Nizamidin and Abudourexiti were high school sweethearts in Ürümqi, the capital of Xinjiang province, in China’s northwest. The province is the ancestral home of China’s Uyghur people, a Sunni Muslim population of nearly 12 million people of Turkic origins, who have faced decades of systemic political and cultural oppression by the Chinese state. In 2009, protests over worker deaths turned riotous in Ürümqi, and the resulting chaos left hundreds of Han Chinese and Uyghur people dead. Then in his final year of high school, Nizamidin had been a part of the initial demonstrations and his family feared the brutal police crackdown that was spreading across the city. Already repressive in Ürümqi “it became like an open prison”. His parents urged him to flee, hurriedly scraping together a large chunk of their savings - the equivalent of $40,000, “enough for a house in China” - to pay for a student visa and travel to Australia. They urged him to seek asylum there. Nizamidin’s claim for protection was recognised by Australia in 2010: he faced a well-founded fear of being persecuted in his homeland, and could not be returned there. He became an Australian citizen in 2014. Throughout it all, he and Abudourexiti remained dedicated to each other. She studied, first in Wuhan, then at the Al-Azhar University in Cairo. On graduation, she and Nizamidin reunited - and married - in their home town in 2016. The couple applied for a partner visa so Abudourexiti could join her new husband in Australia. On 14 February - Valentine’s Day - 2017, Nizamidin surprised Abudourexiti with an unannounced visit to China. He stayed a month, before returning to Australia: “I wanted to rent a house, to get some furniture, make everything ready. We were making plans”. At the end of the next month Nizamidin received the phone call: his wife had been arrested. No one could tell him where she was. A frantic return to China - flying first to Urumqi, then Aksu, 1,000 kilometres away, and back to Urumqi - yielded little information from officials, save for vague assertions on her whereabouts and welfare from bribed police. Nizamidin was told his wife had been arrested on a political charge - its exact nature was a “state secret” - and she had no right to legal representation. Abudourexiti was held for three months without trial, before, at the end of June, she was brought before a court, and tried and convicted in a mass trial alongside dozens of other women, none of whom were allowed lawyers. She was sentenced to seven years in prison for “assembling a crowd to disturb social order”. The allegations against his wife are a “groundless and blatant fabrication”, Nizamidin says. His wife is introverted to the point of shyness, he says, and the allegations “impossible”. Nizamidin believes his wife was arrested because of her Islamic studies in Egypt, and says her detention is part of a broader suppression of religious freedom in Xinjiang by the Chinese government. The day after Abudourexiti’s sentencing, Nizamidin was summoned to the local police station. He was told he had 24 hours to leave China or he would be arrested. He was told he should tell no one about his wife’s detention. ‘We know what’s happening’ Nizamidin has defiantly refused to do that. He has spoken out with the support of Amnesty International, and told his story to journalists. Last year, he gave evidence to a UK House of Commons inquiry into detention camps in Xinjiang. Nizamidin has urged the Australian government to do more to help reunite his family. Every year he visits Canberra, tirelessly walking the corridors of parliament house, beseeching political support from ministers and backbenchers alike. “I talk, and people listen, and they feel very sorry for me. But I don’t know why they can’t follow that with action.” Nizamidin’s father left Xinjiang for the US, fearing increasing repression in Xinjiang. But in January 2018, Nizamidin’s mother, a retired former maths teacher, was detained too. The charge against her was identical to that laid against her daughter-in-law, “disturbing the social order”, but she was never tried, sentenced or sent to prison. Instead she was arbitrarily detained for 22 months, forced to undergo ‘re-education’, to work in a factory. She was released, after nearly two years, to home confinement. She cannot leave China, and remains under surveillance. Her communication with her son remains monitored by the Chinese state. In 2019, Abudourexiti was granted a single telephone call, a harried three-minute conversation with Nizamidin’s mother, during which Abudourexiti sobbed and repeatedly apologised. “She was crying,” Nizamidin says. “And she was saying, ‘sorry, it’s my fault, I shouldn’t do these things’. They were forcing her to say something. “They gave her only three minutes, just to let me know she’s alive.” Nizamidin says commitments from countries like Australia to ‘diplomatically’ boycott February’s winter Olympics in Beijing are desperately insufficient. Australia will still compete in the Games, but will not send any officials or diplomats as a protest against China’s human rights record. Nizamidin says Australia should boycott entirely, send no athletes, refuse any participation which might give the games legitimacy. “China is committing genocide, is killing people, and the world wants to play games with China? The world must boycott. “They shouldn’t join the Games, they shouldn’t even broadcast the sport on TV. As long as countries join the games, they are supporting the genocide. And all the governments, everyone around the world, they know exactly what’s happening to Uyghurs in Xinjiang.” Australia, he says, needs to call out what overwhelming evidence before it shows to be true. “I believe that the Australian government can do more than what it is doing. It should start by accusing China of committing genocide. Because we know that is happening.” A bill from independent senator Rex Patrick to ban imports of goods made through the use of forced labour - designed out of concern over products made in Xinjiang forced labour camps - passed the Australian senate in August. But it does not have government support, and won’t pass the lower house to become law. The economic levers are powerful, Nizamidin argues. Consumers have a power rarely realised, he says. “Boycott ‘made in China’, that’s what we can all do. Don’t buy any products from China. Maybe they are made by my wife or my mother. We don’t know.” The evidence of Chinese crimes against humanity is stark and growing. In January, the US government said it had determined there was an “ongoing … genocide” occurring in China. “We are witnessing the systematic attempt to destroy Uyghurs by the Chinese party-state,” then secretary of state Mike Pompeo said. Congress this week passed the Uygur Forced Labour Prevention Act, which bans the import of all goods from Xinjiang unless companies offer verifiable proof their production did not involve slavery. Also this week, an independent UK-based Uyghur Tribunal released a judgment that found Uyghurs living in Xinjiang province were subjected to crimes against humanity, including genocide, directed by the Chinese state. The tribunal found evidence of torture, as well as suppression of births in an effort to destroy all or part of the Uyghur population in China. Sophie Richardson, China director of Human Rights Watch, said while the ‘tools’ with which countries could respond to Chinese repression were still inadequate, there were more available now “than there were one, three, five years ago”. “We are starting to slowly see different and important actors say ‘there are going to be consequences, there are going to be costs’. “Governments that are clearly shown to be committing crimes against humanity must face consequences. It shouldn’t matter that it’s the second-most powerful nation on earth: no state is above the law.” Amnesty International has described Xinjiang as a “dystopian hellscape” for hundreds of thousands of detained Uyghurs. Amnesty campaigner Tim O’Connor said one of the most difficult aspects of what was happening inside Xinjiang was that independent observers and investigators were not permitted into the region. “Amnesty has collected a huge amount of first-person evidence, including the experiences of Almas and his wife Buzainafu, which is vitally important for the world to understand the scale and human cost of the hundreds of thousands of Muslim minority men and women subjected to mass internment and torture.” China has consistently denied accusations of oppression in Xinjiang and said its camps were designed to offer Chinese language lessons, vocational training and job support, as well as to combat religious extremism. The Chinese state has sought to discredit accusers, such as Nizamidin, and promotes Xinjiang as a “wonderful land”. It has consistently refused journalists and human rights groups unfettered access to the region and dismisses investigative findings and Uyghur testimony as lies. Questions put by the Guardian to the Chinese government regarding Abudourexiti’s detention received no response. In Adelaide, Nizamidin longs to see his wife again. He says he does not fear retribution for speaking out. “They have taken my wife, my child, and my mother from me. What else can they do to me?”Corals across large parts of the Great Barrier Reef could be hit by mass bleaching for the fourth time in just seven years by the end of January, according to a forecast from a United States government agency. Reef scientists are hoping that favourable weather, including cloud cover and rain or a cyclone, could yet cool corals and stave off the threat. The US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (Noaa) forecast shows heat accumulating in northern and central parts of the reef will be high enough for corals to start bleaching by late January. Forecasting from the Bureau of Meteorology also shows heat building over the world-heritage-listed reef in January. Dr David Wachenfeld, chief scientist at the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority, said water temperatures were currently above average “almost everywhere”, with some areas 2C warmer. He said: “The situation at the moment is not what we want, but in a world with a changed climate it’s not surprising.” He said neither the Noaa or BoM forecasts were able to predict cyclones which can quickly lower temperatures. “I wish for cloud and rain,” he said. Australia’s cyclone season is considered to run from November to April and the eastern side of the country, including the reef, gets an average of four cyclones per year. The Bureau of Meteorology says there is only a slight chance of more than the average number of cyclones this current season. A spokesperson said the bureau’s ocean outlook “is indicating increased thermal stress on the Great Barrier Reef for the remainder of the year and January 2022, reducing in February”. According to Noaa’s forecast, delivered through its Coral Reef Watch service, by the third week of January sections of the reef from just south of Airlie Beach to the tip of Cape York – a distance of about 1,300 kilometres – will likely be bleaching. By mid-February, the forecast shows large areas from Cairns upwards would be at “Alert Level 2” – the highest level of heat stress where coral mortality is considered likely. Australia’s climate is currently under the influence of a La Niña weather pattern and Wachenfeld said this would typically deliver more cloud and rain to the reef’s waters. “But we have just not seen that yet this summer. We’re hoping those typical La Niña conditions will kick in. The weather events over the next few weeks are critical.” Coral bleaching is a stress reaction from excess heat. The process sees corals separate from a special algae that gives them their colour and much of their nutrients. Corals can recover from less severe bleaching, but studies suggest those that do survive are weakened. Although 2020 was the most widespread bleaching on record, Wachenfeld said the heat levels were not as intense as previous events and so with low levels of coral mortality, the reef had been given several years to recover. The Australian Institute of Marine Science’s latest reef condition report showed 2021 was a “low disturbance year” with a rise in the amount of corals. But this increase in coral cover was dominated by weaker fast-growing species prone to bleaching. Prof Peter Mumby, of the University of Queensland, said the reef was in a critical period for recovery, but he was concerned by the Noaa forecast “particularly because they tend to be quite conservative”. “Everyone is feeling a bit depressed at the prospect of another bleaching event,” he said. Dr Selina Ward, the academic director of the University of Queensland’s Heron Island research station, said: “I’m always worried when I see temperatures go up and stay up. “This Noaa forecast suggests we’re likely to have a bleaching event and it would come earlier in the summer than we would expect.” Prof Terry Hughes, of James Cook University’s ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies, is a coral bleaching expert who surveys the reef during bleaching events. The Great Barrier Reef has seen five mass bleaching events – 1998, 2002, 2016, 2017 and 2020 – all caused by rising ocean temperatures driven by global heating. One study led by Hughes in November found only 2% of individual reefs along the 2,300 kilometre system had escaped bleaching since 1998. Hughes said the Noaa forecast was unusual in that it was predicting an early onset of bleaching concentrated in the north. But he said the forecast was also suggesting a rapid reduction in heat in early March which would help corals survive. But he said historically an El Niño weather pattern – the hotter and drier alternative to La Niña – would trigger bleaching. “It’s scary that we no longer need an El Niño to trigger a mass bleaching event – we just need another heatwave, driven by global heating. “Across the tropics, average sea temperatures today during La Niña periods are hotter than they used to be during El Niños 30 years ago.” He said the Bureau of Meteorology’s forecast was “more benign” than Noaa’s, but temperatures across the reef had been about a degree above average for the past month. “With La Niña conditions building, we hope that the reef will dodge the bullet for another year,” he said. He said if northern parts of the reef did bleach again this summer, young corals that have started to grow in recent years would be at risk. Prof Tom Bridge, an ecologist and reef scientist at the Museum of Tropical Queensland, said the Noaa forecasts did not make him any more or less worried about the prospect of bleaching as any other year. “It’s now hotter every year,” he said. “Every summer now we are running this gauntlet where bleaching is dependent on the vagaries of the weather like rains and cyclones and heatwaves.” Research last month suggested parts of the reef would be hit with temperatures high enough to kill corals five years per decade by the middle of this century if global heating was kept below 2C. Science advisers at Unesco have said earlier this year the reef should be placed on a list of world heritage sites “in danger” but fierce lobbying from the Morrison government has delayed a decision until at least June next year. Coral reefs are considered one of the most susceptible ecosystems to the climate crisis. The Morrison government has been asked to send a progress report to Unesco by February next year. Unesco is yet to schedule a monitoring mission to the reef, expected in the first half of next year. On Friday, lawyers representing three young Queenslanders wrote to the 21-country world heritage committee, urging it to place the reef on the “in danger” list when it next meets in June in Russia.Last week a photo series popped up on my Facebook Memories, dated December 2017. That was the year I decided to go Full Martha Stewart on the Christmas trimmings and trappings. I had clearly fallen into some hardcore Pinterest hole and decided to make my own decorations. I carefully cut and dehydrated about 50 orange slices, before gluing on cinnamon sticks and star anise, attaching jaunty red and gold ribbons and hanging them on the tree. I also made salt dough, diligently pressing lace patterns into its surface before baking it into rather pale, flabby-looking stars. It took forever and it was a massive pain for someone who has much more ambition than talent on the craft front, but it was all very pretty and whimsical (at least until the ants got wind of the oranges). Yet this year, despite it being the “Freedom Christmas” for so many of us in terms of relaxed restrictions and reunions with loved ones, the urge to “prettify” the season simply isn’t there for me. I don’t want to wrap everything in ribbons or pile on the décor. I’ve whacked up an old wreath from years ago on to the front door, and all my gifts will be unassuming vouchers – experiences rather than tangible things – and short on the gaudy boxes and bows. Because this year Christmas doesn’t feel like it needs to be visual. The baubles and bagatelles – all carefully filtered and documented on Facebook and Instagram – aren’t the point. This year it feels more about touch and sound than sights. The sound of each other’s voices. Laughter – even, or perhaps especially, at a dumb Christmas cracker joke. Hugs. The wild novelty of being in a room with other people. My Christmas Day (touch wood) will be spent at my in-laws, but not with a formal sit down dinner – this year it’s about bringing a plate and simply being in a room together. That’s all the mistletoe and holly I need. I expect I’m not alone. Last Sunday I stopped in for a late breakfast at a cafe in the centre of Sydney. All around me, people were delightedly greeting friends they clearly hadn’t seen for a long time. The rounds of champagne and frocks told me that Christmas was the occasion for most of these groups, but no one was draped in bauble earrings or reindeer ears. There were no gifts. The cafe had no trees or trimmings anywhere. We were all simply there, and loving every second. Then there are people who are simply feeling too battered and bruised by the past two years to get in any sort of Christmas spirit at all. Entirely legit. When you’re reflecting and grieving, who has the bandwidth to wire up the front yard with light-up sleighs and Santas? As the states each begin to dip their toe into the brave new world called “opening up”, all of us live with the fear that Christmas could get cancelled again. Planeloads of holidaymakers flying into Queensland this week were plunged back into isolation, even if they were hastily snatched back out again by a merciful Premier Palaszczuk. In New South Wales, the masks are coming down just as the cases are going up. No one wants to be left gazing morosely at a Frosty the Snowman candle and a tinsel-strewn tablescape if there’s no one there to share it with. If, like many of us, you’re limping to the end of the past torturous two years with the realisation that you haven’t decked any kind of hall in any kind of way, give yourself a break. Sit back. Hang out. Slow down. Nap. Chat. Eat. Definitely eat. This year, Christmas is about people not pressure. And may your people manage to be with you wherever you are.Outgoing competition regulator Rod Sims says foreign companies that do business in Australia have no excuse for ignoring the nation’s consumer protection laws, warning there will be more big fines for breaches in the future. In an interview, he also said that due to the damage done to supply chains by the resurgence of Covid-19, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission was once again giving companies permission to cooperate in ways that would normally be against the law. And he said efforts to force big tech companies to negotiate commercial deals with media outlets had been extremely successful and defended his campaign to make big mergers harder. Sims, an economist by training, will finish as chair of the ACCC after five terms in office spanning 11 years, making him the regulator’s longest-serving boss. He will be replaced by Gina Cass-Gottlieb, a competition lawyer who has represented companies in stoushes with the ACCC. Bigger fines Sims has been a campaigning chair, successfully pushing for increases to fines for breaches of Australian consumer protection laws in 2018 and more recently launching a campaign to make it easier for the ACCC to block mergers – a proposal for which the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, lacks enthusiasm. The ACCC chair said the increased fines meant companies could no longer shrug off penalties for breaching Australian consumer law as a cost of doing business. He contrasted an $11m fine imposed on Flight Centre under the old law (increased to $12.5m after the ACCC appealed), with the record $125m penalty against Volkswagen for deceiving customers and breaching diesel emissions standards and the $50m ordered against Telstra earlier this year for signing up more than 100 Indigenous Australians to mobile phone contracts they did not understand and could not afford. The ACCC is currently waiting for a court to decide on the size of a penalty hotel booking website Trivago should pay after it was found to have misled consumers by promising to show them the cheapest rooms but in fact favouring operators who paid it the most. It is seeking a $90m fine while Trivago has argued it should pay just $15m. “When you breach the law and you get a penalty that’s low, compared to the size of the company, it sends a signal to everybody that it just doesn’t matter,” Sims said. “So you’ve got to get everyone sitting up and saying, ‘Wow, they must have done something bad, look at that penalty.’ “So it’s hugely important and something we’ll be pushing even more in the years ahead.” Pandemic response Sims has also spent much of the past two years dealing with the coronavirus crisis, including by taking measures to keep supermarket shelves full by giving Coles, Woolworths and other operators authorisation to cooperate with each other in ways that would normally be against the law. It’s work that continues thanks to the Omicron variant causing a new surge in case numbers and a global logistics crisis that has caused Christmas shortages. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning At the peak of the crisis the ACCC granted 30 authorisations in three weeks, “which was a 16-hour day massive effort by a lot of people because normally we would do 30 of those in a year,” Sims said. “We thought those would finish about now. “But what’s happening now is we’re also getting continuing requests for those authorisations both in health – hospitals working together or medical supplies and that sort of stuff – and in logistics, you know, we just can’t move this stuff.” Taking on big tech 2021 was also the year Sims and the Morrison government picked a fight with big tech companies including Google and Facebook over their dominance of the media market. In an extraordinary act of corporate petulance, Facebook banned news from its site in Australia over a code that would require them to negotiate payments to media companies. The social media multinational reversed course after the government amended the code. Since its introduction Google and Facebook have struck deals to pay media companies, including Guardian Australia, for their news content. Sims said the code had been “stunningly successful” and estimated the deals have pumped “well north of $200m a year” into the Australian media industry. He rejected criticism that the code allows big tech to avoid negotiating deals with smaller media companies. “There are a few small players that haven’t yet got deals,” he said. “They are very small. And while on the one hand, I think they should get deals, it’s pretty hard to rate the bargaining code a failure when the companies that employ 98% of journalists – I’m making up the number – got deals.” Merger ‘long game’ While Sims and the government worked closely on the code, his pleas for reform of merger laws have so far fallen on deaf ears. Sims said the ACCC wins 85% of its cases but when it comes to trying to block takeovers in court, the strike rate drops to zero. “We’ve lost about eight in the last 20 years and we haven’t won one but keep in mind, we still do stop four to five mergers a year that just go away because they know they can’t take us on and win in court and we get remedies in four or five other cases where people have to divest important assets,” he said. He wants law reform to make it easier for the ACCC to win by lowering the standard the regulator has to meet – it currently has to prove a merger would “substantially lessen competition” – and would also like to make it compulsory for would-be corporate suitors to notify him before consummating their marriage. The lack of enthusiasm from the current government does not bother him. “I said deliberately, while I put this out there, that this is a post-election issue because the government is consumed by – as they should be – the pandemic,” he said. “So I think this debate is, it’s got off to a good start. It’s a long game.”Backpackers who are being deported from Australia for submitting fake work details in visa applications arranged by a third party over email say they resorted to the scheme because there was not enough farm work for them to comply with their visa conditions. Backpackers on a working holiday visa must show they have worked for 88 days in specified occupations in regional or remote Australia, if they want to extend their stay beyond 12 months. The operator providing the visa application service, known as “Golden Fish” because of their email handle, appears to have been targeting backpackers from the UK, offering to provide false work information as part of visa applications for working holiday makers at a cost of $1,000 each. In one email exchange seen by Guardian Australia, Golden Fish said they had been operating since 2009. Golden Fish’s email address has been shared around by word of mouth for years, according to one backpacker who used the service. Once backpackers contact it, they are asked to fill out a 29-point questionnaire and to transfer $1,000 once the visa has been approved. Another email outlined what happens next. “When we lodge your application, immigration contact farm owner and check your details,” the email said. “After that, most of [the] cases would be approved but sometimes immigration request further information. We will respond upon their request so there is nothing to worry about from your end. “If anything happens we will act on [your] behalf,” Golden Fish said. It is unclear how many people used Golden Fish’s services, but Guardian Australia is aware of almost 20 set to be deported for using fake documentation. One Irish backpacker who used Golden Fish and is currently appealing his deportation said it was common practice. “This is huge, it’s everyone I know,” he said. When Australia’s international border was shut due to Covid-19, the agricultural industry complained about a shortage or workers – but some working holiday visa holders who remained in the country say they struggled to find enough work. Some said farmers were hesitant to take on travellers and held on to the workers they already knew. Cameron, who did not wish to use his real name, said the Golden Fish email was passed around in the backpacker community. “No one knows who Golden Fish is, but you contact this email asking to get help to get the 88 days over the line,” Cameron said, referring to the amount of time visa-holders are required to work in regional areas. “They upload documents and you pay them $1,000 for the service and the visa gets approved. Mine came through straight away.” Cameron travelled to Ayr, an hour south of Townsville, when the pandemic hit to complete his 88 days. But over more than four and a half months he was only able to secure 50 days of work on different farms. “I had to wait six weeks to just get my first day of employment – the season was only just starting and there were more people than jobs,” he said. Nine months later he received an email from the immigration department saying it had caught him using false documents and he would have to leave the country. Cameron is currently on a three-month bridging visa. His partner is Australian and in a last-ditch attempt to keep him in the country the pair will apply for a partnership visa. “I had every intention to do my farm work,” he said. Brisbane lawyer Ellison McMullen has worked with eight clients who used the fake visa application scheme. She said all of them tried to get farm work, but there just wasn’t enough work to fulfil their visa requirements. Facing almost instant deportation, she said the desperate backpackers used Golden Fish’s services to forge their working documents. “Every one of them made attempts but they were doing it at a time where state borders were closed,” McMullen said. “Fruit picking is seasonal and they move around the states, but they weren’t able to do that.” On top of the eight cases McMullen has worked on over the last two years, Guardian Australia is aware of nine others all in the process of being deported. Some are appealing the deportation, but others can’t afford a lawyer. Many of them have been given a three-year ban on returning to Australia. None of the appeals have been successful to date. McMullen said there had been a recent increase in deportations. “The regulations we had before, there was a discretion there. The government and case officer could decide on a point by point basis whether or not it was appropriate to forgive it. “That seems to have gone by the board. “They’re getting more and more rigid, there is less and less room for any kind of discretion.” She said there had also been an increase in people using fraudulent work experience documents who had not been able to fulfil their visa requirements. The horticulture sector has been reliant on overseas workers, with the main source of the labour force being backpackers. Under the new trade deal between Australia and the UK, British backpackers will be exempt from the requirement to work on farms – a scheme which has been riddled with claims of exploitation and sexual harassment. McMullen said the program ending was more reason to show lenience and let those at risk of deportation stay in the country. “It’s not in Australia’s interests to deport them. Of the eight people I’ve worked with, one was a teacher and seven were skilled nurses. These are in desperate need at the moment,” she said. The Department of Home Affairs was contacted by Guardian Australia but did not reply to questions asking if they were aware of Golden Fish, how long they had been operating, and how many people had used their services to obtain visas fraudulently. It said it would not comment on individual cases, but stated they had “no tolerance for visa fraud, illegal work, worker exploitation and worker underpayment of any kind”. Jay, who did not wish to use his real name, has just been given three months to leave the country. A teacher by trade, he and his girlfriend, who is a nurse, had hoped to permanently move to Sydney. “I’m more than disappointed. I’ve spent quite a lot of money, the best part of $5,000 on legal fees,” Jay, whose appeal was not granted, said. The pair, who were in Mildura, spent 10 weeks at the start of the pandemic phoning farms in the area but could only get a handful of days of work. Text messages between them and the hostel operator, who often acts as a conduit between farms and backpackers, show they had repeatedly asked for work without success. “There was definitely less work than what there had been,” Jay said. Running out of savings, they returned to Sydney so his girlfriend could take up nursing work which would count towards her 88 days. That’s when Jay emailed Golden Fish. “We’re just backpackers who tried to get work,” his girlfriend said. “So we did what we felt we needed to do at the time … so we can stay.” Golden Fish did not respond to questions from Guardian Australia.“Our mob in the West Kimberley and probably the whole West Australian midwest, north-west are the oldest pearlers in the world,” says Yawuru man Bart Pigram. We’re in the mangroves on Broome’s coastline, and as we walk at low tide my reef shoes sink and squelch. We collect mud whelks (a mangrove snail) and Pinctada albina, a small species of pearl oyster about 10cm in diameter. Pigram later lights a small fire on the sand, cooking our little harvest. There’s the pleasing salinity of just-harvested seafood and the basic comfort of food imbued with smoke. The view into the mangroves isn’t half bad either. While Pigram guides for a living, this catch-and-cook-type experience isn’t something he does often, preferring to preserve what’s there for locals. “We’ve been using it for 20,000, 30,000 years,” he says. “It was an extra resource because you would use it as a plate, and a canvas to scratch into and make your riji.” Beyond traditional use, many associate pearl shells with cultured pearl production, and (especially in the pre-plastic age) a source of material for buttons. But pearl meat is also finding a place as a premium ingredient, from the firm white meat of the Pinctada maxima, at one time an unprized byproduct now highly priced, to the mussel-like Pinctada fucata, or akoya oyster, only seriously marketed as a food in the past few years. Looking out towards the ocean, Pigram says: “We would wait for the big tides to go out and we’d just walk out and the pearl shell beds would be in abundance. We’d grab one – not hundreds of them, enough – and eat that day. It was the 1860s when white men discovered them, and you see the progression of the pearling industry is pretty much the movement of the coastline, and that was the exploitation of pearl shell.” European interest in shells began at Shark Bay in 1850, intensifying on the Pilbara coast at Nickol Bay in 1861. It spread further north-east, and at Broome’s pearling peak 400 luggers worked the waters, destroying mangroves in the process. By the early 20th century Broome was the largest pearling centre in the world. When Pigram talks of the early pearling industry, it was the harvest of Pinctada maxima shells, the same genus used from the mid-20th century to produce cultured South Sea pearls. Broome is known for its mix of cultures – Japanese, Chinese, Indonesian and Malay – but not all were equal, and many were indentured. There was also Aboriginal slavery. Stories of pregnant pearl divers forced to dive are just one of many from this time. ‘Carbon is bound up within the shells’ As the industry developed and the cultural mix changed, pearl meat became a staple of those who worked on the luggers, and the wider community. “I was talking to these three old Malay men and they, the deckhands on the luggers, took control of the pearl meat and would on-sell it in town,” says Pigram. “So that was sort of their bonus. It was cheap. Then it became known, and that’s when the pearl masters started to control the pearl meat itself.” The modern trade in pearl meat, prized in the Asian market, sees wholesale prices of $80 to $200 a kilogram. The product is used by chefs like Ben Shewry at Melbourne’s Attica. While pearls are still the main game for the likes of James Brown, the third generation to lead Cygnet Bay Pearl Farm at the tip of the Dampier Peninsula, pearl meat holds interest for both its history and its future value. Brown likens the shelling days to a “gold rush”, one that led to a unique cuisine borne out of more than just pearl meat. “There’s this great old Broome cuisine but it hasn’t been tapped into yet,” he says. “There’s still some amazing dishes around, like one similar to the belacan prawn paste you have in South-east Asia, but it’s got the pearl guts and meat in it.” The adductor muscle is termed “pearl meat” while remaining soft tissue is “pearl guts”. It’s not just Pinctada maxima that we’re seeing on menus and going to export. Pinctada fucata, known as akoya, are gaining traction. It’s the same species first used to develop the Mikimoto pearl culturing method, which kickstarted commercial pearl cultivation in Japan from the late-19th century. Brown has extended his interests in that product to New South Wales, taking a stake in Broken Bay Pearl Farm on the Hawkesbury River. At Broken Bay hundreds of thousands of oysters don’t make the grade for pearl culturing, which is where the food market comes in. Following floods in March, operations have been set back but this integrated approach is, Brown believes, an important factor in viability. Albany in Western Australia is Australia’s akoya powerhouse. Leeuwin Coast, part of Andrew Forrest’s Tattarang empire, intends to produce akoya in the millions, with no ambitions of pearl culturing. It has caused a stir with local fishers, amid concerns that aquaculture growth could restrict access to fishing grounds. Almost a prerequisite for new entrants into the market for luxury ingredients is a clean, green story. Akoya require no inputs, unlike intensive fish farming, and achieved carbon-neutral status under the government’s “climate active” initiative. Justin Welsh, a marine biologist and Leeuwin Coast’s general manager of aquaculture, says lifecycle analysis of the akoya included emissions from third parties, fuel, processing materials, packaging and, ultimately, freight to the consumer. “We have this wonderful product where carbon is actually bound up within the shells of the akoya themselves,” Welsh says. He describes this as a natural offset, though the main thrust of certification is in carbon-credit purchase. “It’s definitely a beautiful expression of the ocean,” says Amy Hamilton, the Albany-based chef and owner of Liberte, a bar-come-restaurant with a national reputation. “You get all the qualities that you would enjoy in a rock oyster, but it has, to me, the texture of a mussel and in that way it can express itself really well through light cooking,” she says. Hamilton serves as a product ambassador, having used akoya prior to Leeuwin Coast’s acquisition of the leases. Previously sold fresh (as Broken Bay still do), they were a hard sell in a crowded market, she says – and developing them in frozen form was a revelation. Hamilton cures, sears, poaches and deep-fries them. “I don’t feel like I’m messing with the product or degrading it by doing that,” she says. “Any batter situation is good,” from tempura to a buttermilk fry, or “curing in lime juice”. With a near raw treatment, the acid tightens the akoya, making it “a little bit more accessible”. While Hamilton says that education of diners is required, some chefs are still testing the waters. Brendan Pratt, the celebrated head chef at Vasse Felix winery in Margaret River, says: “We’ve used them randomly in snacks with the tasting menu. We cooked them in their own shells with XO sauce and just rested the shell on top of some coals.” Texturally and taste-wise, he was happy, he says, but “it’s challenging for me to get my head around what it is, which is why I haven’t jumped behind it massively”. It’s less a criticism and more needing “time to work it out, showcasing it to its fullest potential”. Back in Broome, the unique culture of eating pearl meat evolved with exactly that: time. Pigrim gestures from the mangroves towards the land. “Over there is a beautiful hill, littered with millions and millions of shells,” he says. “It was one of the most easily accessible food sources.” At the Shinju Matsuri (“festival of the pearl”), local chefs compete in a pearl meat cook-off, applying modern dining sensibility to the ingredient. At Brown’s own pearl farm on the Dampier Peninsula, you can sit on the restaurant balcony looking out over the Indian Ocean. There, with the breeze rolling in, one can enjoy a simple noodle salad with an option of finely cubed pearl, lightly cured.Soil carbon sequestration is front and centre in the government’s plan to combat global warming, and it makes political sense, because politicians have a dilemma. Voters and big business want climate change action. But on the eve of an election, it’s a game politician who tells the voters to fly less, drive less, use less internet, watch less television, waste less food and turn the lights off. Nor is it popular to slam shut the coal industry in places like New South Wales and Queensland, or impose enormous regulatory costs on publicly owned companies whose investors vote. It’s less politically risky to expect the farming community to deliver this wishlist of climate change mitigation and clean and green food. After all, farmers are only 2% of the population but occupy 55% of the Australian land mass. Never mind that it’s a tough ask and a vulnerable position to be in with 98% of voters riding on your future. With the emphasis on carbon sequestration, big business can buy carbon credits and tick that off the risk register. Green consumers can clear their conscience and sleep better at night by ordering carbon “neutral” produce. But there are three problems with that scenario. The first and biggest problem is technical. Our soils can only accumulate so much carbon. Not all soils are equal and not all farming systems can store carbon at the same rate. In Victoria alone, soils range from sands with soil organic carbon (SOC) of about 0.5% to deep clays with SOC in the range of 1 to 2% or greater. Across the country, the bulk of our rainfed soils managed as broadacre agriculture have a sequestration limit of less than 4%. Dairy pastures under irrigation have recorded SOC up to 14%, but these soils represent a tiny portion of the country. Soil carbon sequestration is governed firstly by soil type, secondly by rainfall and temperature, and finally by management techniques. Management systems that sequester high levels of carbon in one environment may not have the same effect elsewhere. Essentially, you can’t make a silk purse out of a sow’s ear. You can’t turn desert sand into peat moss. The second problem is commercial. Farmers and their communities need to feed themselves and remain profitable. The good news is that farming techniques that improve SOC also improve productivity and long term profitability. Maintaining soil cover, reducing tillage and growing good pastures and crops all contribute to building SOC. Around a quarter of farmers are returning double the average profit, so there is plenty of room to improve profitability across the country without compromising sustainability. Of course, there is more to be done, and the mainstream farming community has the will to do more. Farming communities don’t require convincing about global warming. Rainfall patterns have shifted, it’s hotter, frosts are more frequent at critical times, and the variability between seasons is like a rollercoaster. It’s as exhausting and confusing as it sounds. Farmers are becoming astute risk managers out of necessity. As for soil carbon payments contributing to farm profitability, gains from soil carbon payments of $400m across the industry by 2050 sound great. But they are a tiny proportion (0.3%) of total output conservatively modelled at $131bn by 2050 according to the University of Western Australia economist David Pannell. The third problem is the human aspect. Farming is an uncertain game and uncertainty is hard on the head and the heart. On top of trying to make money, stay well and leave a legacy for the next generation, farmers are expected to store carbon so politicians, directors, shareholders and consumers can sleep better at night. An extra 0.3% in carbon payments doesn’t seem like much when one has to wait 25 years to get the benefit, if in fact there is a benefit after all. These contracts are not enticing for farmers when soil carbon is hard to gain and easy to lose. The prospect of signing up for 25 years – when the starting point is hard to measure, and the climate conditions that largely determine the outcome are completely unknown – seems like a risky bet. That doesn’t mean farmers are ignoring the challenge. The innovators are already tracking their greenhouse gas consumption and aiming for net zero emissions, but it’s not a simple task. The reality of soil carbon is that it is highly variable, hard to measure, hard to shift and easy to lose. Agriculture is in the political hot seat this election. This time, it’s not what the government and society needs to do for farming; it’s what farming is expected to do for society. The bottom line is, out in the landscapes beyond back yard veggie patches, farming communities can’t turn sand into compost. It’s time to get real about the expectations of carbon sequestration. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter We need to reduce the greenhouse gas emissions produced in the first place, to really prevent global warming from being any greater than 1.5C. If we are to have any chance of winning the war against global warming, perhaps it’s time to look beyond the farmyards to reducing emissions in both the big industrial back yards and the suburban ones, as well as agriculture. Dr Kate Burke is an agricultural scientist with a PhD in agronomy and plant breeding, working as an agri-strategist in Echuca. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityBrooklyn Nets stars Kyrie Irving and Kevin Durant have entered into the league’s Covid-19 health and safety protocols, multiple media outlets reported on Saturday. Seven-time All-Star Irving has not suited up for the team yet this season because he refuses to take the Covid-19 vaccine, which is required to enter the Nets’ Barclays Center. On Friday, the team said it would welcome back Irving for games and practices in which he is eligible after having initially determined that he wouldn’t play with them at all until he could play in both home and road games. Members of New York’s pro and college teams must be vaccinated against the coronavirus to be able to play in public arenas. Irving refused to get vaccinated and hasn’t practiced with the Nets since October. Durant has been putting together an MVP-caliber season, averaging 29.7 points per game and shooting 52.3% from the field for the Eastern Conference-leading Nets. Durant scored 34 points and grabbed 11 rebounds in Thursday’s 114-105 win over the Philadelphia 76ers in a game for which the team was without seven players due to the health and safety protocols. The NBA, NFL and NHL have all seen games postponed due to the recent Covid-19 outbreak. The NBA rolled out tighter Covid-19 protocols amid a sudden wave of Covid-19 cases and, according to a memo seen by Reuters on Friday, will increase testing from 26 December to 8 January and return to mask usage in many situations until agreed otherwise by the league and union representing its players.The scale of the threat posed by the Omicron variant was laid bare by government scientists last night as they warned that there are now hundreds of thousands of infections every day. That daily number could reach between 600,000 and 2 million by the end of the month if new restrictions are not brought in immediately. The government’s SPI-M-O group of scientists, which reports to the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), also warned that, based on their modelling, hospitalisations could peak between 3,000 and 10,000 a day and deaths at between 600 and 6,000 a day. Sage urged the government to reintroduce “more stringent measures … very soon”. The minutes of its meeting on Thursday stated: “The timing of such measures is crucial. Delaying until 2022 would greatly reduce the effectiveness of such interventions and make it less likely that these would prevent considerable pressure on health and care settings.” The advisers suggested reintroducing measures “equivalent to those in place after step 2 or step 1 of the roadmap in England”. Rules at that time included the “rule of six” and just two households meeting; they also barred holidays abroad, while care-home residents were allowed only one regular visitor. “Although increased vaccination is a critically important mitigation and will reduce disease severity,” the minutes stated, “a significant package of non-pharmaceutical interventions would be required to slow growth in infections. Crowded indoor mixing with many different groups remains the biggest risk factor for spread. Large gatherings present a risk for multiple spreading events.” Boris Johnson has so far resisted imposing further measures after a major rebellion against “plan B” measures last week, when 100 of his MPs opposed him. Since then, Tories have also criticised England’s chief medical officer, Chris Whitty, for advising people to scale back their Christmas plans. Whitehall officials said there were no plans for an announcement on further Covid measures. As well as the alarming scenarios above, Sage also modelled the impact of measures imposed under step 1 of the roadmap used last spring. If step 1 measures were imposed, the modelling suggested that infections could be limited to between 200,000 and a million a day. Hospitalisations could run at between 1,500 and 5,000 admissions a day and daily deaths would be 200 to 2,000. Ministers have also been warned that rising cases and increasing reliance on testing could see demand for tests outstrip supply, while airborne transmission of Covid beyond two metres may happen more frequently. A scientific paper published on Saturday also suggested it may be necessary to reconsider the wearing of face coverings in places where the balance of risks and benefits did not previously support it, such as primary school classrooms. It added that many face coverings, such as scarves, other single-layer fabrics and valved masks are likely to be ineffective at reducing transmission. This came as a major incident was declared in London, after a series of concerns were raised about the number of NHS staff off sick or self-isolating with Covid. London mayor Sadiq Khan made the announcement after seeing the number of cases in London increase rapidly. He said in the past week, the number of Covid patients in London hospitals has gone up 29%. Ed Davey, the Lib Dem leader, demanded a recall of parliament. “We cannot allow the prime minister to sit on his hands while the NHS and businesses are on the brink of collapse,” he said. “Ministers must explain the latest scientific advice to MPs and ensure a proper debate over future Covid measures, including support to help businesses through this increasingly difficult period.” Johnson now faces cross-party calls to ignore rebels in his own party and take action, bringing in the additional measures with Labour support if necessary. Dan Poulter, a Tory MP and NHS hospital doctor, said: “We should recognise that we have a variant of serious concern that’s causing an increased number of cases, and put those measures in place sooner rather than later and follow the science. I’m afraid I find the thinking of some of my colleagues highly irrational and muddled at times. I hope the prime minister will listen to the scientists and the medics on the frontline who are seeing the real impact of this pandemic.” Shadow health secretary Wes Streeting said: “Boris Johnson cannot allow his weakened authority within his party to prevent him from taking the decisions that might be necessary to protect public health. He may no longer be able to rely on the votes of his own MPs, but Labour’s message to the prime minister and the health secretary is that we stand ready to do what is right in the national interest.” Across Europe, governments are reimposing stricter measures. Dutch prime minister Mark Rutte on Saturday night announced the Netherlands will go into lockdown from Sunday morning. France conceded that the variant was “spreading at lightning speed” throughout Europe and would become dominant in the country by the start of next year. Separately, Italy said it was tracking a “strong acceleration” of Omicron cases. The danger facing Britain was also stressed by UK scientists yesterday. “We now have an uncontrolled outbreak in the UK,” said Michael Head, senior research fellow in global health at Southampton University. “It makes a huge amount of public health sense to now implement further restrictions. “However, the politics has become ugly. The prime minister’s denials around the multiple Christmas parties that clearly happened are a little pathetic and we also have the mendacious undermining of the pandemic response for political gain by several of his more vocal, but ignorant, MPs. The government is in a great mess, at a time when strong leadership and collective voices are crucial.” This point was backed by Prof James Naismith, of the Rosalind Franklin Institute, Oxford. “Parliament has effectively decided to rely on hope by not imposing restrictions early. If that hope is wrong, we will know around Christmas Day, when – most likely – it will be too late to stop fairly significant adverse consequences in addition to disruption. It would also suggest that, as the Peter Cooke joke runs, we have learned from our mistakes … in order to repeat them.” Virus expert Stephen Griffin of Leeds University also warned that the government appeared to be ignoring the advice of the WHO, parliamentary committees and Sage to act in a timely fashion. “This is a repetition of past failings, and all the more frustrating and upsetting as potential mitigations could now be intrinsically linked to the vaccination programme. Boosters, necessary because of high prevalence and the antibody-evasive nature of Omicron, are mercifully being rolled out quickly now, but not fast enough if we allow Omicron the same freedom as we gifted Delta during 2021.”The Premier League show staggers on and, amid a decimated schedule, Arsenal stole it to strengthen their hold on fourth place. They made mincemeat of a weakened and thoroughly disorientated Leeds, effectively winning the game by half-time and threatening enough goals to fill an entire Match of the Day schedule on their own. A closer second period at least guaranteed that Marcelo Bielsa’s side, raucously backed throughout, were applauded off but another heavy defeat means they remain precariously positioned above the relegation zone. For a short, heady spell after Raphinha battered a 75th-minute penalty past Aaron Ramsdale, this threatened to be a contest. That had just never seemed on: Arsenal could have led by six or seven at the interval without feeling too embarrassed, tearing into space at will and thoroughly exposing opponents who were hamstrung from the start. Leeds may have escaped a ravaging by the Omicron outbreak for now but still arrived without nine first-teamers, all through injury and suspension bar the unwell Diego Llorente, and it would have taken an incorrigible optimist to imagine a makeshift defence holding firm. Bielsa had rushed Robin Koch back from injury while, at right-back, the 20-year-old Cody Drameh was asked to make a first top-flight start. Arsenal scented blood from the word go and could have scored at least twice before taking the lead, although the fact they ran riot owed as much to Leeds’ approach as the uncertainty of their stand-in personnel. There was no compromising Bielsa’s usual high-octane, maximum-risk approach; they do not know how to shut up shop and the outcome was signposted within the first three minutes, when Illan Meslier made fine saves to deny Alexandre Lacazette and Thomas Partey. The keeper was exercised regularly but there was never much sense his good work would influence the outcome. “In the first half the difference could have been bigger,” Bielsa admitted. “They managed to provoke mistakes in our own half. That made it easier for them to attack.” That pretty much covered it. Arsenal opened the scoring when a passing move from the back broke down and Bukayo Saka began a sequence that saw Granit Xhaka tumble near the edge of the area, the ball running to Adam Forshaw. There was time to clear but Forshaw dawdled and allowed Lacazette, again captaining in Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang’s absence, to stick in a toe. Gabriel Martinelli was perfectly positioned to sweep in and Arsenal did not look back. “He’s getting a level of maturity,” Mikel Arteta said of the Brazilian, who also scored in Wednesday’s win against West Ham and is proving that life after Aubameyang may be lived to the full. “He’s so willing to learn. His passion in life is football, you can see that on the pitch.” Martinelli showed it again when Stuart Dallas failed to find Joe Gelhardt and, with Leeds’ defensive shape reliably awry, Xhaka could slide him through. He dinked past the overly exposed Meslier after holding off Drameh and, with more than an hour left, Leeds were in trouble. They conceded a third when Saka, refusing to give up after his crossfield run had initially been snuffed out, earned some luck with a shot that fizzed in via Mateusz Klich’s deflection. At that point a repeat of Tuesday’s 7-0 embarrassment at Manchester City, inflicted with a comparative glut of riches at their disposal, looked entirely possible. “We were really effective,” Arteta said, although Arsenal had less joy after the break. The home support were kept interested, and angry, when Xhaka was not dismissed for crunching Raphinha’s ankle with a challenge that went over the ball. It seemed a yellow card offence at the barest minimum but no punishment was forthcoming. Leeds rode the ripple of indignation and Raphinha, who had shot wide when well placed after the opener, dusted himself down to lead the charge. They were given their chance to reduce the deficit when Gelhardt, a 19-year-old who showed up time and again, was fouled by Ben White near the byline. Raphinha converted from the spot but Arsenal weathered the squall that followed. Arteta could always pull out something in reserve and brought on Emile Smith Rowe, who had seen off West Ham’s challenge with a fine strike after coming off the bench. He did something similar here, winning the ball near halfway before surging towards the box and latching on to an ingenious scooped pass from Martin Ødegaard. His eighth goal of the season was dispatched mercilessly and, while Arsenal’s pursuers have games in hand, they have points in the bag. “It puts pressure on them,” Arteta said. “We were really lucky to play today with everything that’s happening. I told the players to enjoy the game and give everything because I don’t know how this will develop.” If the music does have to stop, at least they can admire the view.Heavy defeats can be purgative. In 1992, Marcelo Bielsa’s Newell’s Old Boys lost 6-0 to San Lorenzo in the group stage of the Copa Libertadores, sending him into despair. He was an ambitious and idealistic young coach who had clinched the apertura in 1990-91 but then seen his side win only nine games in the whole of 1991. Could it be his methods were ineffective? Was his whole vision of football flawed? For two days he locked himself away in the Conquistador hotel in Santa Fe. He wept. He rang his wife, Laura, and admitted he thought his career might be over. In the end, he gathered the players together and asked them if they still believed in him. Change approach, or play the same pressing game but harder, better? They insisted they still had faith and so, emboldened, Bielsa ploughed on. The next game brought a 0-0 draw against Unión de Santa Fe. It wasn’t much, but it was a start. They lost only one more league game as they won the clausura, and they reached the final of the Copa Libertadores, where they were beaten on penalties by the brilliant São Paulo, coached by Telê Santana and captained by Raí. The San Lorenzo humiliation became enshrined in the Bielsa myth as the moment of greatest doubt before a glorious dawn. If the hope was that the 7-0 defeat at Manchester City on Tuesday might have a similarly galvanising effect, it was quickly dispelled. Arsenal had four shots within the first five minutes, were 2-0 up inside the opening half-hour (by which point they had had as many shots as Tottenham did in the whole of September), and 3-0 up by half-time. If there was any doubt before, there can be none now: Leeds are in a relegation battle and it’s one for which, at the moment, they looked hopelessly ill-equipped. To speak of second-season syndrome, of Leeds somehow being found out, is oversimplistic, however keen the anti-intellectual fringes of English football culture may be to see Bielsa fail. That doesn’t mean there is no truth in the theory but the injuries are clearly a major factor, particularly at a club that has a relatively small squad and the second-lowest estimated wage bill in the division. There’s something slightly uncomfortable in the fact that Leeds, with all their injury concerns, might have welcomed a postponement if a handful of players had been ruled out as close contacts of somebody who had tested positive for Covid. They, though, are understood to be one of the three clubs with the highest rate of vaccinations in the Premier League and it’s hard to avoid the sense that their efficiency in that regard has counted against them. Even without any Covid-related absences Leeds were missing 11 players for Saturday’syesterday’s game, nine of them at least semi-regular first-teamers and seven of them primarily defensive. That meant Luke Ayling, who had been struggling with illness, had to be included, and forced Leeds to bring back Robin Koch earlier than they might have liked after surgery on his hip. Jack Harrison limped off in the first half to lengthen the injury list even further. It’s been suggested that the intensity of the style Bielsa has imposed may be responsible for the proliferation of injuries. The demands he makes on his squad are no secret, but if his training is a significant contributory factor, why has there been no similar glut of injuries before? Then again, this is the first time that Bielsa has ever entered a fourth season at a club, which means we are in uncharted territory in terms of the sustained impact of his methods. The stereotypical criticism of Bielsa is that he is overattacking, his man-to-man pressing game leaving his side exposed at the back. Clearly, notably in the 5-1 defeat to Manchester United and the loss at Manchester City, that has at times been an issue this season. But take out the games against last season’s top four, and Leeds’s defensive record had been reasonable: 14 goals conceded in 13 games before Saturday. The issue had rather been at the other end where, with Patrick Bamford missing most of the season, Leeds had managed just 17 goals in 17 games. But the problem here, in as much as it was possible before half-time to define it more precisely than simply “everything”, was defensive. Again and again Leeds gave the ball away in their own half. Again and again the midfield disappeared. And again and again Arsenal strolled through. The Bielsa way is high risk-high reward; when it goes wrong it can go badly wrong and the second-half rally couldn’t offset that. For the first time, perhaps, Bielsa is beginning to be questioned. Has his project run its course, or is it simply the case that no manager could cope without half his first-team squad?Wilson on Bielsa et al. Nick Ames was our man at Elland Road this evening. His report has landed. Here it is! Thanks for reading this MBM. Nighty night. An extremely happy Gabriel Martinelli, the man of the match, talks to Sky Sports. “It was a very good result. It was away. We are so happy with the result and our good work. We have a young team but a very strong team with very good players. It’s all about the team.” Arsenal put a bit of distance between themselves and West Ham United ... ... while Leeds continue to look over their shoulder towards the relegation zone, their goal difference having taken a pounding this week. Another dreadful result for Leeds, though for a while it threatened to be a lot worse. Arsenal, impressive in attack, consolidate fourth spot; Leeds will try to take whatever succour they can from an improved second-half showing. 90 min +2: The Leeds fans are giving their team a proper ovation, loud and four-square behind their manager. 90 min +1: On Sky, Gary Neville names Martinelli as man of the match. You can’t argue with the decision. 90 min: Just as they did at the Etihad on Tuesday night, the Leeds fans make one hell of a defiant racket. There will be three added minutes. 88 min: Koch is booked now, though, fouling Martinelli from behind in the frustrated style. 87 min: Lacazette turns into Koch and takes a whack in the coupon. The Arsenal striker thinks it was deliberate; the referee isn’t of that opinion. Lacazette wanders off in a gentle seethe. 86 min: Xhaka is booked for taking his sweet time over a free kick. No punishment for that obnoxious challenge on Raphinha, remember. He’s lucky to still be on the park. 85 min: Tavares comes on for Odegaard, whose work here is done. ... so having said that, Odegaard drives at the back-tracking Leeds defence, then dinks a ball between Ayling and Koch for Smith Rowe, who batters the ball past Meslier. Any doubts are gone. 83 min: Plenty of noise in Elland Road again. Leeds have shown admirable spirit in this second half, and they’re being rewarded with plenty of support. 81 min: Liam McCarron comes on to make his Leeds debut. He takes the place of the substitute Summerville. Odegaard is good to continue. 80 min: Odegaard is down, holding his head, having been clanked by Forshaw from behind. There wasn’t much in it, and play goes on for a while, but eventually Leeds are stopped mid-attack. On comes the trainer. 78 min: Both teams make a change. Klich is replaced by Greenwood, while Saka makes way for Smith Rowe. 77 min: Martinelli looks for his hat-trick goal again but can’t get a shot away from a position on the left. Then up the other end, Klich crosses from the right. Summerville meets it, six yards out, but can only bicycle kick wildly over the bar. A sense that the scoring is far from over, one way or another. 76 min: Suddenly Leeds are a little quicker to everything. Roberts and Raphinha combine down the inside-right channel, the former taking too long to consider a shot. Eventually he has a go, but there’s no time or space and the ball squirts harmlessly away. Raphinha absolutely larrups the penalty into the top right. The home fans celebrate by hollering Marcelo Bielsa’s name from the rafters. 73 min: Gelhardt dribbles in from the left. He reaches the edge of the six-yard box, but before he can shoot, he’s taken out by White’s foolish scissor tackle. The referee points to the spot. 72 min: Summerville glides in from the left and considers shooting. He declines the invitation extended by the crowd, who want him to have a dig. Instead he tees up Roberts, who sends a pea-roller straight at Ramsdale. A poor effort that nonetheless stands as Leeds’ first on-target effort this evening. 70 min: Summerville strokes a pass down the left to release Gelhardt, who has the jump on Tierney. Ramsdale takes matters into his own hands by racing out of the box and hoicking clear. 68 min: Saka combines with Martinelli down the left and drags a shot across Meslier and inches wide of the right-hand post. After a relatively quiet start to the second half, Arsenal are beginning to bare their teeth again. 67 min: White, formerly a hero round these parts, is rubbing his erstwhile fans up the wrong way. Now he tangles with Summerville just inside the Arsenal box. Both men fall over, but while Leeds want a penalty, there’s nothing in it other than mutual levels of clumsiness. 66 min: Martinelli has a run at Ayling and very nearly gets a shot away on the edge of the box. No hat-trick goal yet, and the flag goes up for offside anyway. 64 min: White and Raphinha go nose to nose over a trivial matter. They have to be pulled apart. For a second, both men looked ready to rumble. 63 min: Tomiyasu is replaced by Cedric. 62 min: A strange episode as Forshaw is fouled. The referee raises his whistle but doesn’t blow. Everyone stops, except Roberts, so the ref waves advantage. Roberts immediately loses the ball and Arsenal race off upfield, the Leeds players and fans apoplectic. Fortunately nothing comes of Arsenal’s attack. 61 min: Drameh drives down the right at pace. He loops a long cross towards Gelhardt, who opts to cushion a volley back across the face of goal instead of hoofing towards it. Strange decision; that shot was there to be taken. 60 min: Forshaw makes a little space in the middle of the park and shovels a pass down the centre, nearly releasing Raphinha. Not quite, but Leeds have perked up, and are finally asking a couple of questions of the Arsenal defence. 59 min: Partey’s loose pass in midfield allows Raphinha to break upfield. He feeds Roberts, who launches a wild effort over the bar. This is a little better from Leeds, though the bar isn’t set high. Meanwhile Dallas comes back on. 57 min: Dallas is booked for tugging away at Tomiyasu’s shirt. Not sure if he’s injured himself in the process, because now he’s off the field having his ribs examined. 56 min: Raphinha and Klich combine well down the right, the latter fizzing a low ball through the six-yard box. Summerville races in, hoping to slam home from six yards, but Tomiyasu gets in the way to block and shepherd the ball away from danger. That’s great football all round. 54 min: Odegaard nearly gets on the end of a long punt down the middle. Meslier reads the danger, races from his box, and hooks clear, just in time. Here’s Sam Campbell: “If that’s not a red for Xhaka then we should just pack VAR up as there is no point having it if it won’t be used to punish terrible challenges such as that.” Preach on, brother. 52 min: This won’t help Leeds’ mood. Gelhardt is booked for an almost identical challenge on Tomiyasu. He could easily have walked as well. Two really poor challenges. No idea what the referee and VAR dude are up to. 50 min: Raphinha is off getting treatment on that ankle. It’ll have been a sore one. He’s fortunate Xhaka didn’t connect further up his leg, because that could have done some serious damage. 49 min: VAR has a check, but absurdly there’s no punishment. Xhaka responds with a wide smile and a laugh. He’s really got away with one there. Another referee, another VAR operative, could easily have sent him packing. 48 min: Xhaka refuses to step away as Klich tries to take a quick free kick. He’s not booked, but then goes in on Raphinha, unnecessarily hard, studding the Leeds man on his ankle. He could be in trouble here. 47 min: The second corner leads to Xhaka having a dig from just inside the box. The ball pinballs around and away, but already the signs aren’t looking good for Leeds. 46 min: One corner leads to another, Leeds again struggling to clear their lines. Arsenal restart the match. Within 20 seconds, they earn their first corner of the second half. A thoroughly depressing reason for that discussion between the Arsenal staff and the officials. Sky Sports reports an allegation of racial abuse by Leeds fans directed at the subs on the Arsenal bench. The referee and his team will investigate. Half-time entertainment. Leeds fans wishing to block out the present can celebrate their illustrious past with this delightful tribute to Peter Lorimer. Arsenal fans desirous of even more entertainment can read this paean to their hate-hate relationship with Manchester United. Consider these pieces early Christmas presents from the MBM to you. Merry reading! Arsenal have been effervescent in attack ... but Leeds are a shocking rabble. Absurdly open. If they’re not careful, they’ll be on the end of another seven-goal shellacking here. Bielsa walks off, head bowed. A smattering of booing. It’s going to be a long second half for the hosts. 45 min: Three more minutes for Leeds to hang on before they can scuttle off to the sanctuary of the dressing room. 44 min: Leeds are abject. In the space of 60 seconds, Odegaard and Saka take turns to force Meslier into desperate last-ditch saves. This could get extremely ugly for Leeds ... again. 43 min: The Leeds faithful aren’t happy, and the referee tells Arsenal not to celebrate in front of them. VAR checks the goal for offside, but Leeds aren’t getting away with it. Saka jinks in from the right. He’s allowed to run all the way across the front of the box. He attempts to one-two with Lacazette. It doesn’t quite come off but the ball breaks to him anyway. He takes a touch left, then right, and aims for the bottom right. The ball breaks off Klich and into the bottom left. 40 min: Gelhardt tries to close Ramsdale down, and gets reasonably close. The keeper clears just in time. It’s the best Leeds have managed for a while. 39 min: The home fans have packed in the defiant verse, with Arsenal now strolling around in style. Lacazette and Saka combine down the right and nearly open Leeds up, but Ayling stands firm. Leeds need to hear the half-time whistle. 37 min: Arsenal are utterly dominant at the moment. The home fans try to get their side going with some defiant verse. No response as of yet. 35 min: Leeds ship possession in their final third yet again, this time giving Lacazette the chance to shoot from a tight-ish angle to the left of the six-yard box. Meslier stops that one. Lacazette wears the look of a man who thinks he should have scored. Speaking of Arsenal goalscorers, young Martinelli has found a fan in Charles Antaki: “Au revoir, Auba, et merci.” 33 min: Roberts continues for now. Meanwhile there’s a brouhaha on the touchline, the Arsenal staff complaining to the fourth official, then the referee, about something. We know not what. Some form of crowd interaction? There’s a lot of pointing towards an undetermined spot in the stand going on. More when we have it. 32 min: Roberts has a look from distance, but it’s always sailing wide right. He bends over in pain afterwards. Surely not another injury? He’s looking across to the bench. 31 min: Harrison limps off, to be replaced by Summerville. Everything is going wrong for Leeds at the minute. 30 min: Leeds try to respond immediately, Klich making ground down the right but failing to find a team-mate in the middle, or win a corner. Elland Road is even quieter now, save the Arsenal fans making merry. Another goal that’s way too easy for Arsenal. Xhaka slips a pass down the middle to release Martinelli, who holds off Drameh and enters the box. He looks to have taken a heavy touch, but then dinks over Meslier. 27 min: Raphinha wrestles with Tierney over a throw. He catches the Arsenal full-back on his chin. Tierney briefly considers making something of it, but thinks better of it. He’d have given the referee something to think about had he acted up, though whether it was intentional is another matter. 25 min: ... but then, out of nothing, Leeds nearly equalise! Leeds clear long. Raphinha is suddenly racing at Tierney. He beats him as he zips across the front of the box, drops a shoulder to see off White as well, then drags a low shot inches wide of the right-hand post with only Ramsdale to beat. 24 min: Tierney floats in from the left and pearls a low drive towards the bottom left. Meslier does well to stick out a strong hand to turn the ball out for a corner, then bollocks his team-mates, who were once again way too open and passive. 23 min: Arsenal have enjoyed 84 percent possession in the last five minutes. 22 min: Ayling tries to slip Raphinha clear down the middle, and nearly does so, but Gabriel had stuck to his task and eventually draws a foul from his fellow Brazilian. Leeds were after a penalty, the pair falling down, but it was Raphinha who was doing all the pulling. 21 min: Elland Road has gone a little quiet since the opening goal, understandably so given the events of the week. Raphinha tries to get the punters going again, spotting Ramsdale off his line and trying the spectacular from the centre circle. Nope. 20 min: Dallas is back up and, having been given the once-over, raring to go. 18 min: Oh Leeds. That was so avoidable, though it was a great run by Lacazette and a sumptuous finish. Saka, having seen the way, dribbles in from the right and blooters a shot goalwards. Dallas, who had slipped over, inadvertently blocks the shot with the back of his head. Good news for Leeds, not so great for the player himself, who felt that. On come the trainers. Saka busies himself, coming in from the right. The ball breaks to Lacazette, then Xhaka, who goes over looking for a penalty. He’s not getting one, but Forshaw, in attempting to dribble clear, loses possession to Martinelli, who opens his body and curls an unstoppable shot into the top right. 15 min: The Sky cameras train on former Barcelona and Chelsea midfielder, sitting in the stand. He’s now Raphinha’s agent. Worrying news for Leeds with the January window coming up? 13 min: The game’s settled down a little after the harum-scarum start. This is Bielsa’s Leeds, of course, so don’t expect this state of affairs to be maintained for long. 11 min: Raphinha and Klich make their presence felt down the right, but there’s nobody in the box other than lots of Arsenal defenders. They’re forced to turn tail. “Is there a greater contrast in personal presentation between two Premier League managers than Mikael Arteta and Marcelo Bielsa?” asks Kári Tulinius of our bucket-squatting, technical-area-jigging touchline duo. “The former is so well groomed and put together that he looks like the computer generated hologram of himself, while the latter looks like the man who turns up at your door in the middle of the night with an offer you can’t refuse.” 9 min: Tomiyasu goes up for a high ball with Harrison and gives his opponent a painful knee in the side as he wins a header in the no-nonsense style. Then Klich is unceremoniously brushed to the floor by Xhaka. Both challenges are fair; both get the home crowd’s dander up. 7 min: Mikel Arteta is already leaping around in the technical area, throwing semaphore shapes and yelling at his players. Marcelo Bielsa sits calmly on his bucket. Meanwhile here’s Alex Adams: “This might be the blinkered views of a Leeds fan, but the fact that this game is going ahead at all shows a total absence of common sense. Not only do we have 38,000 people in one place as Omicron rages through the UK, but injury-decimated Leeds have a bench of literal actual children. I fear another cricket score, while unnecessarily placing fans and players in the Covid crosshairs. The only good thing about this game are Arsenal’s warm-up tracksuits. Reminds me of 1990s Romania.” 5 min: Tierney cuts in from the left and has a speculative dig from 25 yards. Straight at Meslier, who gathers well. Expect the poor Leeds keeper to be in the eye of the storm this evening. 4 min: Nothing comes of the corner, but Leeds can’t carry on like this. De Bruyne and Foden were given all sorts of room at the Etihad earlier in the week, and look what happened there. Odegaard had the red carpet rolled out for him in similar style there. 3 min: Leeds, seemingly having learned nothing from the City debacle, gift Odegaard an absurd amount of space. He slips a pass down the middle for Lacazette, who is free in the box. Meslier smothers. Leeds half clear. Arsenal come straight back at them, Partey having a whack from an advanced position down the right channel. Meslier turns that one round for a corner. 1 min: From the resulting corner, Raphinha flashes a header over the bar. Ayling claims to have been impeded, but the referee isn’t interested. Elland Road is bouncing. 30 sec: Saka dozes, allowing Dallas to tear down the left and win a corner. An early statement of intent, right there. Leeds get the party started ... but only after everyone takes the knee. Applause rings round Elland Road. There’s no room for racism. Here come the teams! Leeds wear their Revie-Real white, while Arsenal are wearing a design that seems to have been inspired by the seats on the Piccadilly Line. It’s misty at Elland Road, but not half as bad as it was an hour ago. We’ll be off in a minute! Mikel Arteta has his turn on Sky. “We had a couple of good results and good performances, but we have to carry on, we have to get some consistency going. There are other games suspended, but we want to improve our position in the league, and we have a tough game today. We need resilience away from home. We know what to expect out there, it’s going to be a battle, I expect a really difficult match.” He also reports that “quite a lot of staff members and a few players” have tested positive for Covid-19, but refuses to be drawn on whether matches should be postponed across the board, pointing out that it’s a decision the Premier League and the government have to make. Marcelo Bielsa talks to Sky Sports. “To win is always important. After two defeats, even more. And after a defeat like the last one, even more so. Until yesterday we were more or less organised, but in the penultimate training session, Charlie Cresswell suffered an injury to his clavicle, and from today Diego Llorente will be absent for the next ten days at least. There are seven players who are absent and that forces us to quicken the return of Robin Koch.” Leeds midfielder Adam Forshaw adds: “We want to make amends. [The 0-7 at City] was a poor performance. There are ways to get beat, but we didn’t do very well on the night. Only a couple of days before, it was one of our best performances against Chelsea, so we won’t forget that either, and hopefully we can put it right today.” TV times. Gary Byrne is already concerned about tonight’s episode of Match of the Day, having presumably worked out the running order. “If this game ends goalless, do Lineker &amp; Co even bother turning up?” he wonders. You couldn’t blame them if they didn’t, and it would be nice if BBC1 had the brass neck to whack up an old interlude film for an hour in their place, everyone at the channel swinging their boots up on the desk. Of course, back in the day, when the Match of the Day cameras were sent to one predetermined ground and that was that, the likes of Jimmy Hill and Bob Wilson would have to vamp heroically if the BBC had selected a stinker. Even more heroically, viewers usually found themselves sitting through it regardless, with nowt else of interest on BBC2 or ITV. At least tonight you can switch over to the darts, the NFL or extended coverage of the week’s select committees on Parliament. The world is your oyster. God bless these multi-channeled times. Leeds are decimated by injuries and suspension. Dan James, Diego Llorente and Jamie Shackleton all picked up knocks during the 7-0 humiliation at Manchester City, while Junior Firpo is suspended. Kalvin Phillips and Patrick Bamford are still out with hamstring injuries. Robin Koch is back, though, having recovered from a pelvic problem. Cody Drameh makes his first Premier League start at right-back. No changes for Arsenal from the impressive victory over West Ham. The ill-disciplined Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang misses out altogether again. Leeds United: Meslier, Drameh, Ayling, Koch, Klich, Dallas, Forshaw, Raphinha, Roberts, Harrison, Gelhardt. Subs: Klaesson, Bate, Summerville, Greenwood, McCarron, Jenkins, Moore, Kenneh, Gray. Arsenal: Ramsdale, Tomiyasu, White, Gabriel, Tierney, Saka, Partey, Xhaka, Martinelli, Odegaard, Lacazette. Subs: Leno, Smith Rowe, Holding, Cedric, Pepe, Tavares, Chambers, Elneny, Nketiah. Referee: Andre Marriner (West Midlands). This is a rematch of the 1972 FA Cup final. The centenary final doesn’t have much of a reputation outside Elland Road these days, received wisdom suggesting it was a drab non-event. But don’t listen to that. The highlights are more than worth five minutes of your time. A BBC Video Memory Match, no less. No idea how there was just the one goal. Enjoy, enjoy. With the weekend Premier League card decimated by Covid, one hoary old MBM trope seems more relevant than ever: this game between Leeds United and Arsenal is ON. Kick off is at 5.30pm GMT. It’s, to reiterate, on!While conservative Fox News hosts continue to downplay the extent of the deadly attack on the US Capitol on 6 January – and their links to the president who incited it – another part of the Fox media empire appears to have cracked down on a personality alleged to have taken part: the actor and comedian Jay Johnston. According to a report by the Daily Beast, the Bob’s Burgers cast member has been “blacklisted” by Fox over his reported presence among supporters of Donald Trump who sought to violently overturn the presidential election. Johnston, 53, has not been charged or convicted of a crime, or even admitted he was at the Capitol on 6 January. Nonetheless, the Beast cited anonymous sources close to the makers of Bob’s Burgers as saying Johnston was no longer allowed to voice the character Jimmy Pesto Sr on the long-running cartoon sitcom. Johnston has appeared in 43 episodes of Bob Burger’s since 2011 but has been missing from the 12th season that began in September, the Beast said, adding that his final appearance to date was in a season 11 episode that last aired in May. Johnston was unavailable for comment, the Beast said, while Fox and Disney, which includes the show on its Disney+ streaming service, declined the chance to do so. Internet sleuths have identified Johnston as a man seen wearing a camouflage face mask at the Capitol and wanted by the FBI for questioning. The Beast quoted a tweet identifying Johnston by Cassandra Church, an actor who worked with him on the comedy podcast Harmontown. “I’m no detective, but I do know Jay,” Church tweeted in March. “He said he was there. And that’s him in the picture. So…” In a tweet subsequently deleted, Spencer Crittenden, who also featured in Harmontown, wrote that Johnston was “a craven Trump supporter and was there at the time”. Tim Heidecker, a comedy writer, claimed to have “fully confirmed through reliable sources” that “it’s Jay”, although he too later deleted his messages. Johnston’s reported treatment by his employer sits in stark contrast to that of Fox News personalities including Sean Hannity and Laura Ingraham who continue to push the false narrative that outside actors were involved in the insurrection. Both Hannity and Ingraham this week became entangled in the House investigation of the violence on 6 January, when it was revealed that they were among authors of text messages sent to the then White House chief of staff, Mark Meadows, urging him to persuade Trump to call off the mob.Rapidly rising prices and tax increases in the spring, followed by a drubbing for the Tories in May’s local elections, will mark the beginning of the end of Boris Johnson’s premiership, senior Conservative MPs now believe. After Johnson suffered a massive rebellion by his backbenchers over Covid rules in the Commons on Tuesday and a humiliating byelection loss to the Liberal Democrats in the previously safe Conservative seat of North Shropshire two days later, the prime minister is being told he has only three to four months to turn things around or risk being ousted. The news of Brexit minister Lord Frost’s shock resignation from the cabinet, which broke late on Saturday night, has not helped matters. While MPs from all wings of the party agree that with the Omicron variant spreading like wildfire, now is not the time to strike, many are beginning to fear for their own seats at the next general election, and say May will be the decisive moment. Frustration is deep and anger is running high, but MPs say they must hold off for the time being. One former minister said: “If there was not a pandemic I would be writing and signing my letter now and sending it off to Graham Brady [chair of the 1922 Committee of Conservative backbenchers] to trigger a leadership contest. And I think most of us would do the same.” Another former minister said that while MPs were agreed that Johnson should be given time to recover ground in the new year, after a disastrous period in which sleaze and scandals of rule-busting No 10 parties have dominated headlines – few had any confidence that he would change. The former minister said: “Boris isn’t willing to bring in new people, he isn’t willing to re-engage with the parliamentary party, he isn’t willing to do the hard graft, he isn’t willing to do the detail. “Everybody is saying: ‘Let’s go through the process of giving him the opportunity to change’, but we all know where this is going and it is not pleasant. We are heading towards a leadership challenge. The next yardstick is the local elections.” Martin Vickers, a Johnson loyalist and member of the 1922 Committee executive, said he was “confident” that the PM could reassert the strong leadership he showed before the 2016 Brexit referendum and 2019 election, but added: “He has got to do that straight away and avoid the drift of the last few weeks.” Charles Walker, a former vice-chair of the 1922 committee executive, said it would be “unconscionable” to try to get rid of Johnson in the next few weeks, but warned of tough times ahead as the cost of living increases. “The next six months are going to be extremely challenging for a variety of reasons, but mainly Omicron and the impact that yet another iteration of this virus will have on already fractured supply chains and the cost of living,” he said. “The Conservative party is not in a position to have a leadership contest in these circumstances. It is just not conscionable. Having said that it is clear that over the next three months we cannot have a rerun of the past three months.” Tory grandee Sir Roger Gale last week became the first Conservative to say he had sent his letter to Brady. Under party rules, if the committee chairman receives 54 letters in favour of a vote of no confidence in Johnson, he will be required to stage one. If UK voters now begin to blame the government for rising prices, Tories fear a change at the top could be their only hope. Next spring the government will come under pressure from a combination of tax increases and rising prices that will eat further into living standards. In April, the energy regulator Ofgem is expected to allow a significant rise in the gas price cap that protects millions of households from volatile wholesale prices. Several high-profile gas suppliers have gone bust in recent months after they were unable to stem losses from supplying households with energy at below market prices. In the last year gas prices on international markets have risen threefold. While the cap will continue to operate, the regulator is expected to judge that suppliers should be allowed to increase prices significantly. Ministers agreed last week that rail fares would rise by 3.8% in March, despite warnings from several backbench Tory MPs that only a freeze on fares would encourage passengers to return to rail travel following an exodus triggered by Covid-19. At the budget in October the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, said a 1.5 percentage point increase in national insurance contributions would take effect in April 2022, costing someone earning £20,000 an extra £120 a year. The rise in national insurance will go to fund the health service and social care, but councils must wait until 2023 before any of the extra income is diverted from health budgets to social care funding. Meanwhile Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader and shadow chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, called on the prime minister to publish the terms of reference that have been given to the senior civil servant Sue Gray, following her appointment to oversee inquiries into social gatherings in Downing Street and other government properties over Christmas last year. Gray was appointed after cabinet secretary Simon Case stepped aside, after it was revealed a party was held in his own offices in Downing Street last December. Rayner said: “The public must be assured this is a genuine, new and empowered investigation that will get to the bottom of any misconduct by ministers and their advisers, publish its findings in full and hand evidence to the police. “There are still too many questions unanswered about this murky affair and the prime minister should come clean right now.”It has been another week of soul-searching for football. What is the game, what is it for and who does it belong to? With nine Premier League matches postponed in the past week and Dr Nikki Kanani, medical director of primary care for NHS England, suggesting that attending games is a needless risk, a return to reduced attendances, closed-doors matches or even a suspension have become distinct possibilities. The return to Project Restart protocols may be enough to quell the spread of the virus among players but if it is not, keeping going cannot be justified. Brentford’s Thomas Frank has already called for a circuit-breaker but potentially pushing the end of the season into the summer is not easy because of the truncated close-season to accommodate a November World Cup. In football, as in so many other spheres, the pandemic has exposed the dangers of greedy short-termism and bodge-job solutions to systemic problems. What is clear is the desire for football. During the 100-day suspension in the first lockdown, just as in the second world war when the league shut down, only for local competitions to open up within a month, the need for football as an entertainment and distraction, as a communal event to give us something to discuss, rapidly became apparent. CS Lewis observed that we read to feel less alone; in the modern age football serves a similar function. That’s the romantic justification for football’s domination of modern media and culture. And there is something remarkable in that, all over the world, people will be tuning in to Tottenham v Liverpool on Sunday afternoon. Express scepticism about Cristiano Ronaldo or José Mourinho and the abuse will come from all corners of the globe. Football really is universal. But that also makes it both potentially lucrative and influential – and that is why so much of the game is so distasteful. Hearing the self-interested bleating from various top-flight clubs after the fan-led review called for an independent regulator made laughable the idea that any owner has the wider good of the game at heart. And that’s been the other theme of this week: the grim consequences of football’s appeal as a tool of soft power. First there was the news that Abdullah Ibhais, the former media manager at the Supreme Committee of delivery and legacy for the 2022 World Cup, has been jailed in Qatar for three years. He was initially convicted and sentenced to five years in April for bribery after a confession he says was extracted under duress. No evidence was presented at his trial and he claims he was denied access to a lawyer. He appealed and was released, but then rearrested just before he was due to speak to the Norwegian state broadcaster NRK. The magazine Josimar has reported how his initial arrest came after he had refused to spin a story about migrant workers going months without pay in a WhatsApp exchange with senior members of the Supreme Committee. Quite apart from the personal horror of Ibais’s story, the WhatsApp messages cast doubt on official claims about the safety and treatment of migrant workers. Nobody should believe next year’s World Cup represents anything other than football being used as a status symbol by a repressive state in which homosexuality remains illegal and women’s rights are severely restricted. Then there was the news that US cryptocurrency speculators plan to invest in Bradford City, offering a new model of ownership based around non-fungible tokens. For all the sentimental talk of “community storytelling”, that community is the global investors, not the local fans who have supported the club for decades – another civic asset sold off to an investor with no feel for Bradford, its history or its environment. Sunday, meanwhile, will see the first meeting of Newcastle United and Manchester City since that game became a battle of Saudi Arabia and Abu Dhabi. There should be outrage that two proud local institutions have been taken over by foreign states (OK, a foreign state and a public investment fund that is definitely, categorically not the same as the state and the Premier League has legally binding guarantees to prove it) for reasons of diplomatic posturing. But so far have we retreated into self-absorbed tribalism that fans welcome their distant overlords, despite their hideous human rights records, because they promise high-class football. The price of a fan’s soul? The appointment of Eddie Howe and the whiff of James Tarkowski. To blame fans, though, is to address only the most visible symptom. There is a problem inherent in football: if you win you get more prize money and more people want to watch you, which in turn increases revenue through gate receipts, television rights, merchandise, sponsorship and advertising. More money means better players means more success means more money and, without salary caps, unless there is some form of redistribution, a self-fulfilling cycle until only a handful of clubs can compete. The only way for an outsider club to bridge the gap is by the intervention of a sugar daddy, and so they are welcomed as implausible anti-capitalist disruptors even if they have bonesaws in their pockets. So unpalatable is the present crop of owners that the hedge funds have come to seem like the good guys; it’s enough to make you yearn for the cynical hauliers and scrap-metal dealers of old. But these two aspects, the mass popularity of the game, the need for the game as a common touchstone, particularly in a time of global crisis, and the deals football has done with the disreputable, are intrinsically linked. If football weren’t so popular, it would hold less appeal to the very rich or those seeking to launder their reputations. The result is that on the one hand there is a global army of social media warriors enthusiastically doing the job of bot farms, propagandising for faraway states. And on the other, as the Omicron crisis intensifies, the need for our fix of football, that habitual burst of fantasy and narrative, becomes ever more acute. Welcome to modern football: it stinks but we need it. • This article was amended on 19 December 2021. In an earlier version, an image caption misidentified Sulaiman Al-Fahim as “Sheikh Mansour”.The former Obama White House chief of staff and Chicago mayor Rahm Emanuel was among more than 30 ambassadors and other Biden nominees confirmed by the Senate early on Saturday. The Democratic leader, Chuck Schumer, broke a Republican-stoked logjam by agreeing to schedule a vote on sanctions on the company behind the Nord Stream 2 pipeline that will deliver natural gas from Russia to Germany. With many senators anxious to go home for the holidays, Schumer threatened to keep the Senate in for as long as it took to break a logjam on a number of diplomatic and national security nominees. Emanuel was confirmed to serve as ambassador to Japan by a vote of 48-21. Nominees to be ambassadors to Spain, Vietnam and Somalia were among those confirmed by voice vote after an agreement was reached to vote on Nord Stream 2 sanctions before 14 January. The confirmation process has proved to be frustrating for new administrations regardless of party. While gridlock isn’t new, the struggle is getting worse. Democrats have voiced concerns about holds Republican senators placed on nominees in order to raise objections about foreign policy matters that had little to do with the nominees in question. Holds do not block confirmation but they do require the Senate to undertake hours of debate. Positions requiring confirmation can go unfilled for months even when the nominations are approved in committee with the support of both parties. Biden officials acknowledge the president will end his year with significantly more vacancies than recent predecessors and that the slowdown of ambassadorial and other national security picks has had an impact on relations overseas. Ted Cruz, of Texas, held up dozens of nominees at state and treasury, over objections to the waiving of sanctions targeting the Nord Stream AG firm overseeing the pipeline project. The administration said it opposed the project but viewed it is a fait accompli. It also said trying to stop it would harm relations with Germany. Critics on the both sides of the aisle have raised concerns that the pipeline will threaten European energy security by increasing reliance on Russian gas and allowing Russia to exert political pressure on vulnerable nations, particularly Ukraine. Earlier in the week, Schumer demanded that Cruz lift all of his holds on nominees at the two departments as well as the US Agency for International Development, as part of any agreement on a Nord Stream 2 sanctions. Cruz said he was willing to lift holds on 16. The two sides traded offers on Friday. “I think there ought to be a reasonable middle ground solution,” Cruz said. “Let’s face it. There is little to celebrate when it comes to nominations in the Senate,“ said Senator Bob Menendez, chairman of the foreign relations committee. The New Jersey Democrat blamed Republicans for “straining the system to the breaking point” and depriving Biden of a full national security team, “leaving our nation weakened”. “Something’s going to happen in one of these places and we will not be there to ultimately have someone to promote our interests and to protect ourselves,” he said. Roy Blunt, a Missouri Republican, said some of the gridlock stemmed back to four years ago when Democrats, under Schumer, tried to stop many of Donald Trump’s nominees being confirmed in a timely manner. “Senator Schumer doesn’t have anything close to clean hands here,” Blunt said. Emanuel, also a former member of the House, was backed for the post in Tokyo at a time when Washington is looking to Asian allies to help push back against China. Detractors said they would not back him because of the shooting when he was mayor of Chicago of 17-year-old Laquan McDonald, who died when a police officer, Jason Van Dyke, fired multiple times. Emanuel’s handling of the case was criticized, especially as video was not released for more than a year. Van Dyke was convicted of second-degree murder and jailed. Four officers were fired. Biden nominated Emanuel in August. At his confirmation hearing in October, Emanuel said he thought about McDonald every day and that, as mayor, he was responsible and accountable. Eight Republicans voted with a majority of Democrats to confirm Emanuel. Three Democrats voted no: Ed Markey and Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, and Jeff Merkley of Oregon.Kamala Harris has conceded that the Biden administration was blind to the emergence of the Delta and Omicron variants of Covid-19, and said she fears “misinformation” over vaccines will prolong the pandemic well into a third year. The candid admission came in a wide-ranging interview with the Los Angeles Times, which followed reports that the vice-president was “struggling” to make a mark as Joe Biden’s No 2 and was keen for a more prominent role. Biden’s handling of the pandemic, alongside other woes such as spiking inflation and the supply chain crisis, has contributed to a steady decline in his popularity ratings. On Saturday, a White House official told NBC News the president would make a speech about Covid-19 on Tuesday, at which he would unveil new measures to combat the virus, including steps to “help communities in need of assistance”. Biden would also be “issuing a stark warning of what the winter will look like for Americans that choose to remain unvaccinated”, the official said. Harris, who has suffered the same sinking approval ratings as the 79-year-old president, was seen as shoo-in for the 2024 Democratic nomination until Biden said last month he would seek a second term. The White House said on Thursday Harris would be his running mate again. As well as speaking to the LA Times, Harris had a heated exchange on Friday with the radio host Charlamagne tha God. At the conclusion of a testy interview that Harris aides reportedly tried to cut short, Charlamagne tha God questioned if Biden or Joe Manchin, the centrist Democrat from West Virginia who wields outsized power in the 50-50 Senate, was the “real” president. “C’mon, Charlamagne,” Harris snapped. “It’s Joe Biden. “No, no, no, no. It’s Joe Biden, and don’t start talking like a Republican, about asking whether or not he’s president.” Harris’s comments about Covid, in which she also appeared to place blame on the medical community for a lack of foresight, would seem to confirm the administration’s view that the pandemic is its biggest obstacle to progress. “We didn’t see Delta coming. I think most scientists did not – upon whose advice and direction we have relied – didn’t see Delta coming,” Harris said. “We didn’t see Omicron coming. And that’s the nature of what this awful virus has been, which as it turns out, has mutations and variants.” Harris also said the public needed to be more trusting of Covid-19 vaccines, citing a slow take-up rate despite the White House and federal health officials’ efforts to urge vaccinations and boosters. “I would take that more seriously,” Harris said of disinformation promoted in Republican circles and swirling elsewhere, successfully dissuading people from getting a shot. “The biggest threat still to the American people is the threat to the unvaccinated. And most people who believe in the efficacy of the vaccine and the seriousness of the virus have been vaccinated. That troubles me deeply.” Harris’s claims are backed by data analysis showing that 91% of Democrats have received a first shot compared to only 60% of Republicans. Deaths from Covid-19 are occurring increasingly in areas that voted for Donald Trump in 2020, compared to areas that voted for Biden. The administration was handed a victory on Friday, as an appeals court said its vaccine mandate for large companies could go into effect. That contest is not over, however, as Republicans seek to take the matter all the way to the supreme court. “We have not been victorious over [Covid-19],” Harris told the LA Times, appearing to counter Biden’s claim in July that the virus “no longer controls our lives”. “I don’t think that in any regard anyone can claim victory when, you know, there are 800,000 people who are dead because of this virus.” Other subjects covered in the LA Times interview included Biden’s Build Back Better domestic spending plan, immigration and voting rights, all hot-button topics on which the administration has failed to make much headway. Harris said the failure to pass the $1.75tn economic and climate spending package, which Biden conceded on Friday would miss its Christmas deadline, was a frustration – but offered no alternative plan. Although she blamed Republican stonewalling, the measure is being held up in particular by Manchin. “We have to keep appealing to the American people that they should expect Congress and their elected representatives to act on the issue,” Harris said. “We can’t give up on it, that’s for sure.”Amany Galal lost her right eye to a tear gas canister fired by security forces as they tried to break up a demonstration in early 2019, making her one of the first casualties of Sudan’s long and faltering revolution. Three months later, the street movement had toppled the military dictator Omar al-Bashir but, three years later, millions of protesters are still fighting for a democratic government. “It’s impossible that I will stop coming to the streets to protest,” Galal told the Observer last week as she prepared to head out on another demonstration, to be held on Sunday, that will mark the third anniversary of the protests. “What I came out for three years ago hasn’t been achieved. We called for freedom, peace and justice but none of them is actually here.” Perhaps the biggest setback came this autumn, when an unreformed and unrepentant military tried to seize power again in an October coup. Officers were apparently afraid of losing power and decades of accumulated privileges, and of being held accountable for past abuses, if progress towards civilian rule continued. They have partially backed down, after weeks of lethal protests and turmoil in the street and a near-total halt of foreign support for the country’s battered economy. Last month, the prime minister, Abdalla Hamdok, emerged from house arrest to sign a deal with the coup leader, Gen Abdel Fattah al-Burhan. They agreed to set up an interim cabinet, made up largely of technocrats, after mediation by US and UN officials. Protesters were furious at a deal they considered a betrayal. A rally last Friday by politicians from the Forces of Freedom and Change alliance (FFC), who had spearheaded protests and been put under house arrest, was broken up by demonstrators who had once been behind them. They had repurposed unexploded tear gas canisters fired by security forces, setting them off to scatter the crowds. Police had blocked key roads into town, anticipating protests. “I felt they stole the revolution. I was injured and we paid a very high price,” said Mo’men Abbas, an engineering graduate and artist who was shot in the knee by a sniper. “We lost people: some people I know of were raped and became addicted to drugs and alcohol. After all that the FFC leaders sat down with the army and reached a deal?” He stayed away from protests for a year after he was wounded, struggling with depression and fear of disability, but ultimately the trauma has only strengthened his commitment to protesting, which is now the focus of his life. He set up a company to provide protection and employment to fellow activists, using traditional leather crafts. They make thick gloves that allow protesters to pick up teargas canisters fired by security forces and hurl them away, and face masks to stop the gas that escapes suffocating those on the front line. “I stopped engaging with politics for over a year, but being traumatised or disappointed does not solve your issues,” he said. “The revolution is gathering speed and strength day by day, just like a ball of snow rolling down a mountainside.” “I still need counselling but I don’t have time to waste on doctors – I am too busy with the revolution now. I can’t waste a single moment without doing something for the revolution.” The coup has changed the political dynamic in Sudan, consolidating military power. But it also showed that brutal security forces and the slow, stuttering nature of progress towards democracy have not sapped the political will for change. “I never missed a single protest for the past three years,” said Galal. Like Abbas, she found her injury only intensified her commitment. Only 23, she founded an NGO to help other injured protesters get treatment at home and abroad, after she had a prosthetic eye fitted in Russia. “We are now trying to send 470 injured protesters abroad for treatment. That number is only people from Khartoum, and unfortunately it has risen since the coup. Most were hit by bullets, and we would like to send them to India, Russia and Ukraine.” The scale of medical assistance needed is further testimony to the commitment of Sudanese protesters to put their lives on their line in the long struggle to wrest control of their country back from the army. “The military is in a stronger position than it was before the coup,” said Cameron Hudson, senior fellow at the Atlantic Council’s Africa Centre, but protests have shown that “the most powerful force in the country is not the military – it is the people”. “I think that both the military and the international community have been chastened in some respects. They cannot just cut a political deal for the sake of ‘stability’, and expect that the majority of people are going to accept that.” He added that concern in the west that without military rule Sudan could fall apart into bitter civil war – as Libya and Syria did a decade ago – has led to a worrying tolerance for military-dominated government. Generals have controlled Sudan for more than five decades of its 60-year history. Among events planned to celebrate the third anniversary of the revolution launched in December 2018 is an art show curated by photographer and painter Issam Hafeez, called “52”, referring to the number of years Sudan has been under military rule. “I mean by this to emphasise that Sudan has been ruled by the military since its independence,” he said. “It’s my form of resistance.” Under the deal struck in November, elections are scheduled for 2023, and would officially end the security forces’ control of the country. Burhan stated earlier this month that he will exit politics after that vote. Few people believe him: the actions of the past few months suggest a military determined to resist a real transition to democratic rule. Critics of Hamdok among the protesters, and from inside his own ranks, fear that his deal with Burhan pays only lip service to their sacrifices and their democratic agenda, while leaving the generals with enough power to either rig a poll or prepare for another coup. Yassir Arman, a veteran of Sudan’s civil war and former political adviser to Hamdok, resigned from his position after the deal was announced, while he was still being held in solitary confinement by the army. “He abandoned the people who were his strongest base – the very people who made this revolution,” Arman said. “I could not discharge my responsibilities.” “I came to support the prime minister in guiding Sudan to become a country led by a democratic government, and based on equal citizenship, I don’t think he will be able to do this now, he has succumbed to the military.”Well, WHAT a joy it’s been. It’s been a pleasure and a privilege to be at the liveblog helm for another year, and a huge thanks to everyone who’s commented, shared, or just read the blog on a Sunday morning. Even after twelve or thirteen years this little corner of the internet remains a very special place, so thank you for coming. I’m now done with liveblogging for another year, but as usual we’ll open a blog on Christmas Day for the Strictly Christmas Special so you can have a virtual party in the comment box. You can find me on Twitter or Instagram @heidistephens, in all good bookshops or at heidistephens.co.uk, so feel free to swing by and say hello. Have a brilliant Christmas however you’re celebrating, and please stay safe and happy and healthy for another year. I’ll hopefully see you all back here next September for another spin around the Strictly dancefloor, but in the meantime please remember to keeeeeep dancing! You are all sparkly legends. Hx Right, time to crown a winner and hand over a glitterball. And the winners are...ROSE AND GIOVANNI! Well, I think that was very much on the cards - an amazing result for Rose, and a brilliant win for Giovanni. Italy are winning everything this year, and it was definitely Giovanni’s time. But honestly, even without AJ this was one of my favourite Strictly Grand Finals ever. Both couples should be incredibly proud of themselves, and it’s clear to see how much this journey has meant to them. I love this show so much. Final montage of the night, this time from the general public. We need to wrap this up so Tess can hand that dress back to Champney’s Reception. Ooh, UK nil points Eurovision song in the montage! Light up the ROOM! Time for a final dance from the Strictly Class of 2021. Tom’s dancing on a watermelon, and now Nadia’s reminding us that she definitely shouldn’t have been the first celeb to leave. Sara’s in a paper boat, Adam’s descending from the heavens on an Olympic ring, Gorka’s still dressed as a puppy being pursued by Katie. Could they slow this down please? I can’t keep up. Right, Greg’s got his Samba sleeves on and still can’t dance, Ugo’s got his Moana wig back on, and Dan’s still doing Hammer Time. Rhys is bopping with Nancy, who appears to be wearing lametta legwarmers. All that remains is for Judy to twerk with Graziano, and we’re all done (Tilly’s got Covid, get well soon). WHAT a series. Christmas Special plug! Bingo full house DRINK! Montage time! DRINK! This is almost certainly the first of many, because we’ve still got fifteen minutes to fill. Journey! Drink! All we need is a mention of the Christmas Special and that’s a full house. Time for a musical interlude, courtesy of Ed Sheeran singing ‘Bad Habits’. Look, I know he’s not everyone’s cup of tea, but he’s pretty A List for Strictly and this song is a certified bop. Also we’ve managed a whole series without Michael Ball, Alfie Boe or Andre Rieu and his Disney Princess Orchestra, so that’s something to celebrate. Lovely to see Aljaz and Janette dancing together again, she’s SO bendy. AJ’s heart is broken, and ours is broken for her. It must be SO hard for her to sit in the audience with Kai and know that she should be part of this. I know it’s only a gameshow, but she missed her final chance to shine. I hope she feels the love in the room. Just when I thought I might have a chance to dry out, it’s time for a chat with AJ and Kai. HOOK ME UP TO IV FLUIDS. The judges votes count for nothing this evening – it’s all down to you. Are you Team Rose or Team John? If it was down to me I’d give them both a Glitterball and declare Strictly 2021 the best ever, but alas we need to crown a winner. Let’s have a recap on tonight’s dances. I’m going to take this opportunity to blow my nose, because I am a WRECK. I haven’t had a chance to read the comments yet but I’m going to assume you’re all blubbing along with me. Scores: 10,10,10,10 - another full house for John and Johannes. Anton thought it was an explosion of a dance and John is magnificent. Craig definitely had the love, it was the first time he’s seen John come out and go BAM. Motsi is WEEPING (drink), it’s a great time to be on Strictly and that dance was for all of us. Shirley was lost in the expression of the beauty John and Johannes bring, what a way to end tonight’s dancing. John and Johannes have swapped their blue Rumba pyjamas for white Showdance ones, which somehow makes them look like they’re taking time out from a yoga retreat in Marbella. It’s a pure Showdance medley of everything they’ve brought to Strictly this year, delivered with the kind of panache and energy we’ve come to expect from these two. Confetti cannons everywhere, and I can’t stop smiling. Loved that so much. On It Takes Two last night John said this was a manic medley of lifts and tricks, which is exactly what we need to wrap up tonight’s dancing. Their music choice is ‘You’ve Got the Love’ by Florence and the Machine, and I have high hopes for this being a fitting finale to this year’s Strictly. I’m blubbing. DRINK. Scores: 10,10,10,10 - I mean, it couldn’t possibly be anything else. Rose has melted Shirley’s heart and she entralled. It was serene, scintillating and will leave a mark on her heart forever. Anton loved watching Rose dance and feels blessed to have been able to witness it. Craig though it was just tremendous, and Motsi feels like an improved person because Rose was on the show. I’m like Anton, I can’t even look at these two without crying. WHAT a Strictly journey. Forget the Strictly Gazebo, Rose and Giovanni have a giant Romeo and Juliet balcony festooned with pink flowers. I’m not really sure what to make of this – Rose and Giovanni’s connection has never given us romance vibes, and I’m really surprised they would go down the sugary sweet route for their Showdance. Don’t get me wrong, it’s gorgeous and balletic and Rose has lovely musicality. I guess I was hoping for a Showdance glitter cannon. But like Rose, it’s heartfelt and beautiful. And finally for tonight, It’s time for their Showdance, which is to ‘The Rose’ by Bette Midler. It’s a beautiful song featuring more metaphors than you can shake a glittery stick at, but it’s not the kind of thing I’d usually associate with a Showdance. After their lyrical Couple’s Choice, I guess I’d kind of hoped for a high camp jazz hands razzle dazzle finish. But perhaps less is more? Scores: 10,10,10,10 - a full house for John and Johannes. It’s totally even, with only one dance to go! EXCITING. There’s a lot of love in the Strictly ballroom tonight. Worth noting that in the case of Rose and Gio and John and Johannes, I actually believe the whole ‘friends for life’ thing. Motsi thought John smashed it - everything about it has improved. Shirley thought everything came together - John nailed it, and he really felt it. Anton thought it was stupendous, then goes full Len Goodman. Craig pretends to be annoyed by John’s little finger, but he actually thought it was brilliant. OH CRAIG. With all this heavy emotion, what we definitely need right now is a big old filthy pirate Paso. Like the Rumba earlier, you can see how much John’s confidence has grown since Week 3 - he’s giving this both barrels and absolutely smashing it. Just brilliant. They’ve picked their Movie Week Paso, which bagged them three tens in Week 3 and set their pirate ship on course for the Grand Final. I loved it then, and I can’t wait to see them perform it again ten weeks on. Everyone’s crying, including me. Keep rehydrating, everyone, we’re going to be HUSKS by 9pm. Scores: 10,10,10,10 - a full house for Rose and Giovanni. Craig loved how Rose used the floor - it was stunning. Motsi loved Rose’s ability to connect with herself and the audience and Giovanni - she is sensational. Shirley loved how Rose wore her heart on her sleeve, she did it for Strictly, for the country and the world. Okaaay. Anton thought it was just perfect, and he’s welling up. DRINK. This hasn’t got any less beautiful with the passing of time. Still gives me goosebumps, and I’m so glad Rose and Giovanni have had the chance to dance it again. An incredibly special dance that will go down in Strictly history. Sheer joy from start to finish. Next up Rose and Giovanni dancing their favourite dance of the series. They’ve chosen their Couple’s Choice from Week Eight, which was one of the most special moments of this series, so it’s only right that we should all get to enjoy it again. So much sobbing. DRINK. We’ve still got two dances to go, so you might want to hold off for a while longer. Time for the shortest recap in Strictly history. Scores: 9,10,10,10 - another 39 for John an Johannes. Craig is NOT getting that 10 paddle out yet - DRINK. Anton was delighted with that performance - he’s seen a lot of Rumbas over the years and that was the best he’s ever seen on Strictly. Craig thought it was classy, stylish and really brilliant. Motsi was moved by that and really appreciated it. Shirley thought it was a story and narrative of hope, and she hopes she gets to dance a Rumba with John one day. This is still a gorgeous and intimate Rumba, and I feel like John is a lot more relaxed this time round. We’ve had two lovely Rumbas this year from John and AJ, but I think this was my favourite. Just gorgeous. The judges have chosen their Week 7 Rumba, which I mostly remember for John’s missing shirt buttons and bringing me out in a menopausal hot sweat. Do I want to watch this again? Yes, obviously. Scores: 9,10,10,10 - 39 for Rose and Giovanni. Have a drink for Craig’s 9. Shirley though it was Strictly magic - Rose went out and smashed it. Anton thought it was charming and wonderful and her line was immaculate. Craig loved how Rose maintained her frame and the storytelling was superb. Motsi loved the timing and the character, it was a great opening to the evening. I think this might be my favourite Motsi look ever, she looks incredible. Loving Shirley’s outfit too. This was such a fun and charming routine back in Week 9, and it still is - a great example of Rose’s brilliant musicality and characterisation. Really enjoyed that, lovely stuff. The judges have picked Rose and Giovanni’s Quickstep from Musicals Week, to ‘Love Is An Open Door’ from the movie Frozen. Mostly I remember this getting a ten from Motsi and nines from the other judges, so I’m not sure how much room there is for improvement. Would have preferred one of their upbeat Latin routines, personally, but sadly I’m not in charge of these matters. Out come the judges! They all look very relieved that this is nearly over, am loving Motsi’s orange dress. Out come the stars (both of them). Rose’s horrible Frozen dress is BACK. Tess in a white Dynasty karate suit, Claudia in a sparkly silver bandage that’s falling off one shoulder. Let’s assume that’s fashion. Has Tess got a massage booked at 7.30pm? She looks like she’s on a spa day. Time for our final opening pro dance! CGI stars and sparkles all round, to a slightly strangled version of ‘Waiting For A Star To Fall’ by Boy Meets Girl. John and Rose are having a dance on their own starry plinths, which is entirely appropriate as they’re both absolute superstars. I’m already welling up, DRINK. Last chance to watch these credits! We’ll never have to see the Oti/Ugo nose boop again. And we’re off! Time for some slo-mo reflection from Rose and John on the Strictly dancefloor. Sending much love to the poor soul who had to hastily re-edit all this since yesterday, give him/her a bonus. It’s nearly time! Is everyone ready??? I hope you’ve all got plenty of snacks and loved ones. I’m home alone this evening (apart from a Labrador), but I had some cheese on toast earlier. I know how to live. I’d forgotten what a great quiz The Weakest Link is. Turns out all you need to do is replace Anne Robinson’s snarky meanness with the natural charm of Romesh Ranganathan. WHO KNEW. It’s our final bingo of the year, so have a sip of something sparkly for any occurrence of the following: Montages Judges scoring anything other than a ten Mentions of the Christmas Special Crying (you, judges, contestants or their families) The word ‘journey’ Can I suggest you pace yourselves? Tiny sips only, for the sake of your livers. My annual non-scientific Strictly poll thinks Rose and Giovanni are going to win by a country mile this evening, but Twitter also said HRVY and Janette last year (remember them?), so Twitter isn’t always right. That said, this seems QUITE definitive. I’m not so sure, personally, but we’ll see. Personally I really don’t mind which one of the two wins – they’re both brilliant dancers, huge Strictly trailblazers and worthy finalists. Two of my favourite Strictly couples ever. The running order for tonight’s show is as follows: both couples will dance three routines back-to-back – the one the judges want to see again, each couple’s favourite dance of the series, and a free-for-all Showdance. I’m not entirely sure whether the Showdance is second or third, but what I can promise is that the filling in this three-tier dance sandwich will be provided by pro dances, recaps, emotional montages, musical interludes and the return of the Strictly Class of 2021. Put on your most sparkly outfit, stock up on snacks and refreshments, then buckle in for a final spin around the Strictly dancefloor – kick off is 7.10pm, so I’ll see you then! All of this last-minute drama means there are only two couples dancing tonight, and whilst Rose and Giovanni are odds on favourites to lift the Glitterball, I don’t think we can count John and Johannes out just yet. There’s always a risk that tonight could feel a bit lacklustre with only two couples instead of the expected three (and the usual four), so it’s down to us to give it the support and love the cast and crew deserve. Evening all, and welcome to this year’s Strictly Grand Final liveblog! It’s been another up and down year in Strictly’s history, and the cast and crew must have everything crossed that we’re going to get through tonight without further mishap so they can all go home and lock their doors. But against the odds they’ve pulled off one of the best seasons in Strictly history, and for that they all deserve a commemorative glitter cannon. Sadly AJ and Kai had to withdraw from the Grand Final yesterday after AJ suffered a torn ankle ligament in training – it’s devastating news for them both after three months of hard work, and I hope AJ recovers quickly and gets back on Kai’s dancefloor. She’s been a force of nature since that incredible Jive in Week One, arguably one of the most naturally gifted beginners we’ve ever seen on Strictly. I have no idea if AJ reads this blog but feel free to leave some love in the comment box.Boris Johnson was dealt another major blow to his leadership on Saturday night as it emerged that the man overseeing Brexit was resigning from the cabinet. With Tory MPs already warning the prime minister that he would have to regain control of the government to survive as leader until the next election, it emerged that Lord Frost is to leave the government after frustrations over Brexit negotiations and broader concerns over the government’s Covid policies and tax increases. The shock departure represents another dangerous moment for Johnson, following a series of scandals and a humiliating byelection defeat last week that saw his party lose a 23,000 majority. Frost’s departure is also another sign of the major fissures opening up within the Tory party. The peer has been vocal in recent weeks about his concerns over tax increases and the reimposition of Covid restrictions. He is understood to have spoken out against a rise in national insurance to pay for health and social care spending. He also has concerns about plan B Covid measures, which provoked the largest ever Tory rebellion under Johnson’s leadership. At a conference last month he said: “I am very happy that free Britain, or at least merry England, is probably now the freest country in the world as regards Covid restrictions. No mask rules, no vaccine passports, and long may it remain so.” However, Frost has also had to accept concessions over Brexit, with the British government dropping its demand to block the European court of justice from being the ultimate arbiter of trade rules in Northern Ireland. The government has also backed away from his threat to trigger article 16 of the Brexit agreement, which would suspend parts of the trade deal agreed for Northern Ireland. Whitehall insiders said Frost approached Johnson recently about leaving the government, as he felt Brexit talks were not progressing. There had been an agreement for him to leave at the end of January. However, that has been brought forward after news of his planned resignation leaked. In a letter to the PM released on Saturday night, Frost said he was “disappointed that this plan has become public this evening and in the circumstances I think it is right for me to write to step down with immediate effect”. Frost thanked Johnson and said: “Brexit is now secure … the challenge for the government now is to deliver on the opportunities it gives us. You know my concerns about the current direction of travel.” He also expressed his wish that the UK would become a “lightly regulated, low-tax” country. Regarding Covid-19 restrictions, he wrote: “You took a brave decision in July, against considerable opposition, to open up the country again. “Sadly it did not prove to be irreversible, as I wished, and believe you did too. I hope we can get back on track soon and not be tempted by the kind of coercive measures we have seen elsewhere.” In his reply, Johnson he was “very sorry” to have received his resignation. Labour’s deputy leader Angela Rayner said the news showed “a government in total chaos right when the country faces an uncertain few weeks”. Northern Ireland’s former first minister Arlene Foster described Frost’s resignation as “enormous”. Liberal Democrat foreign affairs spokesperson Layla Moran said: “The rats are fleeing Boris Johnson’s sinking ship.” Prominent Brexiter Tory Andrew Bridgen called Frost’s exit “a watershed moment”. He told Times Radio it was a “devastating blow” for the government and Johnson and suggested that many MPs would be considering the PM’s future over Christmas. Johnson, he tweeted, was “running out of time and out of friends to deliver on the promises and discipline of a true Conservative government”. He added: “Lord Frost has made it clear, 100 Conservative backbenchers have made it clear, but most importantly so did the people of North Shropshire.” Several senior Conservative MPs have said they believed rapidly rising prices and tax increases in the spring, followed by a drubbing for the Tories in May’s local elections, will mark the beginning of the end of Johnson’s premiership. After the humiliating byelection loss to the Lib Dems in the previously safe Conservative seat of North Shropshire, the prime minister is being told he has only three to four months to turn things around or risk being ousted. While frustration is deep and anger is running high,MPs from all wings of the party agree that, with the Omicron variant spreading like wildfire, now is not the time to strike. But many are beginning to fear for their own seats at the next general election, and say May will be the decisive month. One former minister said: “If there was not a pandemic, I would be writing and signing my letter now and sending it off to Graham Brady [chair of the 1922 Committee of Conservative backbenchers] to trigger a leadership contest. And I think most of us would do the same.” Another former minister said that while MPs agreed that Johnson should be given time to recover ground in the new year – after a disastrous period in which sleaze and scandals of rule-busting No 10 parties have dominated headlines – few had any confidence that he would change. The former minister said: “Boris isn’t willing to bring in new people, he isn’t willing to re-engage with the parliamentary party, he isn’t willing to do the hard graft, he isn’t willing to do the detail. “Everybody is saying: ‘Let’s go through the process of giving him the opportunity to change,’ but we all know where this is going and it is not pleasant. We are heading towards a leadership challenge. The next yardstick is the local elections.” Martin Vickers, a Johnson loyalist and member of the 1922 Committee executive, said he was “confident” that the PM could reassert the strong leadership he showed before the 2016 Brexit referendum and 2019 election, but added: “He has got to do that straight away and avoid the drift of the last few weeks.” Charles Walker, a former vice-chair of the 1922 Committee, said it would be “unconscionable” to try to get rid of Johnson in the next few weeks, but warned of tough times ahead as the cost of living increases. “The next six months are going to be extremely challenging for a variety of reasons, but mainly Omicron and the impact that yet another iteration of this virus will have on already fractured supply chains and the cost of living,” he said. “The Conservative party is not in a position to have a leadership contest in these circumstances. It is just not conscionable. Having said that, it is clear that over the next three months we cannot have a rerun of the past three months.” Tory grandee Sir Roger Gale last week became the first Conservative to say he had sent his letter to Brady. Under party rules, if the committee chairman receives 54 letters in favour of a vote of no confidence in Johnson, he will be required to stage one. If UK voters now begin to blame the government for rising prices, Tories fear a change at the top could be their only hope. Next spring the government will come under pressure from a combination of tax increases and rising prices that will eat further into living standards. In April, the energy regulator Ofgem is expected to allow a significant rise in the gas price cap that protects millions of households from volatile wholesale prices. Several high-profile gas suppliers have gone bust in recent months after they were unable to stem losses from supplying households with energy at below-market prices.As the 2021 Strictly Come Dancing Grand Final began, it was all about Representation Strictly. From the first flick to the final lift, serious points about changing modern Britain – about inclusion, diversity and legitimacy – were being made amid the drama and the sequins. In the show’s two-person final (a shorter format not seen since 2009), here was a young deaf woman – EastEnders actor Rose Ayling-Ellis, 27 – dancing with professional partner, Giovanni Pernice, 31. Bookies favourite Ayling-Ellis was competing against John Whaite, 32 – chef and 2012 Great British Bake Off winner – in a same-sex LGBTQ couple with Johannes Radebe, 34. They should have been joined in the final by a woman of colour – presenter, AJ Odudu, 33 – who was sadly unable to perform with her partner, Kai Widdrington, 26, due to a ligament injury. As Strictly is one of the UK’s “litmus paper” television shows – an unofficial barometer of public taste and opinion – here was an interesting moment for British culture: the final of the nation’s biggest entertainment show completely dominated by minorities. For all the “woke” charges from some quarters, in real terms, there was little technically new here. Strictly has featured many people of colour, some of whom went on to win. It’s also had contestants with disabilities, including Paralympians. Last year, the show featured a same-sex female couple, teaming Olympic boxer Nicola Adams with professional Katya Jones. That said, this year, things have been pushed that much harder. As the weeks passed, Whaite and Radebe detonated the idea that same-sex couples looked “unnatural” dancing together. While resistance remained (and not a small amount of trolling), in the main, Britain seemed more than ready for two talented gentlemen hitting the Strictly dancefloor, and Whaite – who’d initially been nervous – said the reception was more positive than he’d envisaged. For her part, Ayling-Ellis danced so beautifully (following beats and vibrations, signing her way through dances) she not only represented and inspired deaf people, she also educated the hearing world, at one point increasing online searches for British Sign Language by 488%. And of course this was about talent. As the final began, with Ayling-Ellis and Whaite leaping around on star-shaped mini-stages, it was all to boogie for. Alongside presenters Tess Daly (snow-globe empress) and Claudia Winkleman (silvery glitter-bomb), this season’s contestants (Odudu, Rhys Stephenson, et al), littered a studio that, despite the late arrival of Omicron, hasn’t seemed quite as cavernous and eerie as last year at peak-pandemic. Judges Craig Revel Horwood, Motsi Mabuse, Shirley Ballas, and Anton Du Beke – overdressed to the point of suffocation, reminding you that Strictly is, in the nicest way, a peak-time televisual panto – prepared to dish out perfect scores, compliments and tears – wow, so many tears! – though their votes don’t count in finals. The first dances of the final were judges’ picks, and Ayling-Ellis and Pernice delivered their quickstep from Musicals Week. It’s still debatable whether Love is an Open Door from Frozen is a quickstep-banger, but they managed to glide through smoothly, even elegantly, considering that Pernice’s costume was the budget end of Disney-prince. Whaite and Radebe performed their rumba to Sting’s Shape of My Heart. It was intimate, sensual, daring and, considering rumbas have been the undoing of many a Strictly contestant, nigh on impeccable. Next, it was couples’ picks. For Whaite and Radebe, this was their magnificent paso doble to I’m a Pirate from Pirates of the Caribbean; my personal favourite from the series, an attacking, joyous, mischievous dance that drove a veritable cutlass through the Strictly dancefloor. Next, Ayling-Ellis and Pernice performed their now legendary couple’s dance to Symphony by Clean Bandit, featuring Zara Larsson, where once again a section was performed in complete silence, pulling you deep into Ayling-Ellis’s soundless reality. A barefooted, ethereal tour de force, it’s not for nothing this is hailed by many as one of the greatest Strictly moments ever. Going into the show dances there wasn’t a sequin between the couples. Ayling-Ellis and Pernice performed to The Rose by Bette Midler, dancing dreamily around a quasi-Shakespearean bloom-strewn balcony in a whirl of lifts, spins and waltzes, amid dry ice and falling snow. Whaite and Radebe danced to You’ve Got The Love by Florence + the Machine, one moment slow and romantic, the next in a hi-energy disco frenzy, ending in an explosion of ticker tape with a rainbow heart glowing in the distance. While viewers voted, there was a special guest performance from a certain Ed Sheeran, an up and coming busker from the Suffolk area. Clad in black, he performed Bad Habits, as dancers sexily frugged in front of him. Then, the winner was announced: Rose Ayling-Ellis! Congratulations to the stupendous Ayling-Ellis, and to Whaite, and kudos to everyone involved, not least the professional finalists, Pernice and Radebe, who faced major choreography challenges throughout the series and carried them off with panache. This was a groundbreaking 2021 final in which two men danced together, looking not only glorious but entirely natural, and where a deaf woman didn’t need to hear the music to triumph. Far from being just another round of the culture wars, it was Strictly, and the BBC, at its best: everyone welcome, and everything all the better for it. In keeping with the event, this could be viewed rather as a cultural “dance-off”, where one side undoubtedly won. Where does Strictly go from here? • This article was amended on 19 December 2021 because an earlier version was incorrect to refer to this year’s final as its first with just two couples.The Football Association is set to investigate the alleged racist abuse directed at Arsenal’s bench by a Leeds fan during Saturday’s Premier League game. West Yorkshire police made one arrest following allegations that racist abuse was directed at the Arsenal dugout from among the home crowd in the first half of their 4-1 win at Leeds. Officers spoke to several of the Arsenal substitutes about the incident by the side of the pitch after full time and will receive statements from the club and the individuals involved. Leeds said in a statement last night that the club “confirms an investigation into claims of racism during the first half of our game with Arsenal is under way, and that one arrest has been made in connection to the allegation. Racism will not be tolerated at Leeds United and any supporter found to be using racist language will be subject to a life time ban for all Leeds United games.” The alleged abuse is understood to have been aimed toward Nuno Tavares and Nicolas Pépé as they warmed up during the first half, with play briefly pausing while the match officials were informed. “Yes, unfortunately I can confirm that,” said Mikel Arteta when asked about the investigation. “It was reported to the stadium manager and then the authorities will deal with the situation. It was a player sitting on the bench. One of the players heard those comments. It was a single incident, it was reported and now the authorities will have to work with the clubs to understand what happened.” One of the substitutes, Rob Holding, appeared to alert the officials to the incident in the 34th minute, leading to a conversation between representatives of both clubs and the referee Andre Marriner. Police could later be seen talking to those apparently in earshot at the game’s conclusion. Arteta also confirmed that Albert Sambi Lokonga and Pablo Marí have tested positive for Covid-19. Arsenal’s training ground was closed on Thursday for a deep clean and he was able to name an unchanged starting XI for their third win in a week. Additional reporting by PA MediaIt is the time of the year when conversations tend to revolve around one topic and for football managers that is the January transfer window. Liverpool’s recruitment strategy has been much admired in recent years but this time the question for Jürgen Klopp was not about unearthing another Mohamed Salah but simply whether he would be reluctant to bring in an unvaccinated player. As coronavirus has wreaked havoc with the fixture list, the Liverpool manager outlined a future whereby a vaccine refusenik could be more trouble than he is worth: as a threat to his teammates, creating a two-tier system when he has to be separated from the rest of the squad and a logistical nightmare as the need to quarantine could rule him out of many a game. “We are not close to signing a player but I thought about it and yes, it will be influential, definitely,” Klopp said. His friend Steven Gerrard, the Aston Villa manager, has voiced similar sentiments. If Klopp has a jabs-for-jobs policy, vaccines could shape the future of his side. Liverpool are rarities, with vaccine take-up at 100% and where boosters are encouraged as soon as everyone is eligible. It is an oversimplification to say it gives them complete protection from call-offs as Virgil van Dijk, Curtis Jones and Fabinho missed Thursday’s win over Newcastle after recording positive lateral flow tests. But whereas anti-vaxxers elsewhere are apparently being held partly responsible for postponements, Liverpool are due to face Tottenham on Sunday. It is why Klopp wants potential teammates for Roberto Firmino, Sadio Mané and Salah to trust in Pfizer, Moderna and AstraZeneca. “If a player is not vaccinated at all, he is a constant threat for all of us,” Klopp said. “He doesn’t want to be a threat. It is not that he thinks: ‘I don’t care about the others.’ But he is [a threat] and we have to find different scenarios. He has to change in a different dressing room, he has to eat in a different dining room, he has to sit in a different bus, he has to drive in a different car: from an organisational point of view, it gets really messy.” As annual Champions League participants with a cast of players who represent their countries, Liverpool need to be more aware than most of quarantine regulations for the unvaccinated, as well as the contacts of those who test positive. “If you really want to follow the protocols, it is incredibly difficult to do,” Klopp said. “If one [player] gets Covid and he [the unvaccinated player] was around him in the last four days, he will be in isolation. If we have to travel to a country to play international football and we come back, he has to self-isolate. Of course it is going to be influential. We have to do all these kind of things, like building extra buildings for unvaccinated players and it will not happen.” The 20 Premier League managers will meet virtually on Monday to discuss the game’s latest Covid crisis after a weekend when six top-flight games were called off. A circuit break may not solve anything if Omicron is still a menace in a few weeks. Klopp worries that removing matches now could result in a backlog later in the season. His answer lies in part in honesty. He has been consistent in calling for greater transparency. Whereas other clubs have a fog of secrecy around players and cases, Liverpool were quick to confirm the identities of their trio on Thursday. The paradox is that many of his managerial peers, whose job is to tell players what to do, have refused to instruct their charges about an issue of overriding importance. Klopp is a decision-maker who has not ducked a decision. A vocal advocate of vaccination, he has brought moral as well as footballing leadership. “I trust experts,” he wrote in his programme notes on Thursday. “I follow the advice of smart, educated people who know their field because they have dedicated their lives to it and have studied it.” A belief in experts, whether a throw-in coach or a nutritionist, has served him well in management. The sense now is that too many players at other clubs have instead shown faith in conspiracy theorists or trusted in the strength of their own bodies. A quarter of EFL players do not intend to get vaccinated. In contrast, 93% of their La Liga counterparts are and another 4% have antibodies. Serie A and the Bundesliga are thought to have similarly high numbers and while postponements pockmark the fixture calendar here this weekend, they are altogether rarer abroad. It seems an unfortunate case of exceptionalism in England; Klopp, a critic of Brexit, may spot a theme. The EFL anti-vaxxers could become a more immediate problem for the elite in January’s FA Cup. Liverpool host Shrewsbury, whose manager, Steve Cotterill, spent almost 50 days in hospital with coronavirus. Despite that, not all of his squad are vaccinated. Klopp is relieved the tie is at Anfield and thinking of those at risk in the more cramped confines of lower-league stadiums. “We go there [Shrewsbury] to an FA Cup away game and change in really small dressing rooms, that was the situation last year,” he said. “We play a Football League team at home but others play away and I’m not sure how it’s sorted. It’s just not 100% thought through.” Another season has become an obstacle course. It calls for further leadership, and not just from Klopp. “It’s not only [about] stopping the league or continuing like usual,” he said. “There are things in between that we have to sort.”Jack Grealish believes Manchester City can win the treble this season but the forward says he needs to improve his personal goal and assist tally given his British record £100m transfer fee. City lead the Premier League after 17 games, having won their past seven league matches. Only Manchester United – in 1999 – have claimed a treble of Premier League, Champions League and FA Cup. But before Sunday’s trip to Newcastle, Grealish did not duck the question, saying: “I think so,” when asked if City could win it all. “I don’t want to put too much pressure on the team [but] we have so much talent here and so many good players,” Grealish said. “I really think that we could go all the way in a few competitions this year. That is what I have come here for, to win trophies, so hopefully come the end of the season I will have a few medals around my neck.” Grealish’s goal in Tuesday’s 7-0 rout of Leeds at the Etihad Stadium was only his third for City since he moved from Aston Villa in August and the 26-year-old also has three assists in his 20 games in all competitions. Such metrics matter as they can be a measure of player’s impact, particularly when costing a high fee. “I think they are important because that is what people look at – such as how many goal involvements us attackers have,” said Grealish. “Especially when you come to a club with the price tag that I did. If you don’t get some [goals and assists] for a few games, then everyone starts to talk. “They are important but there will be times where you are playing well and the goals and assists just aren’t coming. That is what I have felt like recently. In the Watford game the other day I could have scored about four or five and I came off the pitch with nothing. Even in the Leeds game, we scored seven goals as well and I only got one. I am just trying to keep improving all of the time and I know for a fact that the longer I am here the more I will improve.” While Grealish is adamant his style remains he admits a need to dribble more. “I wouldn’t say I have changed, and I don’t want to change the way I have played my whole career,” he said. “That dribbling stat [that he was doing it less this season] is something I need to pick up on again and start doing because that is something I was doing the most when I was at Villa last year. But I don’t think you can read too much into stats like that. The main ones are the goals and the assists. They are the ones I am trying to work on the most.” Of that header against Leeds, his first such goal in the Premier League, Grealish said: “I am working on [scoring goals] and we were actually doing it the day before in training at the end. Just crossing and finishing. I surprised myself with a few [headers] and I scored a few. “I missed one at Watford. The ball had come in from a corner, I was free on my own in the middle of the box, but it went straight into the hands of the goalkeeper. To get myself on the scoresheet and to do it with a header, which I don’t do a lot of, it was perfect. It is something I feel like I can keep working with, especially being a winger and the way we play here as there are so many crosses that come into the box.”The story of Wolves’ season cannot be told properly in numbers. Otherwise it might appear Bruno Lage is doing a bad job, or at least the wrong job. After all, he was hired in the summer with a specific brief to make Wolves more swashbuckling, a bit like the Benfica team he inspired to success in 2018-19, when they won the Portuguese league with a record-equalling goal tally, scoring an average of more than three in every match. So far this season his Wolves team have averaged 0.76 goals per match, scoring just 13 goals in 17 Premier League matches – fewer than every other team except Norwich. But Lage is doing well. He has made Wolves better: they are creating more clearcut opportunities, it is just that their finishing has often been awry and the chances are that will change. What Lage has not done is transform Wolves. That was not a realistic expectation in the short-term bearing in mind he has a small squad consisting mostly of players moulded by his predecessor, Nuno Espírito Santo. What is more, a total overhaul was not desirable: Wolves did plenty of things well even in Nuno’s awkward final season. Lage has been shrewd enough to recognise what he inherited and what he could reasonably expect to change without a raft of new signings. Most impressively, although he says 80% of his coaching is on attacking, he has made Wolves more solid than ever. The fear at the start of the season was that Wolves’ new emphasis on offence would leave their defenders exposed, especially to pace. But instead players who were tipped to struggle, such as Conor Coady and Romain Saïss, are excelling while Max Kilman has made the right side of Wolves’ back three his own, performing so well that Willy Boly, ill or injured for most of the season, has barely been missed and talk of an England call-up for the 24-year-old former Maidenhead United player is justified. Nélson Semedo has been excellent at right wing-back, while Rayan Aït-Nouri and Marçal have both enjoyed positive spells at left wing-back. Here, however, the numbers do tell a story. Saïss has made more clearances than any other player in the league this season, and, according to Opta, he and Kilman more interceptions than all but two other centre-backs (Everton’s Michael Keane and Southampton’s Mohammed Salisu). Wolves have conceded fewer goals than any team outside the top three. Last weekend Manchester City needed a lucky penalty to penetrate their defence and Liverpool did so only thanks to a 94th-minute rescue act by Divock Origi. That might not have been possible had Lage been able to introduce a naturally left-sided player after injury forced him to withdraw Aït-Nouri, who had been marking Mohamed Salah, in the 89th minute. Today at Molineux, Chelsea are unlikely to get any gifts. One of the differences Lage has brought to Wolves is the number of analysis meetings he holds, to examine opponents and his own players. He brought two analysts with him, Jhony Conceição and Diogo Camacho, adding to those already at the club. He attributes his team’s defensive resilience partly to these meetings. “I think it’s important when you finish training, exercises or games that you go as a group somewhere quiet [to analyse things],” he says. “The defenders have more meetings than the attackers. Every time we analyse the behaviour of the line and we discuss little things. It’s about trying to arrive at a place where the players feel comfortable doing things. “We have meetings with the defenders, sometimes with the three centre-backs, sometimes with the line of five. Sometimes we look at individual questions such as where you put your body, your feet, your reaction or how you’re going to play against a forward who is right-footed or left-footed, whether he comes inside or outside. These little details we work on. “One good example is Rayan. We work on him especially on individual positions so that he will be a better player. We know he can go forward and do a lot of things in the final third and create a lot of situations but he also needs to improve the way he defends.” Another example is Coady, whose lack of speed could have made playing Lage’s high line problematic. Instead Wolves have worked to get their timing impeccable and Coady resists any temptation to drop back as he was accustomed to doing. “Instead of Conor being the cover for the other two, he now stays in the same line,” says Lage. “We are working in that way so that he doesn’t need to be fast. They are working as a three together, respecting the line and spaces and they move together. When you try to stay in the same line, you can jump to press the guys between the lines. “That’s why it’s so important the strikers also understand the moment of the team and the way we press. If they go and the midfielders go and there are spaces, it is very hard for the defenders to jump six, seven or eight metres to press the guy. If they are more compact and solid and as a team we understand which moment we press, it is better for everyone.”Police officers suffered minor injuries during “scuffles” at an anti-vaccine protest in Parliament Square in Westminster. The officers were injured while attempting to escort a police motorcyclist through the area at about 12.30pm on Saturday, the Metropolitan police said in a statement. Video footage from the protest posted on social media shows shoving between police and protesters. Thousands of protesters had gathered from 12pm in Parliament Square, from where they marched through the capital, with the hashtag #londonprotest trending on Twitter. Among those marching with protesters were Gillian McKeith, former host of Channel 4’s You Are What You Eat, and Maajid Nawaz, the LBC radio host. At around 3pm, a group of protesters stopped outside a shop on Regent Street, police said. They began “directing abuse” at people inside and egging the shop until police intervened, ending the incident, the Met added. No injuries were reported. A further incident occurred at about 4pm when beer cans and flares were thrown at officers on Whitehall. The force said officers were also subjected to “abuse and physical violence” elsewhere on Whitehall – leading to several more officers sustaining minor injuries. No arrests were made. According to a report in the Express, the demonstration was organised by a coalition of groups including Take a Stand London, Save Our Rights UK and The Great Reopening. Many of those marching held placards that had been printed by a group called Together, which hosts an online petition against vaccine passports, mandatory vaccinations and the government’s summary introduction of Covid powers that has been signed by more than 167,000 people. The protest had its critics online, however, with some observers suggesting that by gathering together, those taking part would make lockdowns more likely by increasing transmission of the virus.