Tony Blair considered asking the Queen to open the newly formed Northern Ireland assembly in 1998, newly released state papers show. A letter from the then prime minister’s principal private secretary, John Holmes, reveals that Blair accepted it was a “delicate issue” but “[did] not believe it would be inappropriate” for the monarch to be involved. Details of exchanges relating to the opening are contained in documents held at the Public Record Office in Belfast, with hundreds of the files now being made public under the 30/20-year rule. Blair was keen for the Queen to open Stormont and asked one of his ministers to raise it in secret with the then Social Democratic and Labour party (SDLP) deputy leader, Seamus Mallon. The letter to Nick Perry at the Northern Ireland Office (NIO) on 21 September 1998 reads: “The prime minister agrees that we cannot assume that this will remain a sleeping dog. However, he does not believe that it would be inappropriate for the Queen to open the assembly and does not agree we should ourselves try to avert this possibility. Nevertheless, he recognises that this is a delicate issue for nationalist opinion.” “He therefore believes that as a first step Paul Murphy [an NIO minister] should talk to Seamus Mallon privately about arrangements for the opening, mentioning the possibility of the Queen, but in neutral terms, before raising it with [David] Trimble or making any other moves. We can take it from there, depending on Seamus’s reaction.” The then Northern Ireland secretary, Mo Mowlam, suggested it might help “see off controversy” if ideas that did not include the Queen were considered. A letter from Jonathan Stephens, a Labour official, said he had discussed the issue with Mowlam. He stated: “She was entirely content with the line being taken by No 10. But she also suggested that it might help see off controversy if we were ready to come forward ourselves with vibrant and exciting proposals for marking the devolution of full powers to the assembly in a way which did not necessitate the Queen’s involvement – eg children’s choirs, etc.” The Stormont assembly was established in 1998 but did not gain fully devolved powers until December 1999, mainly due to political disputes over IRA decommissioning of weapons. The newly released files also reveal that the historic moment when unionist politicians shared a conference room with Sinn Féin for the first time was described by officials as “something of a damp squib”. The peace talks, involving Northern Ireland political parties and the British and Irish governments, took place in 1997 after Labour’s victory in the general election that year and a new ceasefire by the IRA. The declassified papers reveal that on 15 September 1997, Mowlam challenged Sinn Féin’s leadership about an IRA interview in An Phoblacht, a republican newspaper, in which the group said it had problems with sections of the Mitchell principles, which committed all parties to exclusively peaceful means. The minutes record the Sinn Féin negotiator Martin McGuinness telling the plenary meeting that “Sinn Féin could not guarantee that the IRA would support whatever was agreed in the talks”. A talks summary from two days later reveals that the key event was the “unexpected arrival of the UUP (Ulster Unionist party) delegation, led by David Trimble”. The two parties were in the same room by the following week. It reads: “The purpose of the plenary – the hearing of the UUP’s indictment of Sinn Féin over the Mitchell principles – was something of a damp squib, particularly as the UUP’s address on their indictment contained no evidence to support their allegations. Nevertheless, a historic change had occurred.” The files also revealed that former British prime minister John Major admitted privately that he did not believe the IRA could be beaten militarily. According to a memo, he made the comments at meeting in Downing Street in February 1992.For many people, placing a record on the turntable will always be the quintessential musical experience. Sliding a shiny black disc out of a gatefold sleeve and dust jacket, laying it on the turntable platter, then the unmistakable crackle and the low, almost imperceptible analogue rumble as the needle slides into the groove. Before the digital revolution, vinyl was the premier choice for listening to music. But the format’s resurgence in popularity over the past few years shows no signs of letting up, with new figures predicted to show sales growing to their highest level in more than three decades. According to the British Phonographic Industry (BPI), more than 5m vinyl albums have been bought in the UK over the past 12 months, up 8% on sales in 2020 and the 14th consecutive year of growth since 2007. By the end of the year, vinyl will have accounted for almost one in four album purchases – the highest proportion since 1990 – according to BPI estimates. But why? There are tactile, sensuous and theatrical qualities to vinyl that made it a unique format, said Andy Kerr, the director of product marketing and communications for Bowers &amp; Wilkins, a British audiophile speaker maker. Popular streaming services used digital file compression to lower internet bandwidth that “tend to make the sound tinny”, Kerr said. “Vinyl is the opposite of that. It tends to make the sound lush and warm.” But Kerr said he did not think the renewed interest in vinyl was being led by audiophiles. “I do think a huge amount of what’s going on with vinyl is not about the sound at all, it’s about the theatre of it, it’s the experience of it,” he said. “The LP record forces you into that [experience], you don’t tend to skip every 30 seconds because you don’t like the way that the song is going, you tend to listen to it all the way through.” Tom Fisher, record buyer at Rat Records, a secondhand record dealer in Camberwell, south London, said lockdowns had led to “frustrated demand for music as a cultural thing”. “If you can’t go and see a band you might buy an album or T-shirt, [that satisfies you] in a way that digital doesn’t fulfil,” he said. Emphasising that his comments related to the secondhand trade in LPs, Fisher said: “The only thing I would say about the renewed interest in vinyl is that it is not really very good for creative music and art, because the interest in vinyl is retro.” A running joke in Rat Records was that it could never get enough copies of Rumours by Fleetwood Mac, The Wall by Pink Floyd or Born in the USA by Bruce Springsteen, all culturally mainstream products of a similar era. People were not interested in records made before about 1968 because they lacked a production quality that conveyed well on modern speakers and headphones, Fisher added. “I find it quite hard to understand why people are so interested in vinyl and when they are so interested in these cultural monoliths, like Rumours, when they could go and listen to some piece of underground hip-hop or something from some other part of the world that was never available before,” said Fisher. Ultimately, vinyl’s newfound success would eat itself, Fisher suggested. “If everybody wants records and they all want the same records then it can’t be really that cool and the vanguard are going to move on,” he said. Geoff Taylor, the chief executive of the BPI, Brit awards and Mercury prize, said: “It’s a great time to be a music fan, with wider choice on offer than ever before supported by great value. “Thanks to record label investment into new music and talent, fans can purchase and collect the music they most love on vinyl, CD and even cassette, whilst also enjoying access to over 70m songs to stream instantly whenever and how often they want, in turn enabling a new generation of artists to create music and sustain successful careers in a global market.” The BPI will report its final music consumption figures on 4 January 2022. Predicted bestselling vinyl albums for 2021 1 ABBA Voyage 2 Adele 30 3 Fleetwood Mac Rumours 4 Ed Sheeran = 5 Amy Winehouse Back to Black Predicted bestselling cassette albums for 2021 1 Olivia Rodrigo Sour 2 Dave We’re All Alone in This Together 3 Lana Del Rey Chemtrails Over the Country Club 4 Queen Greatest Hits 5 Coldplay Music of the Spheres (Based on year to date Official Charts data)UK households face a hit of £1,200 next year as stalling wages and rising tax and energy bills cause a “cost of living catastrophe” in the spring, a leading thinktank has warned. Government measures, including the new social care levy on national insurance and the freezing of the personal income tax allowance, will combine with high inflation to make 2022 the “year of the squeeze”, the Resolution Foundation said. It warned that in April the introduction of tax changes, with a new price cap on energy bills, will cost families £1,200 overnight. “The months ahead will not be easy for households who see their wages fall back as energy bills and taxes rise,” the report said. “As Omicron hopefully fades in the early months of 2022, we will come to realise the scale of the challenge posed to household finances.” UK inflation hit a 10-year high in November, and economists have suggested it will rise further in 2022. One of the biggest factors has been energy bills, which have been driven up by rising wholesale gas prices and the failure of many of the cheapest suppliers. Households have been shielded from some of the increases by an energy price cap, which means suppliers have to offer gas and electricity at or below a unit price set by the regulator, Ofgem. The cap is due to be reviewed in February and come into effect in April, and record wholesale gas prices in recent weeks have led to speculation that it could allow households bills to rise above £2,000. Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, was locked in crunch talks with energy bosses on Monday, but this failed to deliver a breakthrough. The founder of Ovo Energy has warned that household bills will “almost certainly” double in April without government intervention. The Resolution Foundation’s calculations are based on an average rise of £600 in prices, which would take bills to about £1,900 a year. The thinktank said an increase in the price cap in April would have the biggest impact on low-income households as they spend more of their income on energy. It said the poorest households would see spending on gas and electricity rise from 8.5% to 12% of their earnings. Higher-income households will face a bigger hit from the government’s decision to freeze personal tax allowances at £12,570 a year, which was announced in March’s budget, and the 1.25-percentage point increase in national insurance to fund social care. The average cost for households of these changes will be £600, but for those households in the top 50% of earners, the national insurance rise alone will add an average of £750 to annual outgoings. The Foundation said wage growth had stalled in 2021 and in real terms wages were likely to fall for most of 2022. It forecast a rise of 0.1% over the year, once inflation was taken into account, but said it expected that by the end of 2024 real wages would be £740 a year lower than if the UK’s pre-pandemic pay growth had continued. The report called on the government to consider ways to mitigate rising living costs, including raising universal credit, holding down the price cap and temporarily removing VAT on energy bills. Torsten Bell, chief executive of the Resolution Foundation, said: “2022 will begin with Omicron at the forefront of everyone’s minds. But while the economic impact of this new wave is uncertain, it should at least be short-lived. Instead, 2022 will be defined as the ‘year of the squeeze’. “The overall picture is likely to be one of prices surging and pay packets stagnating. In fact, real wages have already started falling, and are set to go into next Christmas barely higher than they are now.” Of the £1,200 income hit in April, Bell said: “So large is this overnight cost-of-living catastrophe that it’s hard to see how the government avoids stepping in. “Top of the government’s new year resolutions should be addressing April’s energy bills hike, particularly for the poorest households, who will be hardest hit by rising gas and electricity bills.” Labour criticised Boris Johnson for failing to mitigate the cost-of-living crisis that is about to hit families and pensioners. “Heating bills are going through the roof, punishing tax rises are on the way, wages are stagnating, universal credit cuts have hit struggling families hard, all while prices in the shops are rising and inflation risks eroding the value of savings and pensions,” said Jonathan Ashworth, the shadow work and pensions secretary. Ashworth said Labour would help ease the burden by scrapping VAT on household heating bills over winter, and would not hit working families “with a punishing national insurance rise at the worst possible time”. Responding to the report, a government spokesperson said: “We know people are facing pressure with the cost of living – which is why we’re taking £4.2bn of decisive action to help. “This includes reducing the universal credit taper – a tax cut worth over £2bn – supporting households with their bills through the energy price cap, warm home discount scheme, winter fuel payments, cold weather payments, and household support fund, as well as freezing alcohol and fuel duty.”The Challow Hurdle at Newbury has a fine record of pinpointing future chasing stars, with past winners including Denman, Champ, Taquin Du Seuil and Sunday’s Kempton winner, Bravesmansgame, all going on to land Grade Ones over fences later on in their careers, and Wednesday’s race looks like one of the stronger renewals in recent seasons. Stage Star has not put a foot wrong in two starts over hurdles and he stopped the clock in a decent time when winning over course and distance in November. Lossiemouth, too, is unbeaten over timber this term after progressing rapidly from an Ascot handicap in October, while Gordon Elliott’s Gringo D’Aubrelle, the only Irish-trained runner in the field, will also attract plenty of support. At the early prices, however, Dan Skelton’s mare, West Balboa (3.05), has to be the bet at around 7-1. Her jumping was impressively slick on the way to a 17-length win in a strong time at Warwick in November and she gets a handy 7lb allowance from her six opponents. Newbury 1.25 Heart Of A Lion was let down by his jumping when only third at Huntingdon last time. He has a big chance on the form of his successful chase debut in early November, however, and is likely to have had some serious schooling in recent weeks. Leopardstown 1.45 Run Wild Fred’s win in the highly competitive Troytown Handicap Chase in November is the strongest form on offer here and he looks overpriced at around 100-30 for the in-form Gordon Elliott stable. Newbury 2.00 Masters Legacy finished well from a long way back when going down by just a length over track and trip last time. A 3lb rise gives him every chance of going one place better. Leopardstown 2.20 The admirable Sharjah is very difficult to oppose in his attempt to win this Grade One for the fourth year running. Newbury 2.35 Crypto was not beaten far on his first start since March in November and normal progress would give him every chance here. Doncaster 3.20 Zambella was a ready winner at Aintree earlier this month and will take some stopping under a 4lb penalty if she is in the same kind of form. Newbury 3.35 A highly competitive novice handicap but Fern Hill did nothing wrong on his chasing debut last time and should go well off a 1lb lower mark.As we look towards 2022 I reflect on the past year and how living in poverty not only affects me but thousands of others as well. At the beginning of 2021, I was doing well. The government had at that time increased jobseeker with the Covid supplement. Even though some would argue the money would be wasted on drugs, gambling, alcohol or cigarettes, in my case and many others, that’s not what happened at all. Instead, I spent the supplement on a gym membership with a swimming pool, healthy food and spending time with my dad who had stage four cancer. I had the money for transport to visit him and attend all his appointments. We made memories that now that he’s gone I will treasure forever. I have chronic illnesses that affect my ability for physical activity but using a treadmill or exercise bike I had the support I needed to exercise and afterwards I’d go for a swim. I ate more fresh vegetables and fruit and lean cuts of meat instead of pasta, rice, bread and potatoes, everything I shouldn’t have been eating but was cheap and would fill me up and stretch a meal even further. An amazing thing started to happen. I lost weight, my A1C lowered and for the first time, I didn’t need iron infusions. My blood tests were continuously improving. I could afford to buy medications and medical supplies and was even able to stop taking iron supplements and diabetes medications and I didn’t need to see my psychologist as often. I felt better and started looking towards the future. I was excited at the new possibilities that improving my health would offer. I even started getting socially involved with the others at the gym. With all these changes my mental health also improved. There was less stress as I didn’t worry about being able to eat or pay for medications. I knew if an emergency happened I could cover it. I bought a new winter coat and new clothes and shoes. I started feeling good about myself and even thought about going back to study. I became more hopeful and life didn’t feel like such a struggle. Things were looking up. I heard from other people on jobseeker that they also noticed a huge change in themselves and their circumstances had improved. Some were even able to find housing. I could afford to meet a friend for a coffee and engage in my local community. I didn’t have to plan out when to make appointments just in case on the day I wouldn’t have money for the bus fare. There were so many things I could do that I could list them for days, simple things most people get to take for granted and that being out of poverty created: friendships, community connections, pride, hope and better health. Then the supplement was cut. The first thing to go was the gym membership and healthy food options. It was back to skipping meals and filling up on carbs. I put on weight and in November I was diagnosed with scurvy and malnutrition. I’m not malnourished because I eat but the foods I eat lack the vitamins I need. I’m now on vitamin and supplement tablets and am back to needing iron infusion and six weekly blood tests. My mental health went back to the way it was and I’ve had to re-engage with my psychologist, all of which is luckily paid for by Medicare. Which makes me question how much money would be saved on Medicare if we as a nation lifted everyone out of poverty? How many more people could improve their health so they were more employable? Maybe keeping welfare so low doesn’t incentivise people to work and instead becomes an actual barrier to finding employment. Australia is a wealthy nation. Poverty is a policy choice. Maybe the question shouldn’t be how we can afford to raise people out of poverty but instead, how can we afford not to. • Melissa Fisher is an Adelaide artist and anti-poverty activist who currently relies on jobseeker to liveWe will be closing this Covid blog but please follow our latest live feed here. If you would like to get in touch with any stories, tips or feedback please get contact me via email at samantha.lock@theguardian.com or Twitter @Samantha__Lock. I would love to hear from you. Brazil reported 171 Covid-19 deaths on Tuesday and 8,430 additional cases, according to data released by the nation’s health ministry. The South American country has now reported a total of 618,705 coronavirus deaths and 22,254,706 total confirmed cases. The nation has registered a total of 77 confirmed cases of the Omicron variant, according to data from Brazil’s 27 state and district health secretaries. Here’s a quick snapshot of how Covid is unfolding across the world: Europe: Omicron “appears to be less severe and many people spend a relatively short time in hospital,” Sir John Bell, regius professor of medicine at Oxford University and leading immunologist has said. UK prime minister Boris Johnson said he will not introduce further Covid restrictions in England before 2022 giving mass events the go-ahead and leaving nightclubs open for New Year’s Eve. Scientists say it is “the greatest divergence between scientific advice and legislation” seen since the start of the pandemic. The UK recorded 129,471 new Covid cases on Tuesday, the highest recorded total ever, and up from 98,515 reported yesterday. More than 500 children admitted to hospital with Covid in England in week up to Boxing Day. France has reduced the waiting time for a third booster shot to three months from four. From Monday, all indoor gatherings will be limited to 2,000 people, and to 5,000 people for outdoor events. Consumption of drinks and food will be banned in long-distance transport and home working will become mandatory for at least three days per week where possible. France reported 179,807 new confirmed cases on Tuesday, by far the highest number since the start of the pandemic. Denmark and Iceland reported record daily Covid cases on Monday. Denmark now has the world’s highest infection rate, with 1,612 cases per 100,000 people. Denmark has the world’s highest Covid infection rate, with 1,612 cases per 100,000 people. Greece will impose further restrictions from January 3 including the closure of bars and restaurants at midnight, no standing customers at entertainment venues and a maximum limit of six people per table. Greece reported a new daily record of 21,657 Covid cases on Tuesday, more than double the number the day before. Germany toughens Covid restrictions with indoor and outdoor gatherings restricted in size and leisure facilities closing in several states. Asia: Daily cases in Australia exceeded 10,000 for the second consecutive day, with a total of 11,264 new Covid cases across the country – the highest figure since the beginning of the pandemic. In Yan’an, China, hundreds of thousands more people were ordered to stay at home, joining millions under strict lockdown in Xi’an. China’s coronavirus cases rose for a fourth consecutive day on Monday. Delhi, India, announces new Covid restrictions. Schools, colleges and educational institutions will close as well as sports complexes, cinemas, conference halls, stadiums and swimming pools. Offices will operate at 50% capacity, as will restaurants with a 10pm curfew. Japanese officials have detected a five-person cluster of Omicron cases in the city of Osaka. Hong Kong will tighten quarantine rules for air cargo crew. Malaysia will cut the booster vaccine waiting time to three months and has banned mass celebrations for New Year’s Eve with negative Covid tests required for private gatherings. India has approved Merck’s Covid-19 pill and two more vaccines for emergency use. United States: Omicron accounts for 58.6% of all Covid cases in the US, new CDC data shows. Delta accounts for 41.1% of Covid cases for the week ending 25 December. The US recorded 512,553 daily new cases on Tuesday – by far the single highest number of cases recorded since the beginning of the pandemic. Dr Anthony Fauci said a vaccine mandate should be considered for all passengers in the US. The US Centre for Disease Control has reduced the recommended isolation time for people recording a positive test from 10 days to five. Joe Biden said the dramatic surge in US Covid cases caused by the Omicron variant “should be a source of concern but it should not be a source of panic”. Africa: South Africa has recalled rules that no longer required people without symptoms of Covid-19 to isolate or test if they have been in contact with a positive case. Last week the health ministry said that asymptomatic individuals who had been in contact with a case of Covid-19 no longer had to isolate but should monitor for symptoms for 5-7 days and avoid attending large gatherings. Hello. It’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog and I hope everyone is well. As I will be reporting from Sydney here is quick snapshot of how Covid is unfolding across Australia. The nation’s most populous state of New South Wales recorded 11,201 cases and reports suggest that the state government will seek to wind back isolation times for Covid positive patients. Victoria recorded 3,767. Some states are considering shorter isolation and Queensland border test requirements are changing. Waiting times at testing sites in NSW and Victoria have been overwhelmed, with reports the system is being strained. Some have reported queuing for hours and being turned away, and many have reported waiting up to six days for results. South Australia saw a huge surge in cases, recording 995 yesterday, with concerns numbers could continue to rise. Premier Steven Marshall told reporters the numbers were “doubling every three to four days”. The ACT also recorded its highest daily case numbers yesterday, reporting 252 new cases. A total of 512 children were admitted to hospitals in England with Covid-19 in the week leading up to Boxing Day, new figures show. The numbers, released on the government’s coronavirus dashboard, showed 59 children aged under 5 were admitted to hospital between Christmas Day and Boxing Day alone. A further 50 children in this same age group were admitted to hospital in the 24 hours prior. From 19 to 26 December, a total of 226 children aged 6 to 17 were admitted to hospital with Covid. Over that same duration, 286 children under the age of 5 were admitted to hospital. In comparison, 256 children aged 17 and under were admitted into hospital in the last week of November. Of those, 100 were aged under five and 156 aged between six and 17. The mass fatalities and packed intensive care units that marked the pandemic’s first year will likely not be repeated in the UK, a scientist advising the government has said. Professor Sir John Bell, regius professor of medicine at Oxford University, told The Independent that vaccines based on early iterations of the virus appear to have remained highly effective at protecting against severe disease and deaths from subsequent waves driven by new variants. “The horrific scenes that we saw a year ago – intensive care units being full, lots of people dying prematurely – that is now history in my view and I think we should reassured that that’s likely to continue,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme this morning. South Africa has scrapped rules that no longer required people without Covid-19 symptoms to isolate or test if they have been in contact with a positive case, the government has announced. The decision comes after health authorities said on Thursday they would stop contact tracing everywhere except places like prisons and schools, as they believed most of the population had already been exposed to the virus through vaccination or infection. Under last week’s rules, contact cases would only have to do a test if they started developing symptoms. If they tested positive, they were to isolate for 10 days then resume their activities as normal after recovery without another test. “The department of health has been inundated with media, stakeholders and public enquiries and comments since the release of the revised protocols,” it said today. “The department has decided to put the implementation of the revised policy changes on hold, while taking all... comments and inputs received into consideration.” Officials said a new “amended circular” would be re-issued once all comments had been assessed. Quebec’s health minister Christian Dubé has announced some health care workers who have tested positive for Covid-19 will continue working. The second most populous Canadian province has “no choice” but to allow some Covid infected essential workers to continue working to prevent staff shortages from impeding its healthcare services, Dubé told reporters at a briefing today. “Omicron’s contagion is so exponential, that a huge number of personnel have to be withdrawn – and that poses a risk to the network capacity to treat Quebecers,” he said. “We made the decision that under a certain condition positive staff will be able to continue working according to a list of priority and risk management,” he said, adding that more information would be provided in the coming days. Quebec, which has been setting daily records since the Omicron variant started a new wave of rapidly rising infections, recorded 12,833 new cases on Monday – the highest one-day count of any region in Canada during the pandemic. Last week, Quebec ordered bars, gyms and casinos to shut and directed people to work only from home. It also limited the size of gatherings at private homes and restaurants to six people. Thousands of New Year’s Eve revellers are expected to escape strict Covid-19 restrictions in Wales by hopping across the border to visit nightspots in English towns and cities. Leaders of the nightlife industry in Wales are angry that they will lose trade to their counterparts in England because Welsh nightclubs have been ordered to shut and pubs told to put in social distancing measures. But the Welsh government said on Tuesday that its restrictions were proportionate, with the latest seven-day coronavirus rate per 100,000 people rising to 1,004 – the highest since the pandemic began. About 6,000 new infections are being confirmed daily, the majority caused by the Omicron variant. Nick Newman, the chair of the Cardiff Licensees Forum, said he expected many people to leave Wales for England. “It’s 40 minutes from Newport to Bristol and it’s easy to get from north Wales into Manchester or Liverpool. English businesses are going to benefit. “We’re hugely disappointed with the stance the Welsh government is taking, especially not presenting the evidence that links the virus to the hospitality industry.” Mark Finlay, the operations manager for a number of pubs and bars in Wrexham, which is close to the border, said people were bound to pop over to places like Chester for a night out with few restrictions. “It’s frustrating that a few minutes down the road you can celebrate a normal New Year’s Eve but we’re not allowed that opportunity here. For us it will be an average night serving people at tables. There won’t be the normal party atmosphere. I’m fully expecting everyone to go to Chester.” Read the full article here: According to data by Johns Hopkins University, the US recorded 512,553 daily new cases today – by far the single highest number of cases recorded since the beginning of the pandemic. The previous record was 294,015 set on 8 January 2021. One mitigating factor is the delay in reporting over the Christmas weekend. Many testing centres were likely closed over the holiday, meaning some test results would have been likely rolled over to Monday and today. Germany’s highest court has ruled that disabled people must be protected by legally binding guidelines in case hospitals are forced to introduce a triage system as the country braces itself for a new, more infectious wave of coronavirus. The constitutional court announced its decision on Tuesday, ordering legislators to create a legal framework that would prevent disabled people from being unfairly treated. It urged the state to establish a criteria to which doctors would have to refer before deciding which patients received lifesaving treatment if intensive care units were overwhelmed and resources were exhausted. The case was brought by a group of nine people with disabilities and pre-existing medical conditions who feared that current medical guidelines would not protect them from being overlooked or disregarded if they became seriously ill with Covid-19. Read the full article here: Cyprus has recorded its highest single-day number of cases with 2,241 infections, up from 1,925 the day before. To date, Cyprus has reported 154,926 cases and 630 deaths, Reuters reports. “I think this is due to the Omicron variant, which may have arrived earlier than we thought,” said Petros Karayiannis, professor of microbiology and molecular virology at the University of Nicosia and a member of the government’s scientific advisory committee. The first confirmed case of the Omicron variant was recorded in Cyprus on 10 December. More than 80% of residents have received two doses of a Covid vaccine. In Turkey, figures by the health ministry show daily cases have exceeded 30,000 for the first time since 19 October. Turkish authorities reported 32,176 cases and 184 deaths today. The country’s daily caseload has risen in recent days due to the Omicron variant, with daily cases surging by 30% on Monday. “Bringing case numbers to the 20,000 level was a serious achievement,” Turkey’s health minister, Fahrettin Koca, said. “Due to the rapid spread of the Omicron variant, it can be seen we are now entering a rising trend.” The number of children being admitted to hospital in New York City has increased fivefold this month as paediatric Covid cases and hospitalisations across the US continue to rise. Paediatric hospitalisations in New York City jumped from 22 to 109 in the week ending 23 December. Nationwide, paediatric hospitalisations rose by 35% in the past week, CNN reports. “I think we are going to see more numbers now than we have ever seen,” said Dr Stanley Spinner, the chief medical officer and vice president at Texas Children’s paediatric and urgent care units in Houston. “Cases are continuing to rise between Christmas gatherings and we’re going to continue to see more numbers this week from that.” Earlier today, New York’s acting state health commissioner said the risk of Covid for children was “real”. “We are alerting New Yorkers to this recent striking increase in paediatric Covid-19 admissions so that paediatricians, parents and guardians can take urgent action to protect our youngest New Yorkers,” she said. Greece reported a new daily record of 21,657 Covid cases today, more than double the number the day before. The previous record was 9,284 cases, set on Monday. That figure was more than double Sunday’s figure of 4,036. Of the new infections, 9,882 were reported in Attica and 2,665 in Thessaloniki. A further 60 deaths were also reported, slightly down from 66 the previous day. The joint head of the largest nursing union in the US has warned that new federal guidance reducing the isolation time for asymptomatic people infected with Covid-19 will increase the spread of the virus. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) released updated guidance on Monday halving the recommended isolation time from 10 days to five days. Speaking to CNN, Jean Ross, the co-president of National Nurses United, said: “It’s only going to lead to more illness, more cases.” Ross argued that reducing isolation time during a surge of the Omicron variant was misguided. “This is when you should be tightening your controls, not lessening [them],” she said. Her comments came as new data released today by the CDC estimated that the Omicron variant accounted for 58.6% of cases circulating in the country for the week ending 25 December. France reported 179,807 new confirmed cases in a 24-hour period today, by far the highest number since the start of the pandemic. The previous highest daily number, 104,611 cases, was recorded on Saturday. Portugal reported a record 17,172 new cases today, beating the previous high of 16,432 cases in late January this year. Despite the rise in cases, the number of people admitted to hospital and intensive care with Covid-19 is a fraction of the peak reached during Portugal’s winter wave. The latest data showed hospitals had 936 patients with Covid, compared with a peak of 6,869 on 1 February. In the last 24 hours, 19 further deaths have been recorded, compared to a peak of 303 deaths reported on 28 January. Official data showed the Omicron variant, which has fuelled a sharp rise in cases across Europe, representing 61.5% of all new cases in the country. With about 87% of its 10 million population vaccinated and almost 2.4 million people having received a third booster jab, Portugal has one of the world’s highest Covid vaccination rates. The United Arab Emirates is the only country with a higher proportion of vaccinated people. Hello, I’m Léonie Chao-Fong and I’ll be bringing you all the latest global development on the coronavirus pandemic for the next few hours. Feel free to get in touch on Twitter or via email. The UK’s care minister has said people should enjoy themselves but exercise caution when celebrating the new year. Speaking to BBC News, Gillian Keegan advised that people should take a lateral flow test before going out and celebrate in well-ventilated areas. “I’ve been to a couple of outdoor parties,” she said. “Just be cautious but do try to enjoy yourself as well.” Covid cases in the UK have reached a record high, with 129,471 new cases reported on Tuesday in England and Wales, as the Omicron variant continues to fuel a winter wave of infections. While official data was not provided for Scotland and Northern Ireland, a record 117,093 cases – infections that are picked up through testing – were reported for England, up from a previous high of 113,628 on Christmas Day. Despite the incomplete nature of the data, the total number of cases reported on Tuesday for England and Wales is higher than the previous record for the entire UK. The UK Health Security Agency reported 17,269 additional confirmed cases of the Omicron variant across England and Northern Ireland, with the total number of confirmed cases in the UK to date at 177,201 – although such figures are a significant underestimate. Data from NHS England released on Tuesday revealed that the number of patients in hospital had risen by more than 1,000 in the space of a day, with 9,546 beds occupied by people with Covid on Tuesday, compared with 8,474 the day before – although some trusts, thought to have about 220 Covid patients in total based on recent submissions, did not report their figures for Monday. Tuesday’s figure is a 38% increase on that reported on 21 December and the highest since 3 March, although still far below the peak last winter of more than 34,000. Read the full article here: The UK recorded 129,471 new Covid cases on Tuesday, the government’s Covid dashboard says. This is the highest recorded total ever, and up from 98,515 reported yesterday. The previous record high of daily infections was 122,186 on 24 December. The data is not complete as it does not include figures for Scotland and Northern Ireland due to differences in reporting practices over the Christmas holidays. The 12,378 cases reported for Wales included data that would normally have been reported in previous days. A further 18 deaths were also reported. This data is incomplete due to the holiday period, so the true figures are likely to be higher. Here’s the breakdown of cases: England – 117,093 Scotland – no data yet Wales – 12,378 Northern Ireland – no data yet Severin Carrell, Scotland editor Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, has predicted that Omicron case numbers will continue to rise in Scotland as she prepared to address Holyrood about further possible restrictions on Wednesday. The latest provisional data showed 9,360 new cases were recorded in Scotland on Tuesday, after a record daily high of 11,030 recorded on Boxing Day, with 10,562 cases detected on Monday. Confirmed daily case numbers for the Christmas period are expected to be published on Wednesday. Jason Leitch, the Scottish government’s national clinical director, told the BBC earlier the present Omicron wave was likely to peak in mid to late January across the UK, or possibly early February. He said it may yet become an “enormous wave” dwarfing the current case numbers. “The modelling suggests that we won’t see the big numbers, and that seems terrifying, having [9,000] to 10 and 11,000, you won’t see the big numbers for two to three weeks yet,” he said. Sturgeon urged people to take up the offer of booster vaccinations and to act as cautiously as possible this week, particularly around Hogmanay and New Year’s Day. Many organised Hogmanay events have been cancelled. She said: While these figures remain provisional, the significantly increased transmissibility of Omicron is reflected in the steep increase in cases now materialising, and we would expect to see case numbers rise further in the days to come. [We] must not underestimate the impact of Omicron. Even if the rate of hospitalisation associated with it is lower than past strains of the virus, case numbers this high will still put an inevitable further strain on the NHS, and create significant levels of disruption due to sickness absence across the economy and critical services. There were 1,374 Covid-19 hospital admissions in England on 26 December, NHS England said. This is up 48% week-on-week and is the highest number since 11 February. During the second wave of coronavirus, admissions peaked at 4,134 on 12 January. In London, 374 admissions were reported on 26 December, up 53% week-on-week but slightly below the 390 admissions reported on 23 December. Admissions during the second wave peaked in London at 977 on 6 January, PA reports. The number of Covid-19 admissions includes people admitted to hospital in the previous 24 hours who were known to have Covid-19, plus any patients diagnosed in hospital with Covid-19 in the previous 24 hours. A total of 9,546 people in England were in hospital with Covid-19 as of 8am on 28 December, according to figures from NHS England, a rise of 38% from a week earlier and the highest number since 3 March. During the second wave, this number peaked at 34,336 on 18 January. In London, 3,024 people were in hospital with Covid-19 on 28 December, up 59% week-on-week and the highest number since 19 February. London’s peak in the second wave was 7,917 on 18 January. Demand for free Covid-19 testing kits provided by Madrid’s regional government, which is relying on increased testing instead of restrictions on socialising, far outstripped supply on Tuesday, with long queues forming outside pharmacies, Reuters reports. Madrid-based pharmacist Cristina Sanchez said she had only received 20 test kits to distribute on Tuesday as part of a plan to reinforce supply after pharmacies started running out of paid tests, but there were already more than 30 people waiting ouside when she opened. Fuelled by the highly contagious Omicron variant, cases in Spain have soared in the past month, pushing the national 14-day incidence to a record 1,206 cases per 100,000 people on Monday, a five-fold rise since the beginning of December. Despite the surge, hospital admissions and intensive-care occupancy remain well below the peaks of last January. The government reintroduced an outdoor mask mandate last week, but has so far not attempted to reimpose any tougher national restrictions. However, regional administrations, which are responsible for implementing their own health policy, have introduced measures ranging from a night curfew in Catalonia to limits on social gatherings and bar opening times. Denmark has the world’s highest Covid infection rate, with 1,612 cases per 100,000 people. The country of 5.8 million reported a new record on Monday for daily infections and now has the highest recorded incidence of the virus in the world. New daily cases exceeded 15,000 for the first time, with health authorities registering 16,164 Covid-19 cases in 24 hours. The 16,164 positive results came from 130,686 PCR tests, giving a remarkably high positivity rate of 12.4%. As of last week, the Omicron variant is the dominant form of the virus in the country. The five countries with the highest case rates over the last seven days were all European, according to statistics compiled by news wire AFP and drawn from official sources. The numbers, taken from statistics bureau Our World in Data on 27 December, place Denmark as the country with the highest incidence of the virus. There is, however, a large variation in the amount of testing undertaken by different countries, with Denmark among the countries that carries out the most tests per resident. Hello, I’m Jedidajah Otte and I’ll be taking over for a while. As always, don’t hesitate to flag anything you think we should be covering, you can reach me on Twitter @JedySays or via email. Here’s a roundup of the latest news on Omicron and Covid from around the world. The Delhi government announced lockdown-like restrictions as the Omicron variant spreads, with certain public venues shuttered and others at 50% capacity or facing curfews, impacting the Indian city’s more than 19 million people. China shut down the city of Yan’an, joining Xi’an as millions are now locked down to prevent Omicron taking hold. Malaysia banned New Year’s Eve mass celebrations and people will require negative tests for private celebrations. Japan reported its first suspected Omicron cluster in Osaka, leading to fears of community transmission despite Japan’s strict border policies. Wales reported 12,378 Covid cases in the past 48 hours, with the UK reporting 17,269 new Omicron cases in the past 24 hours. Scotland is suffering with up to five-day PCR test waiting times, and England is experiencing a shortage of lateral flow tests that threatens New Year’s Eve celebrations. Hospitality bosses in England welcomed news of no further restrictions over the new year. Meanwhile, a leading immunologist said Omicron is “not same disease as a year ago” and horrific levels of UK deaths are “now history.” Indonesia detected its first Omicron case, in a 37-year-old man. France reduced the waiting time for a third booster shot to three months from four in response to the rapid spread of Omicron. Omicron cases make up 58.6% of US Covid cases, CDC data showed. Also in the US, top infectious diseases expert Anthony Fauci suggested the federal government should consider a vaccine mandate for domestic air travel. Globally, 3,500 flights were cancelled on Monday and Tuesday as airlines crews become infected with the Omicron Covid strain. The S&amp;P 500, the benchmark US stock market index, opened at record highs after four buoyant days as investors shrug off Omicron concerns. Health authorities in Denmark are concerned over low vaccination rates for children ahead of the 5 January return to schools and urged parents to come forward. That’s all from me, Jem Bartholomew in London, for today. I’ll be back on Thursday. Do get in touch with tips and stories via email or on Twitter for then. Bye for now. There have been a bunch of changes recently around the world on Covid isolation rules. My colleague Nicola Davis has this helpful explainer on how long people with Covid are infectious and how isolation rules differ internationally. Public health authorities in the UK and US cited data on infectiousness when cutting their isolation times from 10 days to seven and five, respectively. Dr Richard Tedder, a member of the Clinical Virology Network, said the shift was a compromise, and was based on the assumption that people with two negative tests are unlikely to transmit coronavirus to contacts. “On a balance of probabilities this is probably correct,” he said, although he suggested the situation may be different for some people, such as those who are immunosuppressed, and it may not hold if future variants are not picked up by lateral flow tests. But not everyone agrees – paricularly in the US, where a negative test is not required. Dr Michael Mina, an assistant professor at Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health, noted that some people can stay infectious for 12 days, so testing is crucial. “I absolutely don’t want to sit next to someone who turned positive five days ago and hasn’t tested [negative],” he said on Twitter. The UK Health Security Agency detected 17,269 new cases of the Omicron variant in the past 24 hours, taking the country’s tally to 177,201 identified through sequencing. The majority of tests are not sequenced, so the figure is likely to be far higher. (Wales has not reported case numbers since 23 December. Scotland is no longer separating Omicron from other cases.) The number of people in England who have died with the Omicron variant has risen to 49, the UKHSA said. Hospitalisations reached a total of 668 in England. It comes as PCR tests are taking up to five days for results in Scotland and a shortage of lateral flow tests in England threaten New Year’s Eve plans. Record demand in Scotland for PCR tests has left some families waiting up to five days for results over the Christmas period. Some people taking tests on 23 December only got them back on 28 December, the BBC reports. The normal waiting time is within 48 hours. Both Scotland and England detected record-level daily case numbers over the Christmas period, with infections peaking provisionally in Scotland at 11,030 on 26 December. “I couldn’t see my mum on Christmas Day and my dad couldn’t see his partner. It was all a bit strange,” teacher Matthew Campbell from Dundee told the BBC. Campbell spent Christmas Day in isolation awaiting a PCR test taken on 23 December – only for it to be negative on 28 December. The BBC has more details: The UK Health Security Agency apologised to those waiting “a little longer” for their result. They said they were adding extra capacity to their laboratories to meet “exceptional demand”. Scotland’s national clinical director, Jason Leitch, told BBC Radio’s Good Morning Scotland the delays were caused by the scale of demand. “Quite a lot of people went for testing before Christmas in order to try and get Christmas celebrations that were safe if they had symptoms, or if they had contact,” he said. “So I apologise for that, I’m sorry if people had to wait a little bit longer.” Shortages in England of lateral flow tests and lack of walk-in test slots are threatening to undermine the UK government’s plans for New Year’s Eve celebrations to go ahead unimpeded, the Guardian reports. Some community pharmacies in rural areas said they had not received deliveries of LFTs since early last week, although many remained closed on Monday and Tuesday because of the extended bank holidays. People turning to the NHS website were also out of luck: on Tuesday morning it said no delivery slots for LFTs were available, for the second day in a row. But by mid-afternoon deliveries were again being offered, with a warning that the LFT kits could take three days to arrive. The UK Health Security Agency said it encouraged people to revisit the sites “every few hours” if they were unable to order tests, as more would become available, and to use any tests they may already have before ordering or collecting more kits. A UKHSA spokesperson said: “Despite unprecedented demand, we are continuing to supply millions of rapid lateral flow tests every day. Our total delivery capacity has doubled to 900,000 test kits per day since Saturday 18 December so more people can order tests.” Read the full story here. The S&amp;P 500, the US’s benchmark stock market index widely used as a barometer of economic confidence, opened on Tuesday at a record high. It follows four buoyant days in global markets as investors shrug off Omicron concerns amid studies of potentially lessened severity and new drugs to treat the virus. Reuters reports: The [benchmark] S&amp;P 500 and [tech-heavy] Nasdaq index on Monday posted their best four-day rally since November 2020, with the S&amp;P 500 scaling a peak as an upbeat outlook on the US economy helped investors look past thousands of flight cancellations and Apple shutting its New York stores due to surging cases. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) on Monday shortened the recommended isolation time for Americans with asymptomatic cases of Covid-19 to five days from the previous guidance of 10 days. The CDC’s update along with approvals to new pills and more vaccines to fight Covid have all helped put the three main indexes on pace for monthly gains. “This policy change is sending the message that it is becoming more like the flu and less like the variants we saw early on when we had no treatments, no vaccines and it was much more deadly,” Thomas Hayes, the managing member at Great Hill Capital in New York, told Reuters. It comes after a leading UK immunologist told the BBC on Tuesday that Omicron is “not the same disease we were seeing a year ago” and high UK Covid death rates are “now history”. In the US, National Basketball Association (NBA) players who test positive for Covid now have a quicker path to return to play, AP reports, after the league cut isolation times from 10 to six days for vaccinated asymptomatic players. The NBA has seen coronavirus numbers soar in recent days, even with 97% of players vaccinated and at least 65% of eligible players boosted against the virus. It follows a move from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) to cut the isolation period for people testing Covid-positive from 10 to five days. Officials said that data shows people are most infectious in the two days before, and three days after, symptoms appear. Read the full NBA story here. Health authorities in Denmark are concerned over low vaccination rates for children ahead of the 5 January return to schools. Currently, 38% of children aged five to 11 have had at least one dose, the Copenhagen Post reports, leading ministers to urge parents to get their kids vaccinated as soon as possible to prevent a new-term surge. “We can see that it had a beneficial effect on infection among the younger age groups when the schools were shut down before Christmas,” the health minister, Magnus Heunicke, said. “But we still need to vaccinate more of the youngest schoolkids so the infection doesn’t skyrocket in the schools when they open in January.” Omicron has seen new cases climb in Denmark. The country reported 16,164 new Covid cases on Monday, the Post reports, more than doubling the 7,799 new infections on Monday two weeks ago. Denmark currently has one of the highest per capita Covid rates in the world, local media TV 2 reports, with 1,612 cases of infection per 100,000 people last week. Omicron accounts for 58.6% of all Covid cases in the US, new data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) shows. Delta accounts for 41.1% of Covid cases for the week ending 25 December. (The remaining 0.3% is made up of other variants.) The drastic rise of the highly mutated strain comes after the US reported its first Omicron case on 1 December. Omicron has pushed cases up to record levels in some states and sparked a rush for the delivery of booster jabs in efforts to beat back the variant. The new data comes after Anthony Fauci, the chief medical adviser, said the US should consider making vaccination mandatory for domestic air travel, to push up the vaccination compliance rate. Ukraine detected 2,248 new positive Covid tests in the past 24 hours, the health ministry said, a 71% decrease from the 7,716 new cases on Tuesday two weeks ago. Ukraine saw spiking cases in late October and early November, sometimes above 20,000 or 25,000 a day, but cases have receded in recent weeks. (Some countries are reporting lower numbers over the holiday period.) A further 134 Covid-related deaths were recorded, a 68% decrease on two weeks ago, and 944 hospitalisations were reported. Ukraine’s death toll is now 95,105, the world’s 15th highest. Public Health Wales has reported a new 12,378 Covid cases over the latest 48-hour period and warned the country is quickly catching up with the rates seen in England. Wales was stable at about 2,500-3,000 new cases every day until Omicron hit the UK. The seven-day case rate per 100,000 is now up to 918. The Labour-led Welsh government is under fire for imposing stricter restrictions than England, with bosses in the night-time industry warning they are being unfairly hit, especially on New Year’s Eve. The Tories in Wales are demanding to see the science behind the government’s decisions. The party’s leader in the Welsh parliament, Andrew RT Davies, said: “It’s unacceptable that Labour ministers have failed to publish the scientific advice and evidence behind the latest Covid restrictions in Wales. “The public health picture is challenging for ministers of all stripes across the UK, but full transparency on the data and information behind decision-making is crucial. “Many Welsh businesses will be severely hit this Christmas and new year, and I can understand their anger and frustration given they’re not being afforded the advice that’s provided to ministers.” A Welsh government spokesperson said: “The Omicron variant is causing a rapid rise in coronavirus cases across Wales. “Already, people are off work sick, putting essential services under strain, and we expect this situation to get worse. “New protections have been put into place to help businesses continue to trade and updated and strengthened guidance has been issued to help people stay safe in their homes. We all need to do everything we can to protect ourselves and keep Wales safe.” Bangladesh began its booster vaccination drive today in a bid to ward off the highly mutated Omicron variant. Health officials said frontline workers and the over-60s will be first in line to get the booster jab, with the campaign starting in the capital, Dhaka. About 27% of Bangladesh’s population is double vaccinated, Reuters reports. Two Omicron cases have been detected so far – in two travellers returning from Zimbabwe – but community transmission is yet to be confirmed. Really interesting opinion article on burnout for The Guardian here: I thought I could plough through the pandemic without burning out. I was wrong. The rapid spread of the Omicron variant brings home the difficult truth: the moment isn’t going to come “when all this is over”. The pandemic isn’t like a war, to be survived until the day when peace is made, and we can all exhale and begin picking up the pieces. It’s a new reality that will, at best, gradually fade into the background as the threat recedes and our coping strategies improve. The problem is that our bodies aren’t designed to cope with this. As Emily and Amelia Nagoski point out in their book Burnout, our stress response is designed to help us run away from lions. It is something we are supposed to move through: it has a beginning, a middle and an end. Writer Christine Berry goes on to discuss her own experience with burnout. I learned this the hard way when I burned out at the end of July. Like many people, I thought I could just plough on through the pandemic and still meet my own wildly unrealistic expectations of myself. In my case, this meant juggling parenthood with writing my first solo book and taking on a new senior leadership role. As it turned out, I was spectacularly wrong. After several months wrestling with anxiety, depression and fatigue, I finally faced up to reality and decided to step away from the new job. It was wrenching, but I just couldn’t ignore the message my body was giving me: I had to slow down. Read the full story here, including how it is important to “find ways to deal with our stress, calm our nervous systems and make our bodies feel safer.” The multibillion-pound world’s fair in Dubai has warned that some venues on site may shut down as Covid cases rapidly rise in the United Arab Emirates, AP reports. Dubai’s Expo 2020 said that virus outbreaks among staff may force some parts of the fair to “close temporarily for deep cleaning and sanitisation,” without elaborating on the scope or the location of the infections. The UAE’s daily virus caseload has skyrocketed by a multiple of 37 in just the last three weeks after the arrival of the Omicron variant. The vague statement from Dubai’s government-run media office on Monday underscores the daunting challenges of hosting among the world’s first major in-person events amid a still-raging pandemic. The fair opened in October after a year’s delay as the UAE bet that its rapid vaccine rollout would allow its economy to avoid the closures that have paralysed much of the west. With Dubai’s peak winter tourism season in full swing, the world’s fair has vaulted into the spotlight. Millions of tourists from around the world are flocking to the sprawling site packed with scores of national pavilions, restaurants, shops and performance stages. The government of Delhi, India on Tuesday announced more restrictions amid rising Omicron cases, the Times of India reports. The city of about 19 million people will enter lockdown-like restrictions after it reported a further 63 Omicron cases in the past 24 hours, bringing the total to 142. (The number is likely to be much higher.) “As the Covid-19 positivity rate has been above 0.5% for the past few days, we are enforcing Level-I (yellow alert) of the Graded Response Action Plan,” Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal said. The new restrictions include, the Times of India reports, among other things: Schools, colleges and other educational institutions closed Sports complexes, cinemas, conference halls, stadiums and swimming pools closed Offices at 50% maximum capacity Restaurants and bars at 50% maximum capaicty with a 10pm curfew Delhi Metro at 50% seating capacity and no standing It comes after India reports 671 total Omicron cases sequenced so far. Despite the severity of India’s Delta wave providing some barrier of protection from antibodies, there are fears Omicron could re-infect people – and that the high use of the AstraZeneca vaccine, which studies have showed to be less effective against Omicron, could provoke a new wave. Japanese officials have detected a five-person cluster of Omicron cases in the city of Osaka, local media agency Kyodo reports. It follows days of anxiety over Omicron community transmission in Japan, which has imposed strict border restrictions in attempts to shut out the variant. The cluster relates to five people in a nursing home. Omicron has been detected beforehand but this is the first suspected cluster, Kyodo reports. Prime minister Fumio Kishida said on Thursday Japan is prepared for a domestic outbreak. “Using the time we bought through strengthened border controls, we have accelerated efforts to enhance the process of prevention, testing and early treatment,” he said. Japan detected 214 new Covid cases in the past 24 hours, the Japan Times reports, a 67% increase on the 128 on Tuesday two weeks ago. No Covid deaths were recorded in the past 24 hours. Omicron is “not the same disease we were seeing a year ago” and high Covid death rates in the UK are “now history”, a leading immunologist has said. Sir John Bell, regius professor of medicine at Oxford University and the UK government’s life sciences adviser, said that although hospitalisations had increased in recent weeks as Omicron spreads through the population, the disease “appears to be less severe and many people spend a relatively short time in hospital”. Fewer patients were needing high-flow oxygen and the average length of stay was down to three days, he said. “The horrific scenes that we saw a year ago of intensive care units being full, lots of people dying prematurely, that is now history, in my view, and I think we should be reassured that that’s likely to continue,” Bell told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. For the full story, read my colleague’s report here. Poland reported 9,843 positive Covid infections today, a 44% drop on the 17,460 cases detected on Tuesday two weeks ago. Poland saw high case numbers often over 25,000 a day in late-November and early-December. In recent weeks cases have receded, but Omicron is driving fears of a new wave. A further 549 people died from the virus in the past 24 hours, local media Polskie Radio reports, bringing Poland’s total fatalities to 94,914, the world’s 16th highest. New restrictions – tighter quarantine rules for people living with a Covid-infected person, and the closure or capacity-limitation of certain public venues – were implemented this month. Poland currently has 21,283 patients with Covid in hospitals, the health ministry said, and 250,422 people are quarantined after exposure. France will offer intensive care nurses a bonus of €100 a month, prime minister Jean Castex said, to improve working conditions for exhausted frontline staff. “This is about improving attractiveness, training, qualification, working conditions in intensive care units, acknowledging the skills of those who work there,” Castex said. A broader set of measures for preventing staff shortages will be announced next week by health minister Olivier Veran. Hong Kong will tighten quarantine rules for air cargo crew in efforts to block spread of the highly-infectious Omicron variant. Currently, travellers into Hong Kong must quarantine in hotels, whereas air cargo crew are permitted to quarantine at home. New rules will see them spend three days in hotels before going home. It comes after several Omicron cases have been identified by regular testing during people’s qurantine period. Hong Kong, like China, pursues a “zero Covid” strategy, seeing it impose some of the world’s strictest travel restrictions to keep out the virus. Authorities seek to avoid community transmission of Covid entirely. Last week Yuen Kwok-yung, a government advisor, told CNBC the zero Covid border policy will remain until around 95% of the eligible population is vaccinated. Currently, 72.1% of the total population has been jabbed with at least one dose. Hospitality bosses in England have welcomed UK prime minister Boris Johnson’s announcement that no retrictions will be imposed to suppress Covid until at least the new year. The prime minister’s decision gives mass gatherings on New Year’s Eve the green light after days of speculation new measures might be imposed to tackle record-breaking Covid levels. Kate Nicholls, the chief executive of UKHospitality, the industry body, said: “Britain’s hospitality businesses will be raising a New Years toast to celebrate the government’s pragmatic and proportionate approach. This will give a real lifeline for many who have struggled with the loss of trade in the run up to Christmas and the loss of New Year on top of that would have been devastating for many.” She added: ‘This will be a welcome boost and keeping restrictions to a minimum and lifting the remaining restrictions as quickly as possible to help the beleaguered sector back onto the road to recovery.” Michael Kill, the chief executive of the Night Time Industries Association (Nita), which represents bars, pubs, nightclubs, restaurants and entertainment venues, said that the decision had come after “an extremely anxious few weeks for our sector”, but he was pleased that the PM had listened. Kill said: “Our industry can now start to plan with some certainty over the next week, and make up for lost time promoting one of the key nights of the year in the coming days. British Chambers of Commerce president Baroness McGregor-Smith welcomed the announcement on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, but warned the hospitality sector needed additional support. “I am delighted to see that we are protecting New Year’s Eve but it just won’t go far enough,” she said. For more on the reaction from hospitality in England, read this Guardian report. Malaysia has banned mass celebrations for New Year’s Eve and said negative Covid tests will be required for private gatherings, Reuters reports. Malaysia also lifted its travel ban on eight southern African nations given the Omicron variant’s rapid spread around the world. Malaysia reported 2,897 new Covid cases in the past 24 hours, local media the New Straits Times reports. Health minister Khairy Jamaluddin told reporters Malaysia is also cutting the booster vaccine waiting time to three months. Russia detected 21,922 new Covid infections in the past 24 hours, a 21% decrease on the 27,910 cases recorded on Tuesday two weeks ago. Russia experienced spiking cases in early-November and has seen its cases recede in recent weeks. But deaths still remain high. A further 935 people died from Covid-related causes, a 16% decrease ion the 1,114 deaths on Tuesday two weeks ago. The Moscow Times reports that Russia’s excess deaths since the pandemic began is over 810,000. There are concerns the highly-mutated Omicron strain might provoke a surge in new infections, after a study earlier this month found Russia’s Sputnik V vaccine provides little or no protection against Omicron. Last Tuesday Russian authorities said 41 Omicron cases had been detected, but the number is likely to be much higher. As UK prime minister Boris Johnson said he will not introduce further Covid restrictions in England before 2022 – giving the go-ahead for mass gatherings on 31 December – let’s take a look at the latest Covid stats on cases and hospitalisations. Here are the UK’s record-breaking infections in recent weeks. (Some figures for Northern Ireland, Wales and Scotland were not released over Christmas.) And here’s the hospitalisation figures, which ministers have said will guide their decisions on restrictions. We’re yet to see what impact the latest wave of cases, driven by Omicron, will have. Some experts have warned that despite the potential lessened severity of Omicron it could still overwhelm the health service. This is Jem Bartholomew in London taking charge of the global Covid blog for today. Do get in touch with tips or stories, it’s always great to hear from readers. Email me here. Message me on Twitter here. I’ll be handing over blogging duties shortly, but if you’re just joining us these are the main developments in the pandemic in the past several hours: Thousands more flights have been cancelled by airlines around the world, causing chaotic scenes at airports at one of the busiest times of the year for travel. Carriers scrapped 2,700 flights on Monday and a further 800 have already been dropped from Tuesday’s schedules. Dr Anthony Fauci said a vaccine mandate should be considered for all passengers in the US. Hundreds of thousands more people were ordered to stay at home in northern China on Tuesday, joining millions under strict lockdown in Xi’an as the government tries to contain a worsening outbreak of Covid-19. Boris Johnson will not introduce further Covid restrictions in England before 2022, giving mass events the go-ahead and leaving nightclubs open for New Year’s Eve – in contrast with devolved governments in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Scientists said it was “the greatest divergence between scientific advice and legislation” seen since the start of the pandemic. The US Centre for Disease Control has reduced the recommended isolation time for people recording a positive test from 10 days to five. The CDC said these changes reflect the latest data on when the virus is most contagious. Joe Biden said the dramatic surge in US Covid cases caused by the Omicron variant “should be a source of concern but it should not be a source of panic”. France has narrowed the delay for a third booster shot to three months from four in response to the rapid spread of Omicron but there will be no curfew for New Year’s Eve. From Monday, all indoor gatherings will be limited to 2,000 people, and to 5,000 people for outdoor events. Consumption of drinks and food will be banned in long-distance transport and home working will become mandatory for at least three days per week where possible. Daily new coronavirus cases in Turkey surged 30% on Monday to 26,099, health ministry data showed, the highest percentage rise this year, as the health minister warned about the rapid spread of the Omicron variant: The number of patients in England admitted into hospital with Covid-19 has reached its highest level since mid-February after a 74% rise in a week. In London, hospital admissions have increased by 73%. A total of 8,474 people were in hospital in England with Covid-19 as of 8am today – the highest number since 5 March. Scotland has recorded a record number of Covid cases over the Christmas weekend, hitting a high of 11,030 new cases on Boxing Day, the Scottish government has said. Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, is due to update a specially-reconvened sitting of the Scottish parliament on Wednesday about the spread of the virus and the impact on hospitals. Catching the Omicron variant means it’s more unlikely that you’ll get the Delta infection, according to a study in South Africa, Reuters reports. The study, by the Africa Health Research Institute in South Africa, which has not been peer-reviewed, found that people who were infected with Omicron, especially those who were vaccinated, developed enhanced immunity to the Delta variant. The analysis enrolled 33 vaccinated and unvaccinated people who were infected with the Omicron variant in South Africa. While the authors found that the neutralization of Omicron increased 14-fold over 14 days after the enrolment, they also found that there was a 4.4 fold increase of Delta virus neutralization. There is varied treatment of Boris Johnson’s decision not to introduce restrictions for new year celebrations in England. The Mail hails it as “Boris’s new year cheer”. The Guardian says England is “going it alone” compared with the devolved nations... ...the Telegraph says there will be no restrictions to “spoil New Year’s Eve”.. ... and the Mirror asks “Where is the PM” Hundreds of thousands more people were ordered to stay at home in northern China on Tuesday, joining millions under strict lockdown in Xi’an as the government tries to contain a worsening outbreak of Covid-19. Yan’an, which is about 300km (186 miles) from Xi’an, ordered the closure of businesses on Tuesday and told hundreds of thousands of people in one district to stay indoors. China has followed a “zero-Covid” strategy as Beijing prepares to welcome thousands of overseas visitors to February’s Winter Olympics. But authorities have faced a resurgent virus in recent weeks, reporting 209 infections on Tuesday – the highest single-day tally since March last year, when the virus was only beginning to spread around the world from the city of Wuhan. Reuters reports that Indonesian health authorities were conducting contact tracing on Tuesday after detecting the Southeast Asian country’s first case of the Omicron coronavirus variant in the community, health ministry official Siti Nadia Tarmizi said. It says: The first confirmed case was a 37-year-old male who was from the city of Medan and had visited a restaurant in Jakarta’s central business district earlier this month, Tarmizi told a news conference. The man had no recent history of overseas travel or contacts with international travellers, Tarmizi said, adding he was asymptomatic and was in isolation at a Jakarta hospital. There is an interstate fight brewing in Australia over Covid testing requirements for tourists travelling from New South Wales into Queensland during the busy summer holidays. Cait Kelly and Caitlin Cassidy explain: Reuters reports that daily new coronavirus cases in Turkey surged 30% on Monday to 26,099, health ministry data showed, the highest percentage rise this year, as the health minister warned about the rapid spread of the Omicron variant: Turkey’s daily case levels have been below or about 20,000 in December, down from about 30,000 in October. The number of deaths due to coronavirus fell to 157 on Monday from 173 a day earlier. “The Omicron variant is spreading more quickly than the other variants,” health minister Fahrettin Koca said on Twitter late on Monday. “You must be careful and get your booster shot done.” Let’s take a look at some of the UK papers for Tuesday, most of which lead on the announcement that there will be no new restrictions before New Year’s Eve: Agence France-Presse reports that Delta Air Lines on Monday cited new Chinese cleaning requirements after it rerouted a China-bound flight back to the United States, drawing criticism from Chinese authorities. The report states: The December 21 flight was supposed to land in Shanghai after disembarking from Seattle, but instead returned to the US city midair. Delta said the reason for the reversal was new Chinese requirements issued earlier that day in the wake of the latest Covid-19 surge. “The new cleaning procedures require significantly extended ground time and are not operationally viable for Delta,” a Delta spokesman said. “We apologize for any inconvenience this is causing for customers as we continue to work on rebooking on alternate flights.” The Chinese consulate in San Francisco complained that several Chinese citizens were stranded on board with expired visas and Covid-19 tests that no longer met time requirements, according to Chinese state media. Airlines, including Delta and other leading US carriers, have canceled thousands of flights in recent days as the Omicron variant of Covid-19 hits airline workers and roils travel plans for many consumers. In three days time, on 31 December, it will be the second anniversary of the day that health authorities in Wuhan reported an unknown pneumonia outbreak to World Health Organization (WHO) colleagues in Beijing. This time last year, Michael Standaert visited Wuhan to report on how the city had changed since the emergence of the coronavirus. Our colleagues in Australia report that 486 people who were initially told by a Sydney clinic that their Covid test had a negative result were actually positive. That is a total of 886 people to whom St Vincent’s hospital mistakenly gave the all clear. First, 400 people were told on Christmas Day that their result was negative, only to be told later they were positive. Yesterday the hospital’s pathology department (SydPath) said another 950 people who were tested in the days before Christmas were “prematurely” sent a text message saying they were negative when their actual results had not yet been confirmed. Of those 950 people, 486 were eventually found to be positive. All of the Covid developments in Australia are wrapped up at their live blog: Local authorities in Shaanxi province are cracking down on food hoarding and price gouging as 13 million people in its capital Xi’an entered a sixth day of strict lockdown and mandatory testing, writes our correspondent in Taipei, Rhoda Kwan. The new rules, introduced on Sunday, introduced a reporting hotline and strengthened the monitoring of shops and markets. The hotline has received over 300 complaints in two days, most over an increase in the prices of daily necessities including eggs, meat and vegetables. Authorities say they have investigated 33 illegal cases and have closed five by Tuesday. The measures come as China is battling its worst community outbreak of the Delta variant since 2020 little over a month before Beijing is set to host the Winter Olympic games. Stock markets have continued to gain ground despite the surge of Omicron around the world. Asian markets lifted on Tuesday with the Nikkei in Japan up nearly 1%, Shanghai up 0.2%, Seoul up 0.1% and Sydney’s ASX200 is up 0.44%. Wall Street had another record-breaking day on Monday with the S&amp;P 500 index rising 1.38% to end at an all-time high thanks to strong US retail sales. The narrower Dow Jones average climbed 0.98% and the Nasdaq Composite added 1.39%. Apple has closed all of its 12 stores in New York City to indoor shopping as cases of the Omicron variant surge across the United States. Customers will be able to pick up online orders at the stores, an Apple spokesperson said. “We regularly monitor conditions and we will adjust both our health measures and store services to support the wellbeing of customers and employees,” the company said in a statement. Germany has reported another 21,080 cases bringing the country’s total to 7,026,369. The Robert Koch Institute also reported another 372 deaths which means that Germany has now seen 110,805 people die of Covid-19. More from the US where the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said on Monday it was shortening the recommended time for isolation for Americans with Covid to five days from its previous guidance of 10 days, given they are asymptomatic. It is hoped the move will help airlines and other businesses mitigate staff shortages from the disease. CDC director Rochelle Walensky said it was “vital people stay home and test when sick and adhere to recommended masking in order to mitigate the spread of Covid, especially as we continue to see more of the Omicron variant”. France has reduced the waiting time for a third booster shot to three months from four in response to the rapid spread of Omicron. Jean Castex, the French prime minister, also said that from Monday and for the next three weeks all public gatherings would be limited to 2,000 people for indoor events, and to 5,000 people for outdoor events. Masks will be mandatory in city centres and people must work from home three days a week if possible, Castex said, as the country’s infection rate hit a record level of more than 700 per 100,000 people. However, there will be no curfew on New Year’s Eve celebrations and schools will reopen after the festiv season as planned on 4 January. China’s coronavirus cases rose for a fourth consecutive day on Monday, with Xi’an city reporting more infections in a flare up that has put 13 million residents under lockdown. Xi’an reported 175 cases, up from the previous day’s 150, official data showed on Tuesday. None of them are of the Omicron variant. China has reported only a handful of Omicron infections among international travellers and in its south. Mainland China detected 182 local symptomatic cases for Monday, the health commission said, compared with 162 a day earlier. Xi’an is experiencing China’s biggest community outbreak since 2020. Read our correspondent Rhoda Kwan’s report on how the city is responding, including a disinfection campaign, with staffers spraying pathogen-killing solutions on surfaces of roads and buildings: Dr Anthony Fauci has suggested that the federal government should consider a vaccine mandate for domestic air travel. “That is just another one of the requirements that I think is reasonable to consider,” America’s leading infectious disease expert told MSNBC in an interview. The Biden administration has thought about this move before , or one requiring either vaccination or proof of negative test. But given the resistance to vaccine mandates for health workers and other categories in the US, such a requirement could face legal challenges. Here’s how we reported the pushback against mandates in the US earlier this year: An illustration of the airline problem comes in the travel saga of two brothers from the US Pacific North-west. Harley Garner, a 27-year-old creative strategist from Portland, and his brother, who lives in Seattle, were staying with their parents in Pahrump, Nevada, over the holidays and had planned to fly home on Sunday evening, Reuters reports. Both brothers’ respective flights from Las Vegas – to Portland via Alaska Airlines and to Seattle via Allegiant Airlines – were cancelled on Sunday afternoon. Both managed to book seats on later flights. When their second flights were cancelled, they decided at 3am on Monday to start driving. Their father took them to Bakersfield, California, where they planned to rent a car and then drive up to Portland and Seattle, totalling some 17 hours on the road. Garner said the most frustrating part of the travel nightmare, which Alaska Airlines said was weather-related, although Portland was not experiencing severe weather on Monday, was the last-minute notification of cancellations. More than 3,500 flights have been cancelled on Monday and Tuesday causing widespread disruptions for travellers all over the world as airlines crews succumb to the Omicron Covid strain. According to flight tracker FlightAware, 2,700 flights have been cancelled on Monday and 860 more on Tuesday. In total, 11,000 flights have been cancelled since Friday thanks to the impact on crews, although bad weather has also played a part in cancellations in the US. In more travel misery, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said on Monday it was investigating 68 cruise ships after reports of Covid-19 cases on board. Good morning/afternoon/evening to you wherever you might be and welcome to our rolling coverage of the coronavirus pandemic. Here’s a summary of the main developments: Thousands more flights have been cancelled by airlines around the world, causing chaotic scenes at airports at one of the busiest times of the year for travel. Carriers scrapped 2,700 flights on Monday and a further 800 have already been dropped from Tuesday’s schedules. Dr Anthony Fauci said a vaccine mandate should be considered for all passengers in the US. Boris Johnson will not introduce further Covid restrictions in England before 2022, giving mass events the go-ahead and leaving nightclubs open for New Year’s Eve – in contrast with devolved governments in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Scientists said it was “the greatest divergence between scientific advice and legislation” seen since the start of the pandemic. The US Centre for Disease Control has reduced the recommended isolation time for people recording a positive test from 10 days to five. The CDC said these changes reflect the latest data on when the virus is most contagious. Joe Biden said the dramatic surge in US Covid cases caused by the Omicron variant “should be a source of concern but it should not be a source of panic”. France has narrowed the delay for a third booster shot to three months from four in response to the rapid spread of Omicron but there will be no curfew for New Year’s Eve. From Monday, all indoor gatherings will be limited to 2,000 people, and to 5,000 people for outdoor events. Consumption of drinks and food will be banned in long-distance transport and home working will become mandatory for at least three days per week where possible. Denmark and Iceland reported record daily Covid cases on Monday. Denmark now has the world’s highest infection rate, with 1,612 cases per 100,000 people. The number of patients in England admitted into hospital with Covid-19 has reached its highest level since mid-February after a 74% rise in a week. In London, hospital admissions have increased by 73%. A total of 8,474 people were in hospital in England with Covid-19 as of 8am today – the highest number since 5 March. Scotland has recorded a record number of Covid cases over the Christmas weekend, hitting a high of 11,030 new cases on Boxing Day, the Scottish government has said. Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, is due to update a specially-reconvened sitting of the Scottish parliament on Wednesday about the spread of the virus and the impact on hospitals. Paraguay has confirmed the country’s first Omicron cases, health officials said. The cases were detected in people who had travelled outside the country this month but the government has not taken immediate action on travel. Argentina reported its highest daily tally for six months with 20,263 cases. Greece has announced further restrictions effective between 3 and 16 January to contain a further surge in Covid infections. Bars and restaurants will have to close at midnight and no standing customers at entertainment venues will be allowed. There will also be a maximum limit of six people per table.The World Health Organization has warned that the Omicron coronavirus variant could lead to overwhelmed healthcare systems even though early studies suggest it sparks milder disease, as daily case records fell across Europe and the US while China, South Africa and Germany brought back tough restrictions to stamp out infections. Covid-19 surges have wreaked havoc around the world, forcing many nations to make tough choices between economically punishing restrictions and controlling the spread of the virus. The United States has halved the isolation period for asymptomatic cases to try and blunt the disruption, while France has ordered companies to have employees work from home at least three days a week. Contact restrictions were in place in Germany for the second year in a row heading into the New Year, as Europe’s biggest economy shuttered nightclubs and forced sports competitions behind closed doors. Despite facing a much smaller outbreak compared with global virus hotspots, China has not relaxed its “zero Covid” strategy, imposing stay-at-home orders in many parts of the city of Yan’an. The hundreds of thousands of affected residents there joined the 13 million people in the city of Xi’an, who entered a sixth day of home confinement as China battled its highest daily case numbers in 21 months. “I’m about to be starved to death,” wrote one Xi’an resident on the Twitter-like Weibo platform. “There’s no food, my housing compound won’t let me out, and I’m about to run out of instant noodles … please help!” Many Xi’an residents have similarly complained on social media about the restrictions, which include a ban on driving and only one member of a household permitted to go outside for groceries every three days. This lockdown is the most sweeping in China since the similar-sized city Wuhan was cut off from the world in the early days of the pandemic. South Africa said it would reinstate efforts to trace the contacts of people infected with coronavirus after a backlash over plans to scrap the measure. Health authorities said on Thursday they would stop contact tracing everywhere except places like prisons and schools, as they believed most of the population had already been exposed to the virus through vaccination or infection. Those protocols will be recalled after the Department of Health was inundated with media, stakeholders and public enquiries and comments following the release of the revised regulations. The surges in many countries have been propelled by the highly transmissible Omicron variant, with the Netherlands and Switzerland both saying Tuesday that it has now become the dominant strain in their countries. Greece meanwhile reported a new daily record of 21,657 cases, which health authorities said was linked to the rise of Omicron. The WHO warned against complacency even though preliminary findings suggest that Omicron could lead to milder disease. “A rapid growth of Omicron … even if combined with a slightly milder disease, will still result in large numbers of hospitalisations, particularly amongst unvaccinated groups, and cause widespread disruption to health systems and other critical services,” warned WHO Europe’s Covid incident manager, Catherine Smallwood. However, the WHO highlighted the 29% decrease in the incidence of cases observed in South Africa - the country which first reported the variant to the WHO on 24 November. It said early data from Britain, South Africa and Denmark - which currently has the world’s highest rate of infection per person - suggested there was a reduced risk of hospitalisation for Omicron compared to Delta. However, further data was needed to understand Omicron’s severity in terms of clinical markers, including the use of oxygen, mechanical ventilation and death. More data was also required on how the severity might be being impacted by previous Covid infection, or vaccination. To hold back the tide, European nations brought back curbs with painful economic and social consequences. Facing record-high infections, France stopped short of issuing a stay-at-home order but called on employers to make staff work from home three days a week where possible. Finland on Tuesday said it would bar unvaccinated foreign travellers from entering. Only residents, essential workers or diplomats will be exempt. Sweden had begun requiring negative tests for incoming non-resident travellers from Tuesday, a day after Denmark – which currently has the world’s highest rate of infection per capita – applied the same measure. In Germany, private gatherings are now limited to 10 vaccinated people – or two households where any unvaccinated people are present – and nightclubs have been closed. All sports competitions will now be held behind closed doors. “Something has to be done to bring the infection figures down,” a Berlin resident told AFP TV. But not all accepted the measures. Thousands of protesters went on the march across Germany late Monday against the curbs, with some hurling fireworks or bottles at police and leaving at least 12 officers injured. Beyond social strife, the pandemic has been punishing economically, in particular for sectors like travel. Some 11,500 flights have been scrapped worldwide since Friday, and tens of thousands more delayed, during one of the year’s busiest travel periods. Multiple airlines have blamed staffing shortages caused by spikes of Omicron cases. The surge in the US has been fuelled by the Omicron variant, as well as large pockets of unvaccinated residents and a lack of access to quick and easy testing. President Joe Biden said Monday some US hospitals could be “overrun” but that the country was generally well prepared. He stressed that Omicron would not have the same impact as the initial Covid outbreak or the Delta variant surge this year. “Omicron is a source of concern, but it should not be a source of panic,” Biden said. In an effort to prevent mass labour shortages during the surge, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on Monday cut the isolation period for asymptomatic cases from 10 to five days. The US is the nation hit hardest by the pandemic, and is closing in on its daily high of 250,000 cases recorded last January. With Agence France-PresseA doctor in economics, military leader, Bristol University graduate, Hun Manet, the oldest son of Cambodia’s prime minister Hun Sen, has been confirmed as the next leader of the country’s dominant political party, which described him as a “prime minister candidate [of] the future”. At last week’s congress, the Cambodian People’s party (CPP), which holds every parliamentary seat, voted unanimously for 44-year-old Hun Manet to succeed his father. In 2017, Hun Sen had the main opposition party dissolved amid accusations of a plot to overthrow the government, meaning life under Hun Manet is almost inevitable. The burning question now among observers is whether he will follow in the dictatorial path of his father. Very little is known about Hun Manet, says Dr Lee Morgenbesser, senior lecturer at Griffith University’s school of government and international relations in Australia. Growing up amid wealth and political celebrity, he shares few personal opinions on his own social media channels, instead posting photos of ceremonial events and his wife and children. “To rise to the top, it is beneficial for the sons of dictators to hide their beliefs, intentions and vision,” Morgenbesser says. The oldest of Hun Sen’s six children, Hun Manet has been “groomed to succeed his father who has ruled the country for more than three decades using a combination of corruption and repression”, he says. In Transparency International’s 2020 Corruption Perceptions Index, Cambodia scores only 21 out of 100 and is ranked at 160 out of 180 countries. Hun Sen has a reputation for imprisoning political opponents, and stamping out media criticism and civil disobedience. A 2018 Human Rights Watch report labelled his regime “abusive and authoritarian”. But Kheang Un, professor of political science at Northern Illinois University, believes Hun Manet himself is seen as a “clean politician” and well liked. “Hun Manet is known to be well educated, competent, down to earth, and friendly,” he says. Emulating his father’s early days, he has thus far followed more of a military than a political path, graduating from the United States military academy at West Point – as well as New York University and the University of Bristol, obtaining his doctorate in economics – before moving through the ranks to become a lieutenant general. He has held numerous high-profile roles and is now deputy commander of the Royal Cambodian armed forces and joint chief of staff. The military training and exposure to western society puts him in a strong position to navigate Cambodia in an era of tense geopolitical competition between China and the United States, Un says, adding that his training in economics will also be an asset. Morgenbesser says “while there will be a temptation to label Hun Manet as some sort of progressive or reformer, he has done nothing to deserve the benefit of the doubt”. “He is merely the next dictator,” he says. “Since returning from the United States … he has been busy cultivating support within the CPP, winning the backing of the security apparatus, building ties with the business community, and helping to eliminate the political opposition. This should tell us all we need to know.” Time may yet reveal more about Hun Manet. Sixty-nine-year-old Hun Sen, who has held office since 1985, has said he will run in the 2023 election. Hun Manet is a member of the CPP’s permanent committee and deputy head of the party’s central youth wing. He co-founded the NGO Samdech Techo Volunteer Youth Doctor Association alongside his wife, Pich Chanmony and also has good connections with Thailand after helping in a border standoff in 2011, according to Paul Chambers, a lecturer at the Center of Asean Community Studies in Naresuan University, Thailand. “The general impression of Hun Manet, however, is that he is quite young and his power emanates from the fact that he is Hun Sen’s son,” Chambers said. “Once Hun Sen himself passes from the scene, one wonders how much charisma Hun Manet would himself have to carry on the Hun family’s political supremacy.”The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has revised down its estimates for US infection by the Omicron variant, stating it accounts for approximately 59% of all Covid cases in the US, not 73% as it previously said. Nevertheless, the figures issued Tuesday indicates that Omicron is spreading rapidly in the US, growing from a revised estimate of 23% of cases as of 18 December. The correction shows that until the week before Christmas, the Delta variant remained dominant. “Setting aside the question of how the initial estimate was so inaccurate, if CDC’s new estimate of #Omicron prevalence is precise then it suggests that a good portion of the current hospitalizations we’re seeing from Covid may still be driven by Delta infections,” Scott Gottlieb, former commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, posted on Twitter. The disparity in estimates, while confirming the rapid spread of Omicron, also speaks to relative lack of precision in detecting a new variant that can only be confirmed by genetic analysis. The news comes as the US surpassed its all-time total for new cases, according to figures from Johns Hopkins, with the daily total soaring above 512,000. However, the numbers come with the caveat that many testing centers were closed over the holiday weekend, and a CDC spokesperson told Politico that the number was likely an “overestimate” due to a delay in state reporting. Separately, the former US surgeon general Jerome Adams criticized the CDC for its revision Monday to cut Covid isolation periods from ten days to five. “I love the CDC. Grew up wanting to work there and have been one of their most ardent defenders. I never dreamed the day would come when I would advise people NOT to follow their guidance,” Adams said in a tweet on Tuesday. “They wouldn’t even follow it for their own family.” The CDC also announced Tuesday that the United States has administered 505,013,980 doses of the Covid-19 vaccines. The figures show that US health authorities have administered 1,533,313 doses from a day earlier. The agency also estimated that more than 67 million people have received an additional dose of either Pfizer or Moderna’s vaccine since 13 August, when the United States authorized a third dose of the vaccines for people with compromised immune systems. Late Tuesday, NBC News reported that children have been hospitalized at nearly twice the rate of adults in the past 4 weeks. According to analysis of Department of Health and Human Services data, the average number of children hospitalized with Covid-19 jumped 52%, from a low of 1,270 on 29 November to 1,933 on Sunday. The analysis showed that states that have contributed the most to the rise in pediatric hospitalizations are Florida, Illinois, New Jersey, New York and Ohio. In the same time period, it said, adult Covid hospitalizations increased 29%. The calculations come as Covid continues to wreak havoc across travel and other commercial sectors of the economy. 2,800 flights were canceled Tuesday, with more than 1,000 of them within, into or out of the United States, according to tracking website FlightAware. Omicron’s rise has coincided with the holiday season, and new cases in the US are currently averaging more than 200,000 a day according to the CDC.Harry Reid, who emerged from the unforgiving political landscape of Las Vegas, Nevada, to lead the Senate Democrats for 12 turbulent years, died on Tuesday at age 82. Reid died Tuesday, “peacefully” and surrounded by friends “following a courageous, four-year battle with pancreatic cancer,” Landra Reid said of her husband. Tributes for the late Senator poured in after the news of his death, led by president Joe Biden, who called him a “great American”. The Democratic Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer called Reid “one of the most amazing individuals I’ve ever met”. “He was tough-as-nails strong, but caring and compassionate, and always went out of his way quietly to help people who needed help,” Schumer said in a statement. Steve Sisolak, the governor of Nevada, said that calling Reid “a giant” failed to “fully encapsulate all he accomplished on behalf of the state of Nevada and for Nevada families. There will never be another leader quite like Senator Reid.” Former president Barack Obama said he’d written a letter to Reid at the request of his wife, Landra, near the end of Reid’s life. He posted the letter on Twitter, which read: “You were a great leader in the Senate, and early on you were more generous to me than I had any right to expect. I wouldn’t have been president had it not been for your encouragement and support, and I wouldn’t have got most of what I got done without your skill and determination.” “Most of all, you’ve been a good friend,” he added. Reid’s reputation as a quiet leader with a sometimes quick temper was reinforced by decades of hard-fought legislative wins, including the passage of Obama’s Affordable Care Act, an economic stimulus package following the 2007-08 recession and the Dodd-Frank financial reforms. But his policy legacy was marred in some eyes by his push in 2013 to alter Senate rules to make it easier to confirm Obama’s judicial nominees, a move that paved the way for Donald Trump’s controversial supreme court nominees to be confirmed by a simple majority. Reid defended the tactic to the end. “They can say what they want,” he told the New York Times Magazine in December. “We had over 100 judges that we couldn’t get approved, so I had no choice. Either Obama’s presidency would be a joke or Obama’s presidency would be one of fruition.” Reid’s sometimes defiant bluntness was forged by a childhood in Searchlight, Nevada, a desert crossroads where his father was a gold miner and his mother did laundry for the brothels. The family home had no indoor toilet, hot water or telephone and the town had no high school, so Reid boarded with relatives 50 miles away. Reid and his wife, Landra, met as students at Utah State University, where they converted to Mormonism. In the 1960s the couple moved to Washington DC, where Reid enrolled at George Washington University law school and worked six days a week on the police force patrolling the Capitol, where he would later climb the heights of political power. First, the amateur boxer had to come up through the harsh terrain of Nevada politics, defined by Las Vegas, the state’s casino interests and the presence of organized crime. At the end of her husband’s four-year stint as Nevada gaming commissioner in 1981, Landra Reid found an explosive device in the family station wagon. As Senate majority leader decades later, his chief of staff told the New Yorker, Reid still weighed conflicts by reflecting: “No one is going to kill me over this.” Multiple Republicans bore scars from tangling with Reid. During the 2012 presidential race between Obama and Mitt Romney, Reid announced on the floor of the Senate that Romney had not paid taxes in 10 years: an unfounded and ultimately debunked claim spurred by Romney’s refusal to release a full set of tax returns. Asked if he regretted the charge, Reid said: “Romney didn’t win, did he?” Trump found his way into a war of insults with Reid after the New York developer, then a candidate, criticized Hillary Clinton’s health. Reid replied that Trump was in no position to criticize because he “is 70 years old, he’s not slim and trim, he brags about eating fast food every day”. Trump then mocked Reid for an exercise accident a year earlier that had blinded the senator in one eye. In December, Reid called Trump “amoral” and “the worst president we’ve ever had”. Trump had reason to resent Reid. So well-oiled was Reid’s political machine in Nevada that the state bucked national demographic trends in 2016 to reject Trump. In 2018, voters threw out incumbent Republican senator Dean Heller. Efficacy behind the scenes became a trademark for Reid, who won loyalty from colleagues for his willingness to bestow credit and cede the limelight. “I know my limitations,” Reid told the New Yorker in 2005, the year he took leadership of the Democrats in the Senate. “I haven’t gotten where I am by my good looks, my athletic ability, my great brain, my oratorical skills.” Reid is survived by his wife, five children and 19 grandchildren. Asked in March last year what he thought of Washington since his retirement, Reid shrugged: “I just shake my head is all I can do.” Reid in May 2018 revealed he’d been diagnosed with pancreatic cancer and was undergoing treatment. Less than two weeks ago, officials and one of his sons, Rory Reid, marked the renaming of the busy Las Vegas airport as Harry Reid international airport. Agencies contributed reportingThe New South Wales government has told people travelling to Queensland over the holiday period not to line up for Covid-19 tests, conceding that pressures on the PCR system mean results are unlikely to be returned within the 72-hour window required to enter the sunshine state. As daily case numbers in NSW almost doubled to 11,201 the premier, Dominic Perrottet, apologised for the strain on the state’s testing capacity which has seen long delays at Covid clinics throughout the state, but said people should not be in line for tests unless they were sick. “There are many people in those queues who do not need to be there,” he said. “We are doing everything we can to increase capacity and put downward pressure on those queues but if you are not sick and do not have any symptoms [and] have not been advised by NSW Health to receive a PCR test you should not be lining up.” “By doing that you are taking the place of someone who needs to receive one of those PCR tests.” It came as Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, announced on Wednesday that her state would drop its controversial requirement for interstate arrivals to receive a PCR test before crossing the border. Instead, from 1 January arrivals will only need to have a negative rapid antigen test. The policy has been the subject of criticism from the NSW government, which has put much of the blame for long Covid testing lines and result delays on the pressure on the system caused by holidaymakers. Perrottet thanked Palaszczuk for that decision on Wednesday, but the NSW health department has told people travelling before 1 January that there was no point lining up for a test because of the blown-out wait times. In a statement, the department said people “seeking results to travel interstate that they are unlikely to receive their results within 72 hours”. Perrottet also flagged changes to the isolation period for Covid positive people ahead of a hastily arranged national cabinet meeting on Thursday. He said he believed the government could make “sensible changes” to the policy. The mooted change, which will be discussed along with a narrowed national definition of close contacts, follows recent decisions in both the US and UK which saw the isolation period drop to five and seven days respectively after a negative rapid antigen test. “My preference would be that we have a national response, I understand though that other states are at a different part in time with this pandemic so different states at this moment have different challenges but we’ve seen globally that it makes a lot of sense to revisit and look at that isolation period based on the evidence that’s in front of us,” Perrottet said. “I believe that will be a commonsense change which ensures as we move through this phase as case numbers increase we reduce the isolation period and that to me is really learning to live alongside the virus. I’d be really supportive of those changes.” Covid case numbers have shot up across Australia amid the spread of the Omicron variant. On Wednesday Victoria recorded 3,767 new cases of Covid, up from 2,738 the day before. Queensland recorded 1,589 cases. Tasmania recorded 55 new cases. And South Australia reported another daily record increase, with 1,471 new cases. The spike in cases on Wednesday was coupled with another jump in hospitalisations. In NSW there are now 625 people in hospital with the virus – up by 68 compared to Tuesday and by 323, or more than double, from a week ago. That, coupled with the faltering testing system and the decision to back-track on the removal of an indoor mask mandate and QR-code checkin requirements, has seen the state premier come in for criticism from some health experts. But Perrottet has insisted he does not regret easing restrictions earlier in December as the Omicron variant arrived in the state, and during a press conference on Wednesday he refused to concede he had struck the wrong balance between managing the virus and opening up the state’s economy. “We have always said we will tailor our settings to the circumstances we find ourselves in,” he said. “In every press conference we’ve said case numbers will increase. Now they’re increasing. We need to learn to live alongside the virus and we’re doing just that. And in the meantime there will be inconveniences as naturally as a society we adjust to those settings, and that’s OK.” On Wednesday the NSW chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, conceded that the delays in testing meant that the number of positive cases in the community was likely higher than the official figure, saying the initial wave of the Omicron variant could see about 10% to 15% the community acquire the virus. The NSW government announced this week that it had placed an order for 20m rapid antigen tests, which are expected to arrive by the end of January. Perrottet said the government would investigate whether it could provide the tests free, amid increasing pressure on PCR testing. Asked on Wednesday whether, if the government knew that cases would rise, he should have acted sooner to increase testing capacity, Perrottet said the government has been in negotiation with private pathology clinics to continue testing capacity over the Christmas period. “We’re doing everything we can to get through those tests as quickly as possible,” he said. South Australian premier, Steven Marshall, has also announced his state would no longer carry out pre-departure PCR tests for people leaving the state. Marshall also announced that booster shots would now be mandated for frontline health workers. The dramatic rise in cases – after the arrival of the Omicron variant – is proving to be the first significant test of Perrottet’s leadership since he replaced the former premier, Gladys Berejiklian, in October. Perrottet has sought to convince NSW residents that living with Covid is an inevitable development and insisted that hospitalisations from the virus, not case numbers, should be the focus. After case numbers began to rise in early December, Perrottet pushed ahead with easing restrictions, removing the use of QR codes in some retail venues and indoor mask mandates. The premier was forced to back-track before Christmas as Omicron became the dominant variant in the state and the number of health workers furloughed either with the virus or by isolation orders rose to about 1,500.Spectacular fireworks lit up the summer sky and the air filled with the smell of sulphur as trails of smoke descended on the crowds in Tiananmen Square. The throng cheered enthusiastically. “Go Beijing, go China, go Olympics,” they chanted. The collective pride was palpable. It was shortly after the opening ceremony of the Beijing Summer Olympics, which began at 8.08pm local time on 8 August 2008; the Chinese believe eight is an auspicious number. That evening, Chinese-American Kaiser Kuo was watching from the balcony of his apartment in eastern Beijing. “It was meant to be impressive, and watching as a Chinese person, it certainly was: all the pageantry of history, the flawless performances, the grand scale,” Kuo says. “But watching through my western eyes, this spectacular event also played into a sense of fear: the robotic juggernaut and machine-like rise. It was intimidating.” Fourteen years later, China is staging its second Olympics when the Winter Games open on 4 February in Beijing. But the international context and much of the mood music surrounding the event is very different this time. The 2008 Games were a symbolic moment for China, both as a competitor (sport had long been a means to reclaim wounded national pride) and for the image the event projected to the world. The Chinese capital underwent a massive facelift after winning the bid in 2001 as roads were repaved and subway lines added. Authorities amassed 400,000 English-speaking volunteers to prepare for the influx of foreigners. The theme song of the Games spoke to this reinvented and reinvigorated China showing itself to the world: Beijing Welcomes You. For many, the Olympic slogan, “One world, one dream”, was a sign that China’s convergence with the rest of the world was inevitable. Expectations were exceeded, with China winning 51 gold medals and – for the first time – unseating the US, which won 36. The New York Times called the 29th Olympiad China’s “coming out party, a show of its rising economic and political power and its re-emergence as a global power”. Jacques Rogge, the then president of the International Olympic Committee, said: “The world has learned about China, and China has learned about the world, and I believe this is something that will have positive effects for the long term.” *** The 2008 and the 2022 Olympics will both have taken place during epoch-defining global events and shifts in China’s relations with the west. The 2008 Games coincided with the beginnings of the financial crisis and symbolised China’s recognition on the world stage; the 2022 Games will take place during the Covid pandemic and are already overshadowed by the growing boycotts from western capitals. In the months leading up to both Games, rights organisations seized on the occasion to highlight the treatment of Tibetans and Uyghurs as well as Chinese dissidents. They called for a boycott. In March 2008, protesters in Greece disturbed a high-security ceremony to light the Olympic flame. This month, a London-based unofficial tribunal concluded China was committing “genocide” in its western region of Xinjiang. Beijing’s response to both developments was furious. A few days before the 2008 Games took place, the US House of Representatives passed a resolution, by 419 votes to one, condemning China’s record on human rights and was accused by the Chinese foreign ministry of trying to “sabotage the Olympics”. The sharp tone has been similar in the run-up to the Winter Games, yet this time the criticism has been backed by more concerted action: the US has staged a diplomatic boycott, with some of its allies following suit. In 2008, the US’s China policy was still dominated by the idea of “engagement”. China was seen as having embarked on a “peaceful rise” and, despite repeated allegations of rights violations, Washington believed China would eventually liberalise. So, on his last trip to Asia before landing in Beijing to attend the Games that summer, the then US president, George W Bush, told an audience in Thailand that while Washington would “stand in firm opposition” to repression in China, “change in China will arrive on its own terms and in keeping with its own history and its own traditions. Yet change will arrive.” A few weeks earlier, he told departing US athletes in the White House Rose Garden that “Laura and I look forward to joining you for the Olympics. I’m fired up to go.” That optimism from Washington has evaporated, and 2008 was a turning point, says David Ownby, a China historian at the Université de Montréal, who writes a widely read blog, Reading the China Dream. “The contrast between the beautifully executed Beijing Games and the chaos created by the entirely avoidable financial crisis convinced many Chinese that China was a major player,” he says. “Since then, the general mood is that China weathers crises better than the west,” he adds, pointing to problems caused in the west by the European refugee crisis, Brexit, Donald Trump’s election, the 6 January US Capital riot, and the pandemic. *** A month after the 2008 Games took place, Lehman Brothers collapsed. The US government bailed out Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac – two huge companies that had guaranteed thousands of sub-prime mortgages, in the biggest rescue operation since the credit crunch began the previous year. The fallout of the financial crisis was not just economic, but made clear the reality of a less western-centric world order. In the words of the historian Adam Tooze in his book Crashed: How a Decade of Financial Crises Changed the World: “As the appalling scope and scale of the crash was revealed, the financial institutions that had symbolised the west’s triumph since the end of the cold war seemed – through greed, malice and incompetence – to be about to bring the entire system to its knees.” The financial crisis emboldened China’s confidence in its own system of economic management. That November, the then Chinese premier, Wen Jiabao, announced an unprecedented 4tn yuan (then £375bn) stimulus package, triple the size of the US’s effort. In Wen’s words, the package was “big, fast and effective”. The deal propelled China’s GDP growth even at the time of a global crisis. And while it also brought headaches for Beijing as easy credit fuelled inflation, the country’s robust growth led it to surpass Germany to become the largest exporting nation in 2009, and in the following year replace Japan as the second-largest economy in the world. In Washington, China was reluctantly seen as a saviour of the US economy. On her first trip to Asia less than a month after Barack Obama’s inauguration on 20 January 2009, the then US secretary of state, Hillary Clinton, stopped by Beijing. She persuaded Wen to purchase more American sovereign debt. But she also later acknowledged the dilemma this posed for the US. After returning from Asia, she asked the then Australian prime minister, Kevin Rudd: “How do you deal toughly with your banker?” Some believe the financial crisis and its incremental fallout over the ensuing decade precipitated a shift in China’s global identity and strategy. “[20]08 began this reckoning [in China] with the idea that maybe the United States is actually weakening,” said Rush Doshi, Joe Biden’s China director in the National Security Council this summer. Chinese perceptions of western weakness are also underlined by the surge in the study of western populism in Chinese academia in recent years, Doshi added. “There’s just so much attention and study on western populism in that period because they see there’s something fundamentally compromising the ability of government to work. They may be wrong about that assessment, but that’s their assessment.” Mixed with the rethink of its own identity, there was another visible change in China around the Beijing Games, says Kuo, who left China in 2016 after 20 years there. With the exponential growth in internet users every year, the Chinese began to express themselves – sometimes critically of the government – while learning about what the English-language international press was saying about their country for the first time. “Most of the time they didn’t agree with the foreign press’s coverage of China. And it was then that the Chinese began fighting with westerners online in the comments section of online publications, including the Guardian’s,” Kuo adds. “It was also then when online nationalism began to emerge.” *** China has had its own dramas since the 2008 Games. First, the huge stimulus package unleashed that year triggered warnings from economists of China’s own debt crisis. Then in 2012, before Xi Jinping took office, a top-level scandal involving Bo Xilai, a rising political star, sent shock waves through the ruling Communist party and the country. After Xi came to power in 2013, his anti-corruption campaign took down officials as senior as a former member of the politburo standing committee. In 2018, Xi scrapped presidential term limits, a move that alarmed western capitals. Meanwhile, despite the west’s condemnation of China’s treatment of its Uyghur population and Hong Kong protesters, Beijing has doubled down on its policies. Albert Leung, the Hong Kong lyricist who wrote the 2008 Beijing Welcomes You theme, is no longer welcome to perform on the mainland after being accused of supporting pro-democracy protesters in the former British colony in 2014. Ai Weiwei, who was involved in designing the Bird’s Nest stadium where the grand opening ceremony took place, is living in exile in Europe. Parallel to these events inside China, the west has also changed significantly in the decade leading up to the 2022 Games. In the UK, the Brexit vote in 2016 marked a turning point in Britain’s relations with the outside world and sowed domestic division, puzzling many Chinese. In the US, the election of Trump also highlighted domestic tensions, while his China policy amplified the cracks between Beijing and the west and turned an already fraught diplomatic relationship into a zero-sum geopolitical contest. But perhaps more crucially, the Covid pandemic has strengthened Chinese leaders’ confidence in the country’s political system. “Judging from how this pandemic is being handled by different leaderships and [political] systems around the world, [we can] clearly see who has done better,” Xi told his cadres five days after an angry mob besieged the US Capitol on 6 January. “Time and history are on our side, and this is where our conviction and resilience lie, and why we are so determined and confident.” “In 2008, China was crying out to be recognised. It wanted to show its wealth, cosmopolitanism as well as friendliness,” says Xu Guoqi, a historian at Hong Kong University and author of the book Olympic Dreams: China and Sports, 1895-2008. “Nowadays, China wants to show its assertiveness. Some in the country go as far as to – perhaps mistakenly – suggest that the east is rising and the west is falling. Hence, in response to [recent] diplomatic boycotts, Beijing said: ‘Nobody cares.’” Kuo, who now hosts a China-focused podcast called Sinica from the US, says it is hard for him to see how China and the west get out of this security dilemma. “I feel a sense of despair,” he says. “For many years of my life, as we saw things converging, I was very much encouraged. Now, I’ve been very depressed about it. I’ve almost experienced it as a personal failing.”Midwinter dusk is falling as we navigate the steep maze of arms’-width alleys that pass for streets in Robin Hood’s Bay. It’s the stuff of Instagram dreams, but if you were to go back 250 years, locals had another use for the warren on their doorsteps. Back then, this tiny community was among the busiest smuggling hotspots on the North Sea coast of England. Contraband rowed ashore under the gaze of a clifftop lookout disappeared into a network of passages, interconnected houses and tunnels, including one opening directly on to the slipway. I must have been here a dozen times before my friend Jen told me that it led somewhere, and today we spring the same surprise on our children. They are initially wary. The dark, the rushing water and the smell – not foul, but dank – are not exactly inviting. It’s a bit much for the littlest, but the older two are game, first edging along a shelf on one side, then hopping rock to rock, nimble as ship rats. A short way in, a smaller tunnel opens to one side. It is steeper and rockier than the main culvert, with a beamed and boarded roof that suggests we are under a building. It would be the work of seconds to pass a packet through a lifted board, from where it could be whisked, hand to hand, house to house, to a safe hiding place. That’s how it happened. It was risky, but the profit on a single parcel of tea or silk or a bladder of Dutch gin exceeded a week’s legally earned wage, and with geology, topography and hydrology on their side, the entire community, as tight-knit as a fisherman’s gansey, was in on it. Rather than being a place built for smuggling, smugglers were made by this place. The tunnel leads out into a steep gully, its sides green with mosses, woodrush and ferns. Above, Christmas lights twinkle in the fog-furled night – close, but somehow a world distant. In the bar of the Bay Hotel later, the kids form a conspiratorial huddle. By the time we leave, the littlest has found her courage, and back to the tunnel they go, together this time, to emerge triumphant, with rebellion running hot in their veins. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryNew Zealand has reported its first community exposure to the Omicron variant from a person arriving from the United Kingdom earlier this month. The person, who tested positive for the Omicron variant of Covid-19, had briefly been active in the community in Auckland. The recent international arrival reportedly returned a positive result on day nine of their self-isolation period but had previously returned three negative tests for Covid-19 while completing seven days of managed isolation at a facility in Auckland, the ministry of health said in a statement on Wednesday. “The case arrived on a flight from the United Kingdom via Doha on 16 December and is fully vaccinated with a mRNA vaccine. No other Covid-19 infections have been identified from the individual’s flight,” the statement read. The result of the person’s day nine test was received on 27 December and they were immediately transferred to an Auckland MIQ facility on the same day at which point the Omicron variant was confirmed. Investigations are currently under way as to the source of the infection and public health officials are in the process of identifying and contacting all other known close contacts, and ensuring they isolate and get tested. The individual was in Auckland city centre on 26 December and 27 December, but the health ministry did not believe that the person was highly infectious at the time. The New Zealand Herald reported the person visited a nightclub, bar, Chinese restaurant and a jewellers. New Zealand has reported 13,986 confirmed coronavirus cases and 51 deaths since the beginning of the pandemic, according to government health data. There have been 54 Covid cases reported over the past 24 hours with the majority of cases recorded in Auckland.Nine Perfect Strangers (Amazon Prime) When a glowing Nicole Kidman first glided into shot, speaking in a Russian accent an offensive uncle might pull after a few shandies, it was clear that Nine Perfect Strangers was, actually, not so perfect. But I persevered, because this was another glossy adaptation from Lianne Moriarty – the novelist behind Big Little Lies – and it boasted a cast including Regina Hall, Michael Shannon and Melissa McCarthy. Why might enigmatic Masha (Kidman) have invited this motley crew to her Tranquillum wellness resort? Was there a supernatural twist ahead? Was she evil? Two episodes in, it attempted a big reveal – that she had been slipping guests a daily LSD cocktail – and nobody batted an eyelid because, hey, YOLO. A mindblowing finale was surely due. But it didn’t come; it was ultimately about a woman chasing hallucinogenic trips to “see” her dead son – and bringing another bereaved family along for the ride. That’s fine, but why was it pretending to be something more sinister or exciting the whole time? Without even knowing it, it was a wellness culture satire, and proof that we’re too easily sucked into wanting to know what happens to silly, wealthy people with non problems. Shame on us. Hollie Richardson The Morning Show (Apple TV+) The first season of The Morning Show had a giddy allure. A bunch of Very Famous People, some of them doing their best work in years, were let loose on #MeToo and the results were borderline operatic. But then they had to make a second season. The list of everything wrong with The Morning Show this year could fill up the entire internet, so I’ll try to keep to the worst offences. Making Billy Crudup the authority figure, automatically robbing him of all his charm. Setting it at the start of Covid, like a horrible piece of The Newsroom cosplay. The entire Italian episode, which was by far the most baroquely misjudged hour of television made all year. The lack of direction. And the ending. My God, the cack-handed, logic-defying, brain-destroying shocker of an ending. Congratulations, The Morning Show. You were the only series this year that made me physically shout at the TV. Stuart Heritage You (Netflix) You is one of the most improbably bizarre dramas ever made, a heady cocktail of stalking, killing and bibliophilia which makes your average daytime soap look plausible by comparison. And yet, for all of those reasons it is also undeniably compelling, with literary snob and murder enthusiast Joe Goldberg (Penn Badgley) hooking viewers in with each sub-American Psycho monologue. If its first two seasons seemed problematic – guy kills girl, repeatedly – season three was a less controversial bingewatch. Both Joe and his wife, Love (Victoria Pedretti), prodded at the fourth wall as they decamped to the California suburbs to do battle with mommy bloggers and tech barons … as well as offing the odd neighbour with an axe. I nearly forgot – they’ve got a baby, too (Joe and Love seemed to forget as well: he wasn’t in it much). From questionable stalker drama to questionable family stalker drama – have you ever heard anything more heartwarming? Hannah J Davies The L Word Generation Q (Sky Atlantic) I came of age with the original L Word, when seeing queer women on screen felt so revolutionary – so of course I was going to watch the reboot, Generation Q. The first season was perfectly decent, soapy and trashy in just the right measure, but by series two the shine had worn off. It managed to make the magnificent Bette Porter into a curmudgeonly caricature, much of it involved a court case about marketing opiates that was ill-at-ease with the tone elsewhere, which was a bizarre patchwork of moods in the first place. The rest of the characters seemed stuck on a treadmill of circular stories that had no tension, because they would have been so easily resolved by a single rational action. I understand there’s no drama in that, but a whole season of people doing stupid things for no good reason, in an increasingly confusing mess of plots, isn’t very gripping. So obviously I watched every episode. Rebecca Nicholson The Crew (Netflix) What made me go the distance with a multi camera sitcom set in the deeply macho male environs of a Nascar garage? In the dark days of February, maybe all you really want is something low-stakes and easily digestible. The Crew’s plot of a veteran garage chief (Kevin James) butting heads with a fresh-faced new owner (Jillian Mueller) seemed to promise generational and gender-clash shenanigans. But despite an episode where James unexpectedly rocked an eyepatch, this half-hearted Netflix project struggled to get out of first gear. The first 10 instalments were characterised by the mechanical delivery of would-be zingers, unappreciated side characters being put upsettingly through the wringer and two suspiciously out-of-the-blue romantic cliffhangers to wrap the season up. Of course I raced through the whole thing and five months later – when it was quietly cancelled – I hated myself even more. Graeme Virtue Buffering (ITV2) As intensely maddening viewing went in 2021, the sitcom writing debut of Love Island narrator and comic Iain Stirling was almost unbeatable. Apparently playing himself, Stirling’s turn as a kids’ TV presenter was so screechy and irksome that his scenes alongside a puppet co-star saw him prove less empathic than a lump of felt with ping-pong balls for eyes. And yet, in a shout-at-the-TV, pray-for-disaster sort of way, it was captivating. It’s not unusual to be hooked on a show by rooting for its lead. But in this case, you were rooting for him to fail. Alexi Duggins Behind Her Eyes (Netflix) For the most part, Behind Her Eyes was a naughtily good psychological thriller – the perfect blend of raunch, wealth, secrets and lies, based on a book by Sarah Pinborough which you can imagine tearing through at the airport. It follows Louise (Simona Brown), a receptionist who starts having an affair with her psychiatrist boss David (Tom Bateman) then befriends his wife Adele (Eve Hewson). Soon, the true story of this outwardly perfect but damaged couple begins to unravel, with Hewson giving a shuddering performance as a woman who is dead behind her eyes. But just when we thought we were going to get a well-considered conclusion, the series decided to switch genres and become a supernatural story about astral projection. Sure, it was a shocking finale which nobody saw coming and we couldn’t stop tweeting about – but that is exactly why it was so damn infuriating. Where was the logic? Why cop out of a decent ending with a nonsensical twist? That said, the closing scene where Adele’s son realised another soul was living in his mum’s body made me want a second season. HR Married at First Sight (Channel 4) When the UK version of Married at First Sight launched in 2015, I instantly fell head over heels. Despite the gimmicky premise, the show had all the sociological delights of the best reality TV and none of the infuriating cynicism: contestants really seemed in it for the promise of everlasting love, not a career on the influencer circuit. That, unfortunately, was not the case with this year’s edition, revamped to mimic the hugely popular Australian format. Featuring a whopping eight couples, forced to interact regularly during mass dinner parties and communal “commitment ceremonies”, what had once been a genuine social experiment became just another tacky drama factory: performative arguing, fake friendships, game-playing, cross-couple cheating, dinner table showdowns. Still, like previous series, I watched until the end, desperate to know if the participants went the distance – not because I was rooting for them, but because I was concerned for their welfare. Most of these relationships were disturbingly dysfunctional: were they being prolonged solely for the airtime? Going by the eventual slew of separations (and continued tabloid coverage) the answer – mercifully – was yes. Rachel Aroesti Kim’s Convenience (Netflix) The first four seasons of Kim’s Convenience were perfect lockdown viewing: a warm, occasionally biting comedy about a Korean Canadian family and their convenience store. A rare western show to feature a majority Asian cast, it took on immigrant storylines without ever becoming preachy. Until, in the final season, things took a turn, with all emotional investment lost to a string of dead-end storylines. Would the parents close up shop? Would longsuffering daughter Janet (Andrea Bang) land a job? Would eldest son Jung (Simu Liu) get a … better job? (There was some irony here: over the summer Liu starred in Marvel blockbuster Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings.) But despite everyone seeming to have given up, I had to know what happened to my lockdown companions. We were eventually rewarded with a series finale, memorable mostly for introducing a break-up within the final five minutes. After it ended, Liu called out a lack of diversity in the writer’s room, turning this hatewatch of a final season into something sadder: a missed opportunity. Henry WongTesco is to launch the first fully-electric HGVs to be used commercially in Britain to serve its distribution centre in Wales. Two 37-tonne lorries will transport goods from a rail freight terminal in Cardiff to the company’s hub in Magor, about 30 miles away, from January. The vehicles can travel about 100 miles on a single charge, making the relatively short distance of the round trip an ideal route to test how further vehicles could be rolled out in the fleet, Britain’s biggest supermarket said. The first two, from the Dutch manufacturer DAF, are expected to make about 65,000 miles of haulage journeys otherwise made by diesel vehicles, cutting an estimated 87.4 tonnes of CO2 emissions a year. HGVs contribute about 16% of all emissions from UK transport, the sector that now contributes most to greenhouse gases. Battery weight and range requirements have made HGVs a more difficult proposition than cars to electrify. Smaller electric lorries have gone on sale in the UK, and 20 are taking part in Department for Transport trials with the NHS and local authorities. The DfT has also commissioned a study into using railway-style overhead electric cables to power HGVs on motorways. Britain became the first country to commit to making all new goods vehicles weighing 26 tonnes and under zero-emission by 2035 at the Cop26 climate summit last month. The largest HGVs will not need to be zero emission until 2040, a decade later than the UK’s target date for phasing out the sale of new petrol and diesel cars. Jason Tarry, the chief executive of Tesco in the UK and Ireland, said starting to convert its distribution network, one of the largest in the UK, would play an important role in the supermarket’s efforts to become net zero by 2035. “We’ve already made progress by starting our switch to electric home delivery vans and rolling out electric vehicles charging points for our customers. I’m excited that Tesco can also lead the way in electric haulage innovation, helping to tackle this last source of road transport emissions.” Its freight partner, FSEW, said it planned to create a low-carbon fuel hub in Cardiff, with more trucks also running on renewable biomethane fuel.Health chiefs believed a pandemic was “imminent” in 1997 and drew up a contingency plan that included a mass vaccination programme and closing borders. Officials expected a flu pandemic to emerge from the far east and established a UK-wide plan to deal with the health crisis, newly declassified documents have revealed. The Northern Ireland Department of Health, Social Services and Public Safety received the Contingency Plan for Pandemic Influenza in March 1997, which also included provisions to close schools. The plan reads: “The following conditions coexisting suggest that a pandemic is imminent – the emergence of a new strain of influenza virus which has a marked antigenic shift – a new virus; a high proportion of susceptible people in the population, ie with no immunity to the new virus either from vaccination or from previous infection with a similar virus; evidence that the new virus can spread and cause human disease.” The document continues: “Typically, new shifted strains of influenza virus have emerged in the far east and spread via Asia or the antipodes towards Europe. “If this occurs, some warning is likely before a new strain appears in the United Kingdom, although spread may be very rapid.” It predicted that any flu originating in China would probably have a faster spread than the previous pandemic in 1968 owing to “the opening of China to trade and tourism” and “increasing international movement of people and greater use of rapid methods of transportation”. In response, the then senior medical officer for Northern Ireland, Dr Elizabeth Mitchell, drafted a contingency plan for the region in December 1997 to help the local health service to prepare draft arrangements. The plan says: “Immunisation with appropriately formulated influenza vaccine can reduce the impact of influenza, particularly among those population groups most at risk of serious illness or death. “An early priority of contingency arrangements will therefore be necessary to secure supplies of vaccine against the new strain and to immunise as many people as possible.” The draft report adds: “In general, it is unlikely that the spread of influenza can be halted, but some slowing could possibly be achieved by reducing unnecessary, especially long-distance travel, and by encouraging people suffering from the disease to stay at home. “Closing schools is likely to cause some problems, especially for working parents, but would be an option to be considered, particularly if teacher absenteeism reached levels at which schools could not function.” Mitchell’s report also states that non-urgent hospital admissions, including serious but non-critical operations, would “need to be reviewed and may need to be suspended to make beds available”. A letter from Northern Ireland’s then chief medical officer, Dr Henrietta Campbell, on 17 December 1997 to public health directors and doctors in Northern Ireland raised concerns over an outbreak of avian flu in Hong Kong, which had infected six people. The declassified documents were made available to the public by the Public Record Office of Northern Ireland and can be viewed at the National Archives.Britain’s Most Expensive Houses 9pm, Channel 4 What better time of year to think about excess than Christmas? Presumably this is the rationale for the timing of a series examining the palatial abodes on the books of one of the world’s largest luxury estate agencies. Think a 102-room neoclassical mansion in north Wales and a “mega-mansion” in Windsor with its own fitness centre, pool and staff quarters. Alexi Duggins Billionaire Blooms 7pm, Channel 4 Florals? For winter? This one-off show follows the world’s most celebrated, high-end florists as they put together some of the most impressive Christmas displays out there. Prepare to feel ashamed of that drooping poinsettia. Hollie Richardson Worzel Gummidge: Calliope Jane 7.15pm, BBC One In the third episode of this run of seasonal specials, a travelling fair comes to Scatterbrook. Worzel recalls the legend of a fairground with an enchanted organ that sent humans to sleep so that scarecrows could enjoy the rides without fear of being seen. Bill Bailey guest stars. HR Lady Gaga at the BBC 11.20pm, BBC Two Fresh from her brilliant performance as Patrizia Reggiani in House of Gucci, Lady Gaga gets exactly what she wanted for Christmas: an “at the BBC” treatment. Expect to revisit renditions of her belters, including Shallow and Paparazzi. HR Celebrity Quizness 10pm, Channel 4 Tom Allen hosts a famed-up version of the silly, clever quiz where unusual question-setting (eg rounds where almost all the answers are the same) demands nimble thinking. Willing to look mildly foolish are Siobhán McSweeney, Jo Brand, Robert Rinder and AJ Odudu. Jack Seale Frankie Boyle’s 2021 New World Order 10pm, BBC Two Who better to spread some Christmas cheer than … er, Frankie Boyle? He attempts to make sense of the past 12 months – or at least poke a big stick at them – in this end-of-year special. Guests are yet to be confirmed, but their reviews and discussion of the bewildering year that was 2021 are guaranteed to be brutally funny (if we don’t laugh, we will surely cry). HR Film choice A Star Is Born (Bradley Cooper, 2018), 9pm, BBC One Every generation gets its version of this rags-to-riches tale – and gen Z’s boasts the splendid Lady Gaga in a role already graced by the likes of Judy Garland and Barbra Streisand. Bradley Cooper – also the director and co-writer – co-stars as the over-the-hill, alcoholic country singer Jack, who discovers Gaga’s younger waitress, Ally, doing a number at the drag bar where she works. Seeing her potential, he mentors her to success and they inevitably fall in love. However, the less Ally needs him, the more Jack resents her fame and changing musical direction. A remake that has interesting things to say about the power balance in relationships. Simon Wardell Live sport Premier League football: Brentford v Manchester City 8.15pm, Amazon Prime Video. Plus Chelsea v Brighton at 7.30pm.Up to a point, I can plot my life in clothes shops. M&amp;S and Asda as a kid; New Look and Tammy Girl as a pre-teen, then Topshop, surf shops and our local 60s den for massive corduroy flares – the full complement from my rural hometown’s offering. When I moved for university, I revelled in the terribly exotic (to me) Gap and Zara; during my 20s, London offered the untold riches of Cos, Monki and &amp; Other Stories. After turning 30, that sense of surefire fits slipped away. I was probably too old for Topshop’s cropped-everything, plus I found its owner a bit gross. I felt jaded by Cos’s austere dental hygienist smocks. And the emerging age-appropriate uniform of mid-length floral skirt, nice jumper and heeled boots felt like a millennial update of M&amp;S’s old Classic collection, AKA premature fashion death. Where next? In case the aforementioned array of pedestrian high-street shops didn’t make it obvious, I haven’t been much of a fashion adventurer since I was a teenager, back when chaos was my style MO. (Mismatched Converse, mismatched knee-length striped socks, skirt that looked like a bin bag.) These days I find clothes shopping demoralising (Zara, with your so-called XL that’s no bigger than a size 12 – I’m looking at you.) I’d attempted vintage shopping but never had the eye for it, nor the patience. My wardrobe was haunted by my sole thrifted purchase: a grey silk 80s jumpsuit with padded shoulders, bought in Berlin on the encouragement of a friend who can actually carry off that sort of thing. What felt exciting in the changing room made me feel like a blousy mechanic back home. On the coathanger it stayed. Conscious of the climate crisis and the ills of fast fashion, I wanted to try secondhand marketplaces such as Depop. But when I first poked around, I only seemed to find an avalanche of fleeces – the kind I would wear after a swimming lesson in 1998 – albeit customised and cropped. I don’t have the appetite to rehash that look, nor the abs for its reinvention. Another dead end. Then earlier this year, I was researching an interview with the 21-year-old British pop star Holly Humberstone. Like many of her generation, she loves thrifting, for the creativity and environmental positives. At her shows, she runs a clothing swap initiative where fans might even snare one of her old outfits. Inspired (not to mention sensing an opportunity to procrastinate) I redownloaded Depop. I don’t know whether the site’s range had expanded or my mindset had just shifted: the potential and fun to be had was suddenly obvious. I saw a colleague wearing cool white trousers and wondered if I could find something similar: still with their tags, in my size, half the price of new? Sold, to the woman certain she’ll get jam on them in weeks. My pre-pandemic jeans were skinnies I never want to see again; I researched fits for generous bottoms and learned that a fancy Swedish brand I would never ordinarily splash out on was apparently the answer. And here they were, in my size, perfect condition: £15. (Turns out they were right about the bum thing.) There’s a degree of slot machine-style pleasure in finding exactly what you’re after. Beloved M&amp;S polo neck, rubbed threadbare, in a new colour? Jackpot. This flush of sartorial success encouraged me to commit to not buying new if I can help it (I’m making an exception for pants, pyjamas and gym clothes). As well as making a tiny contribution to the planet, to my delight, it’s also unlocked a desire for self-expression that’s lain dormant since those odd striped-sock days. Walking into a shop and being confronted by outfits you’d never dream of wearing deters me, at least, from burrowing for hidden gems. (The &amp; Other Stories near work currently has a display that I would describe as “cyberpunk Sloane Ranger”, and more power to you if you can pull that off.) Plus taking risks on new wildcard items is prohibitively expensive and potentially wasteful. But on Depop or eBay, dabbling in a new personality comes with less pressure. Cherry-pink velvet hot pants for £8? I could be that person – and if I’m not, I can sell them to someone who might be. I started selling my own neglected items, thrilling quietly at the idea that they were apparently desirable: maybe I had some covetable style after all. I even sold that German jumpsuit. Its new owner – a vintage fiend – told me they love how it hangs and the uniqueness of the detailing; that they would wear it anywhere, “dressed up or down”. It makes me strangely happy that this item I could never love turned out to be just what someone else was looking for. Laura Snapes is the Guardian’s deputy music editorPam and Tommy (Disney+) Buckle up: this is going to be a wild ride. Lily James and Sebastian Stan undergo serious transformations in the makeup department to play Pamela Anderson and Tommy Lee. The mini-series tells the story of their infamous sex tape – the first-ever viral video – and how it all began with the pair getting married 96 hours after meeting in 1995. But beyond dining out on a juicy scandal, will it use a post-#MeToo approach? Hollie Richardson This Is Going to Hurt (BBC One) Adapted from Adam Kay’s wildly successful and hilarious book of the same name (which was scribbled down in diary form during breaks), this series follows the travails of a junior doctor in the NHS. It has been in the pipeline for some time and was delayed, ironically, by the pandemic which has, to say the least, sharpened our appreciation for our overworked, undervalued medical professionals. Ben Whishaw stars. Phil Harrison The Responder (BBC One) Once again, Martin Freeman gets under the skin of a disappointed (and disappointing) middle-aged man and renders him sympathetic. This time, Freeman is Chris, a police urgent response officer whose bleak, solitary night-shifts in Liverpool are disrupted by the arrival of rookie partner Rachel (Adelayo Adedayo). When Chris makes a rash decision, their previously mundane job becomes distinctly more dangerous. PH Atlanta (BBC) Donald Glover’s eccentric and inventive take on the Black American experience has felt like one of the most timely shows of recent years. As we left him, Glover’s normally diffident hip-hop impresario Earn had just done the dirtiest of the dirty on his protege Clark County and earned the respect of Alfred in the process. Even so, the incident will surely hang over their relationship. Expect season three to be a fraught examination of loyalty and betrayal. PH Derry Girls (Channel 4) The “wee lesbian” (Nicola Coughlan), the “English fella” (Dylan Llewellyn) and the rest of the motley crew are back for a third and final season. For a comedy that has fans in stitches throughout, there’s also a lot of heart in how it handles being a teenager during the Troubles in Northern Ireland – so it’s sure to be an emotional farewell. Also look out for Skint on the BBC later this year, a series of monologues about poverty which includes one from Derry Girls creator Lisa McGee. HR Riches (ITV) A family drama that has been dubbed “a love letter to Black London” by its creator Abby Ajayi. There are distinct top notes of Succession in the premise: Hugh Quarshie plays super-rich patriarch Stephen Richards who suffers a stroke and, amid slightly cosmetic concern for his wellbeing, his troublesome family’s secrets and rivalries begin to surface as a fortune appears up for grabs. PH The Undeclared War (Channel 4) The war in question is, of course, a cyberwar. And this political thriller sounds like the kind of weighty, slightly portentous fare that is director and writer (and seven-time Bafta-winner) Peter Kosminsky’s speciality. He’s assembled a heavyweight cast: Mark Rylance, Simon Pegg, Adrian Lester and newcomer Hannah Khalique-Brown star as the 2024 general election looms and GCHQ finds itself under attack. But who are the nation’s virtual assailants? PH Superhoe (BBC Three) This drama has been heralded as the next Fleabag, given that it, too, started out as a one-woman stage show with a flair for the funnies and emotional heft. Creator Nicôle Lecky stars as Sasha Clayton – a 25-year-old wannabe singer and rapper whose attempts to fend for herself become ever more desperate after she is evicted by her family. Alexi Duggins Marriage (BBC) In Mum and Him and Her, Stefan Golaszewski created two of the most beautifully observed, touchingly comic portraits of relationships to ever grace the small screen. This forthcoming four-parter about a 30-year marriage, with Nicola Walker and Sean Bean in the lead roles, is sure to do more of the same. Expect dialogue that can shift from hilariously banal to heart-rendingly poignant in the space of a sentence. AD The Last of Us (HBO/Sky Atlantic) If there were ever a video game crying out for a TV adaptation, it’s the poignant 2013 action-adventure epic about a smuggler trying to guide a teenage girl across postapocalyptic America. HBO has chosen it as its first adaptation of a console franchise, so no doubt it’ll reproduce the game’s narrative forte: tempering the bleakness of a zombie apocalypse with the emotional core of a pseudo parent-child relationship. AD Queenie (Channel 4) Candice Carty-Williams’s bestselling 2019 novel tells the story of a 25-year-old Black journalist in London whose life starts to unravel when she takes a break from her long-term boyfriend. What follows is a nuanced, authentic exploration of race, mental health, womanhood and everything in between (including a few laughs). With Carty-Williams working on the adaptation, it’s bound to please fans of the book. HR Top Boy (Netflix) The Drake-backed Netflix reincarnation saw this already great drama about London’s drug gangs scale new heights of brilliance, as its longer episode count let narratives breathe and showcased the killer acting chops of MCs including Dave and Little Simz. The prospect of its return is hugely tantalising – not least due to the narrative drawing the rival gangs of Dushane (Ashley Walters) and Sully (Kano) together with their intensely likable young rival, Jamie (Micheal Ward). AD House of the Dragon (Sky Atlantic) Following a final season so disappointing that many fans avoid talking about it, there’s trepidation about HBO’s Game of Thrones prequel. Then again, perhaps the only way is up. It rewinds 200 years to chronicle dragon-loving House Targaryen, with Matt Smith wearing a white wig as Prince Daemon and Emma D’Arcy playing Princess Rhaenyra. Expect the usual low-key stuff: mythical beasts, big budget battle scenes and endless raunch. HR Peaky Blinders (BBC One) The BBC’s Brum-based gangster drama has failed to put a foot wrong over five hooky, violent seasons. Here’s hoping this final series brings things to a brilliant close, as Tommy continues to battle Oswald Mosley and the second world war looms. It remains to be seen how the show will cope with the tragic loss of Helen McCrory, but at least it can count Stephen Graham as a new cast addition. AD Euphoria (Sky Atlantic) The most hyped teen drama in years (and rightly so) got us talking with its copious nudity and substance abuse – not to mention the musical number that formed its final moments. But it was also capable of real beauty and depth, not least Zendaya’s vulnerable portrayal of Rue, a young woman struggling with addiction. It earned her a best actress Emmy, and we’re excited to see what new heights she scales as she grows into the role. AD Inside Man (BBC One and Netflix) From Steven Moffat (Dracula, Sherlock, Doctor Who), here’s a curious thriller following a prisoner on death row in the US, a vicar in a quiet English town and a maths teacher trapped in a cellar – and how they cross paths in a most strange way. With Stanley Tucci, Lydia West and David Tennant heading the cast, it seems impossible to disappoint. HR The Afterparty (Apple TV+) This new series from the Oscar-winning directors of The Lego Movie is part murder-mystery, part comedy, centring on a death at a high school reunion. As the investigation unfolds, each episode will be told from a different character’s perspective, which should showcase the brilliant comic character acting of Jamie Demetriou, Veep’s Sam Richardson and Parks and Recreation star Ben Schwartz. AD Frasier (Paramount+) Hey baby, I hear the blues are calling. Following an almost 20-year hiatus, Kelsey Grammer is back as Seattle’s snooty but beloved radio psychiatrist for tossed salads, scrambled eggs and a reboot fans are torn over. Part of the show’s enduring appeal was the relationship Frasier had with his dad Marty – but actor John Mahoney died in 2018. Can the show be as good without him? It’s not clear whether Niles, Daphne and Roz will come calling again, but we hope they’ll return to provide the show with a shot in the arm. HR Everything I Know About Love (BBC One) There’s not one millennial woman in London who has not read – or at least heard of – Dolly Alderton’s bestselling memoir about friendship and romance. In this dramatised adaptation, Maggie and Birdy (played by Emma Appleton and Bel Powley) are two pals in their 20s navigating their first phase of adulthood in a flatshare. But then the unthinkable happens – dependable Birdy gets a steady boyfriend. Just like the book, let’s hope the series is a brave yet vulnerable (and very funny) unpicking of what love means in all its forms. HR Pistol (Disney+) Advance photos of this series don’t exactly inspire confidence – the fictional Sex Pistols look more like Ed Sheeran roadies than punk rock tabloid folk devils. But Danny Boyle is at the helm of this dramatisation of Steve Jones’s memoir Lonely Boy and he can normally be relied upon to come up with the goods. The story itself – friendship, music, rivalry, drugs and death – has all the right ingredients. PH Then Barbara Met Alan (BBC) The remarkable true story of disability rights activists Barbara Lisicki and Alan Holdsworth is brought to life by Bafta-winning writer Jack Thorne and Genevieve Barr. Lisicki (Ruth Madeley) met Holdsworth (Arthur Hughes) at a cabaret night in 1989 – cue years of righteous mischief-making as the couple became the driving force behind the Direct Action Network, whose protests led to rapid advances. PH The Crown (Netflix) A changing of the guard for the fifth season of Peter Morgan’s epic. Olivia Colman’s Queen Elizabeth II will vanish into a royal phone box and emerge as Imelda Staunton. More intriguingly, how will Jonny Lee Miller fare as John Major? And what next for Elizabeth Debicki’s troubled Diana, Princess of Wales? No spoilers, but to be honest, we have a bad feeling about where her story arc might be going. PH Better Call Saul (Netflix) After 14 years, the extended world of Breaking Bad finally comes to an end as Saul Goodman’s origin story reaches its conclusion. Over recent series, the prequel has come increasingly close to scaling the heights of the original, as Jimmy has moved ever closer to the dark side, so this last outing will no doubt be something to lap up every moment of. It is, after all, the end of an era. AD Heartstopper (Netflix) If there’s one thing TV needs more of, it’s credible adaptations of LGBTQ+ narratives. Hence some of the excitement around this eight-part reworking of Alice Oseman’s Tumblr-born graphic novel of a gay high school romance. The story of Nick and Charlie, two British teens at a boys’ grammar school who fall in love, also looks set to showcase new and exciting talent, including Yasmin Finney, a Black Manchester-based transgender woman – and TikTok star. AD The Lord of the Rings (Amazon Prime) It’s a big year for fantasy revivals, as JRR Tolkien’s epic world of hobbits, wizards and elves is brought to the small screen with a whopping budget (apparently $1bn in total). Aside from a confirmed September release date, fans only know that the series will take place in the Second Age thousands of years prior to the Lord of the Rings books and The Hobbit. All other details are being kept under wraps, which only makes the wait even more exciting. HR • This article was amended on 29 December 2021 to credit Genevieve Barr as co-writer of Then Barbara Met Alan.Tis the season to be disturbing hibernating butterflies, and the naturalist Lucy Hodson recently posted a video of a memorable encounter with a peacock. The butterfly was beneath a log and, its sleep interrupted, flashed its wings bearing vivid blue and maroon eyespots. Most strikingly, it also emitted a series of loud hisses that viewers judged like the rustling of petticoats or a whispered “pissaff”. It may have been a fairy casting a spell but it was also a classic example of deimatic behaviour, a sudden bluff from a defenceless animal to momentarily unsettle a predator. The peacock was also pictured upside down, which is exactly how most predators, from mice to birds, see it. From this angle, the blue eyespots on its hindwings combine with its beak-like abdomen to create a startling image of an owl’s face – from which a wood mouse would flee in terror. Studies have found that a peacock’s hissing increases the likelihood of seeing off a mouse. Enduring a British winter as an adult butterfly is a tough road that only five native species take (most hibernate as caterpillars). The wings that litter log-piles and sheds in spring are testimony to the peacocks whose smart defences aren’t quite bewitching enough.Strictly speaking, my “winter” love story took place in a whole other season. Although it was January, my girlfriend and I were visiting Argentina, at the height of the Austral summer. But we were in the Andes, 4,000 metres above sea level, surrounded by ice and snow. If that doesn’t count as winter, I don’t know what does. At this point in 2003, Jane and I had been travelling for 10 months – the New Guinea Highlands, Easter Island, Angkor Wat … and we had experience-fatigue. We had made it to Argentina and, for reasons ranging from the aforementioned travellers’ ennui to the peso crisis making Argentina dirt cheap, had decided to climb Mount Aconcagua. At 6,962 metres (almost 23,000ft), this is the highest peak in the Andes (and the western hemisphere). You don’t need any special mountaineering skills to climb it. Nonetheless, it is a very serious mountain and has killed more than 100 climbers. Most people who attempt it train for months beforehand. They bulk up, too, because you burn a lot of calories climbing high peaks. We were pretty fit, although 10 months’ travel meant we had bulked down. I normally weigh 73kg (11st 7lb) but I was 57kg back then. Our wintry tale starts with us at about 3,600 metres, where it was a sunny 17C. All our cold-weather kit had been sent by mule with our guide to Plaza de Mulas (PDM), the base camp, which is at 4,370 metres. We were looking forward to an easy six-hour hike to PDM through tawny desert landscapes that look like the American west. The day dawned bright and clear, but it didn’t stay that way. After a few hours, we were walking into a 100kph wind. Soon, snow was falling and visibility was getting poor. At 5pm, we called a halt and pitched our tent, figuring that the weather would improve and we would walk up the next day in blazing Andean sunshine. But the snow was the start of the worst blizzard in 20 years. So we hunkered down and snuggled up. People ask, “Wasn’t it romantic?” Well, we zipped our sleeping bags together and cuddled for warmth, but this is where any romcom similarities end. We were in a high-altitude tent designed to cope with howling gales, which resembled a cramped 70cm-high orange envelope. The next morning, I unzipped the tent. Complete whiteout. We knew what to do: sit tight. It was annoying because PDM was only 90 minutes’ walk away, but we also knew that the people who die in blizzards are those who leave their tents. So we went back to bed. We played Travel Scrabble – game after game after game. In those long ago, pre-smartphone days, a lot of travelling was waiting around with very little to do. In Indonesian Papua we had waited a fortnight for a flight in a dull little frontier town. Mostly we’d played the card game shithead – sometimes for eight hours straight. These things are not romantic per se. But spending all day, every day with another person with no real diversions and not getting on each other’s nerves is an excellent test of whether you can spend your life with them. Especially when you’re trapped together in less than two cubic metres. By the afternoon of day two, any novelty had been replaced by hunger. We did an inventory. Food-wise, we had milk powder, two onions and a surprisingly comprehensive selection of herbs. We had a gas stove but not enough gas to melt snow. The river was five minutes’ walk away, but in the blizzard this meant remembering a dozen landmarks because visibility was so low and, y’know, death. I survived and Jane made cream of onion soup, our first meal in 30 hours. And so it went. We talked – increasingly about food – and we played Scrabble. The next morning we woke and opened the tent. Another wall of white. We reassured each other it would be fine – we just had to resist the urge to move. And then something terrible happened. Nature was calling – and not a number one. I looked at Jane. “The loo roll went up on the mules,” she said. I squatted behind a pyramid-shaped rock in the howling snow. In the absence of toilet paper, I looked around me … Well, the solution was soft and white: you make snowballs and keep wiping until they come out clean. When I got back into the tent, Jane asked how it was. “Not as bad as you’d think,” I replied. “But still very bad.” I went down to the river again. On my way back a man appeared out of the whiteness. His beard and moustache were rimed in white and he was leading a pair of ice-shellacked mules. He looked like something from a horror film: an Arctic explorer minutes before death. We wished each other luck and he disappeared into the whiteness, leaving me wondering if he had been there at all. Back in the tent, we ate the last of the onion soup. We talked about how you can live without food for weeks, and played Scrabble. We talked about how we would stay in the five-star Hyatt in Mendoza, how we would drink malbec and eat steak and sink into high-thread-count sheets. We talked about deep, perfumed baths, about the future, about buying houses and marriage and children. We talked about everything. By the third evening we had been in the blizzard for 50 hours and eaten two bowls of soup. We were ravenous, although one upside of not eating is not having to use snowballs as toilet paper. Months ago, in the Himalayas, we had learned there’s not much to do in the mountains at night so you sleep for 12 hours. We slept. The next day, I poked my head out of the tent. Still white. “It might be a bit brighter,” I said, more optimistically than I felt. But an hour after that I saw blue sky, the first in three days. We went outside and did a hungry, smelly dance. Two hours later, we were eating beef and beans at PDM. In the end, we never made it to the top. Jane dropped out at 6,000 metres and I got to about 6,700 – which seems incredibly close. But it wasn’t really – at that height, a few dozen steps feels like the battle of Stalingrad and, besides, I could feel altitude sickness coming on. Back at the Hyatt, we bumped into climbers who had been caught in the blizzard much higher than us. There was a lot of frostbite – hands bandaged like mittens. Some of them would lose fingers and toes, which rather put my failure to summit into perspective. That was 18 years ago, and we’re still together and have two lovely daughters. It’s an unromantic test of romance, but if you can spend 65 hours together, unwashed, in a tiny tent playing Scrabble, you’re in it for the long haul. Needless to say, the three Rigby women reliably veto my occasional suggestions that we go on a walking holiday in the Andes.John Davies’ family has farmed in the hills and valleys of mid Wales just north of Brecon since the 19th century and his most cherished times now are when he is working shoulder to shoulder with his 91-year-old father, Elwyn, and 20-year-old son, Brychan. “That’s incredibly rewarding,” says Davies, 55. “There’s a balance there. Dad has seen it all, done it all. Brychan brings in the new things from college. It’s good to see that blend of experience and ambition and I’m in the middle, the bridge. “Family farming businesses are incredibly important in Wales, the backbone of our industry. We don’t have a large agribusiness kind of structure but we’ve lived in these hills for six generations and we’d like to see it carry on for another six. It’s about community, culture and language. It’s about building for each generation.” But that building will not be straightforward. “This is a period of great volatility,” says Davies, who is standing down as president of NFU Cymru after four years in office. “We need to work incredibly hard to make sure we get a fair deal.” The future of the Welsh family farm does appear to hang in the balance. Post-Brexit trade deals with countries such as New Zealand and Australia make sheep and beef farmers worry that they will not be able to compete with cheaper imports. Other pressures – and temptations – include the corporations circling family farms, buying up their land to plant acres of trees to offset their carbon emissions. Estate agents have cold-called farmers in Davies’ neighbourhood asking if they want to sell up. “We do need to plant trees, but we need to make sure we do not lose farms to greenwashing operations,” said Davies. And farmers are feeling the pressure from environmental campaigners, many of whom would prefer re-wilding schemes to take the place of traditional sheep and cattle farms. “We have to get away from the idea that cows and sheep are bad and woodland is good,” says Davies. “It does not move the argument forward when you talk about sheep-wrecked landscapes. That is deeply offensive to our communities and culture. We’ve got to move the debate to a different place.” The fragility of the farming life is keenly felt in Davies’ village, Merthyr Cynog. It nestles beneath the upland of Mynydd Epynt, once a vibrant farming community that was cleared in 1940 to make way for a military training ground. The 219 inhabitants of the 54 farms had just three months to pack up and leave. Livelihoods, a way of life and, to a large extent, the Welsh language were wrecked. Elwyn Davies, who was a young boy when his family was forced to move, said it led to huge changes. “It was good land, quite steep but fertile. Everyone had a few acres and worked well together. Everything was disrupted, a whole community gone. It took many years to rebuild.” Conscious that farms across Wales are under threat, the UK government’s Welsh affairs committee has launched an inquiry into their future, examining not just the economic aspects but the damage the loss of every farm does to the local community. Its members heard that while, according to the last census, about 19% of people in Wales speak Welsh, more than 40% of workers in the farming industry speak the language. Welsh farming heartlands tend to also be the language strongholds. While Elwyn speaks Welsh, John does not, largely as a result of the clearance. The revival of the language in schools now means that Brychan does speak Welsh. “For the language to prosper, farming is key,” said John. “When we’re at the market in Dolgellau, Welsh is the main language. You get a better deal if you can haggle in Welsh.” Davies is proud of the work his farm does to improve the environment, from planting trees on steep ground that cannot be used for growing crops to creating new ponds and wetlands. “As an industry we have a clear ambition to be net zero by 2040 and provide the most climate-friendly food in the world,” he said. He remains hopeful. “We’ll have to evolve, adapt, deliver what is wanted but we have a great climate to grow food, a fantastic climate. And if we’re backed into a corner we’ll make a stand.” Yet another problem for Welsh farming is demographics. The average age of a farmer in Wales is 60 and only 3% are under 35. That makes the attitude of people like John so crucial. Like his father, young Brychan is optimistic. “People are always going to need food and the issue of food miles is a big one. I don’t think we’ll going anywhere anytime soon.”As I set out for the Swanscombe peninsula from Greenhithe station, on the south bank of the Thames near Dartford in Kent, on a dull winter day, I tell myself to be realistic. I’m heading for Britain’s newest site of special scientific interest (SSSI) but it’s not going to be a wildflower meadow or an ancient woodland. This is a former industrial site situated on a part of the river long associated with the hidden, the forgotten and the thrown-away. But something magical happens. Following signs for the England Coast Path, I fall through a wormhole in time and find myself in an unexpectedly lovely waterside village of flint cottages, old ship chandlers and cosy pubs. Here, in Greenhithe’s high street, is a slice of the old Thames. The air heavy is with woodsmoke and the only sound is of waves slapping against the banks. Out on the river, close to the spot where Sir John Franklin and his crew set sail on their ill-fated quest to discover the Northwest Passage through the Arctic, a flock of redshank are probing the mud as a tug guides a container ship out to sea. I feel my step slow, my mind ease as I follow the river through the once-rolling parkland of Ingress Abbey, now blighted by the pile-up of architectural styles that makes up most waterside developments. On the far bank I can see the industrial sprawl of West Thurrock. Kent has fared little better than Essex when it comes to poor planning decisions but here and there pockets of land have escaped. The Swanscombe peninsula, a mile or two east of Greenhithe, is one such place. A former cement works, abandoned in the 1990s, this landscape has been left in glorious, unfettered abandonment for decades, allowing nature to reclaim it. The peninsula now comprises 259 hectares (640 acres) of wetland, woodland, lakes and, yes, flower-rich meadows. As I climb on to the sea wall, I see a large reed bed stretching away, its edges backlit by silver birches, those most pioneering of trees. They dust the site with spangles of gold. Deep within this swamp land I hear the ping-ping-ping of bearded tits, elegant and often hidden, peach-coloured birds with drooping black moustaches. I’m astonished. How could this area have remained vulnerable and unprotected for so long? Sadly, so often we fail to see the value in places until they are threatened. Despite its designation as a protected landscape, the Swanscombe peninsula is earmarked to be turned into a theme park by London Resort Company Holdings, a project considered by the government to be “nationally significant infrastructure” thereby skipping what little planning protection is left in the hands of local councils. In order to save this wetland, conservation bodies including Buglife, the RSPB and Kent Wildlife Trust stepped in, and Natural England declared it an SSSI because of its importance for a number of scarce insects, plants and birds. But even with this level of protection, the developers hope to get the green light for their plans, claiming that the funfair will boost the economy of the area and that the fragile habitats can be recreated elsewhere. I follow the coastal path around the shoreline. There is no escaping the fact that this landscape is not instantly attractive. A 190-metre pylon strings wires high across the Thames, and derelict buildings crumble beneath ivy. However, it is on our former industrial sites that nature shows us what rewilding really means. Birch and bramble clamber across piles of rubble; orchids bloom alongside the trackways. In the spring, bumblebees search for nectar among the coltsfoot. It is not only nature that benefits from such places. There is peace here, as rare as hens’ teeth on the fringes of the city, and I can picture what a wonderful place this could be to connect children in a largely deprived area with nature. Despite the industry, there is something prehistoric about this land. It resembles the places our ancestors would have hunted. Half a mile away is the Swanscombe skull site, where some of the earliest-known human remains in Britain were discovered, those of a woman who lived 400,000 years ago. Undoubtedly, she would have foraged along these shores and gathered ducks’ eggs in a wetland not so different from this. The coast path emerges on to a creek. Here a community of houseboat owners are working away to patch and repair their crafts. Thames barges lie docked for the winter and stonechats bob between the piles of timber and old railway carriages. These edgeland communities are inhabited by people who wish to live unfettered, too, and undoubtedly are as vulnerable to eviction as the wildlife. As dusk falls, I follow the path back to the river. The lights from the QEII bridge pool out across the water. The drivers rushing overhead probably have little knowledge of the importance of the oasis tucked away down here. Post-industrial sites are not always easy to love, but the more you look, the more they reward you. I can only hope that the protection this place has been given is enough to prevent its loss.Interest in anime, gaming and K-pop is fuelling a boom in Korean and Japanese university degrees that is helping to revive modern languages departments struggling with falling enrolments. Acceptances to study Korean more than trebled from 50 to 175 between 2012 and 2018, while Japanese places grew by 71% in the same period, according to a report published this year by the University Council of Modern Languages (UCML). More students now study Korean than Russian, and more take Japanese than Italian, the report shows. Experts who spoke to the Guardian said this was due to the popularity of east Asian culture – in particular K-pop and J-pop, Japanese video games, anime and popular films such as Parasite, and series such as the violent survival drama Squid Game – which has been boosted by their accessibility on platforms such as Netflix and Spotify. According to Netflix data, the South Korean series Squid Game is comfortably its most viewed show of all time, with 1.65bn hours of the series streamed in the first four weeks after its release date. The rising popularity of Korean culture in particular, a phenomenon referred to as the Korean wave or K-wave, or hallyu, is influencing trends in a number of sectors, from cosmetics and fashion to food and household appliances. At the heart of the K-wave is K-pop, which in 2017 was already estimated to be a nearly $5bn industry. The South Korean K-pop group BTS set a new record and made headlines for achieving the most YouTube views for a music video debut – more than 101.1bn within 24 hours for their 2020 song Dynamite. Emma Cayley, the UCML chief executive, said: “It is clear that there has been a shift away from more traditionally taught European languages to non-European.” She said this included Arabic and Chinese, which combined with Japanese and Korean are driving the recovery of the study of languages and culture in universities. A recent UCML study based on universities self-reporting their language provision suggested the proportion of universities offering Japanese rose from 19% in 2018 to 39% in 2020-21, while a small increase was observed in departments offering Korean. Lecturers say students often start studying Korean and Japanese as a hobby while at school on language-learning platforms such as Duolingo, with recent figures in the UK showing Japanese was the fastest-growing language and Korean the fourth fastest. “They started learning Japanese just casually, for fun, and then they thought ‘this is fun’ so they want to study more seriously either as a degree or as an optional subject,” said Kazuki Morimoto, a Japanese lecturer at the University of Leeds. Morimoto said he had noticed a shift away from students opting to combine Japanese with business or economics 10 to 20 years ago to improve their job prospects, towards students studying the language and culture by itself for the love of it, although many do still find jobs connected to Japan as graduates. He thinks young people have been influenced by the spread of the culture on social media as well as by a strategic programme of cultural diplomacy initiated by the Japanese government in the run-up to the rugby World Cup and Tokyo Olympics. Many students were also drawn to the prospect of a year in Japan, he added. Jaeuk Park, a Korean lecturer at Leeds, said his students typically studied Korean as a result of their love for K-pop and K-dramas, although some were also interested in understanding more about North Korea, a notoriously secretive nation. Sarah Keith, who researches Korean popular culture at Macquarie University in Australia, said its appeal to westerners was a result of “how global culture is now”, with many Korean creators having grown up consuming Hollywood films and European culture. As a result, their cultural outputs are a “balance of familiarity and novelty” that westerners find compelling. “For example in Squid Game, the dramatic pacing and arc of the show are intelligible to viewers worldwide, but at the same time it engages with specifically Korean themes which are totally new to foreign audiences,” she said.My daughter faces having nowhere to live because of billing mistakes by British Gas. Her landlord served notice, in order to sell the property she was renting, and she was unable to find any other property to rent locally. She decided to buy a house, but her mortgage application was declined as her credit record showed defaults on her British Gas account. She had installed a prepayment gas meter during lockdown due to financial concerns but, unbeknownst to her, there was a duplicate gas account in her name. It’s this that British Gas had declared in default. British Gas has admitted this was an error, but has not removed the defaults. She is likely to lose the house and no one seems to care. SB, Newcastle Your daughter is among countless people barred from the property ladder because of billing errors by a third party. It’s inexcusable that, having identified a mistake, British Gas did not immediately correct it. The mistake, it turns out, is that the switch from a credit account to a prepayment gas meter last year was not completed on the company’s system. That meant that the old credit account remained open and appeared to be in default. British Gas managed to amend the credit report instantly when I queried it, just in time for your daughter to secure the mortgage. Incorrect information on a credit file should be raised directly with the credit reference agency in question. It can add a notice of correction while it investigates. Lenders have a legal obligation to read such a notice, although it may not alter their stance. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsIt was June 1981 and I was 18. I stood in the dock at Camberwell Green magistrates court in south London. I was just about to receive my sentence for my role in the Brixton uprising of that April, after being arrested for assaulting a police officer. Ignoring the summary of my case, I stared into the public gallery. Relatives of the other six accused sat there in quiet, hopeful silence. I imagined they were mums, dads, aunts, uncles, siblings and grandparents. But not one belonged to me. I studied their faces, trying to comprehend what it might be like to have someone of your own blood supporting you. I tried to picture what my own parents looked like and what they might feel as I was handed down my sentence. If my mother were present, would she be weeping? I barely heard the 12‑month custodial term being given to me. As I glanced at my fellow accused, I suddenly became very resentful. I guessed they would be visited by relatives wherever they were sent. For me, there was no one. Not even a second cousin. There were numerous times I had felt isolated, especially growing up in the notorious Shirley Oaks children’s home in Croydon, after being abandoned by my father when I was two. But I had never felt so alone as in the moment I peered into that public gallery at the court. No one gives a fuck about you, Alex. They took me away in one of those security vans with the blackened windows. As I sat in my cubicle, I wondered if there were any quick and easy ways that I could end my pathetic existence. After being taken to a large holding cell near Lambeth Walk, I was driven to Wormwood Scrubs in west London. For some reason, the jangling of bunched keys and clanging of metal doors seemed much louder in the prison environment than anywhere else. I was given my stiff prison uniform and escorted to my cell. They opened the door and pushed me inside. I closed my eyes, trying to ready myself for the suicide to which I had committed inside the prison van. The closing door resounded behind me. Opening my eyes, I saw that I would be sharing my cell with a Rastafarian who looked at least 20 years older than me. He introduced himself as Simeon and offered me a cup of tea. I declined and refused to speak to him. I wanted to be left to writhe in my own self-pity so I could devise a plan to end my miserable days. But Simeon persisted in wanting to become acquainted. Besides, it is impossible to find your own space within a tiny shared cell. The tension between us became unbearable, especially as he had a diarrhoea issue. Eventually, we came to blows. Or rather, he came to blows and I received them. At the conclusion of our fist-to-fist, I sat in a corner, bawling my lungs out. It was not so much because of the pain Simeon had inflicted, but because of the hard ache of childhood abuse and trauma. Up to that point, no doctor had ever described to me what a breakdown feels like, but I think I was very close to one. Luckily, Simeon took pity on me and insisted that I tell him my story. During that long night, the stench of excrement climbing into my nostrils, I did. He didn’t say much, but every now and again he nodded. He understood too well that I was disconnected from my roots, culture and people from the moment I was taken into care at two and a half. He took it upon himself to reconnect me. He pushed CLR James’s The Black Jacobins into my eager hands. “This will tell you ah liccle something about where you come from and where you stand in the struggle,” he said. Although my education had stalled, with numerous suspensions and three expulsions, I had always had the ability to read well. When I was five, I started to read the comics and magazines that were sometimes discarded on my dormitory floor. Little did I know that it was boosting my aptitude for the written word. Any novel or text that Simeon fed me, I gobbled up. I read Dickens, James Baldwin, Richard Wright, Langston Hughes, John Steinbeck and so many others. Through reading, I discovered that I wasn’t alone in having a difficult start in life. In the silence of the night, Simeon and I would discuss African civilisations. He would teach me about the continent’s kings and queens. He schooled me on the struggle for black liberation in South Africa, Angola, Mozambique and other countries. He introduced me to the life of Marcus Garvey and how he not only inspired the fight for equality for black people in the Caribbean, but also influenced the birth of the civil rights movement in the US. Together, we would try to decipher Bob Marley songs. We would sing the Wailers’ Get Up, Stand Up and Dennis Brown’s Three Meals a Day. He would laugh at my impressions of the reggae artists Barrington Levy and Johnny Osbourne. Simeon became a mentor and a father to me. I didn’t feel alone any more. I released the rope that I had clutched and held on to from the moment I gazed into the public gallery in court. Just before I completed my sentence, Simeon instructed me: “Alex, your life, and all those of the underclass, is just as valuable as anyone else’s in this world; never forget that.” With that mantra repeating in my head, I started to write. Initially, reggae lyrics and poems about my lived experience. My fables are essentially the tales of the underclass or, as we used to say in Brixton, the sufferah. Whatever I achieve in this old writing game is down to the conversion I experienced under Simeon in Wormwood Scrubs. The stories are already there, sometimes going unnoticed, ignored or rejected. All I do is try to make them important. I will be for ever grateful to him. Alex Wheatle’s latest novel, Cane Warriors, is out now (Andersen Press, £7.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply. In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or by emailing jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at befrienders.org.A run on rapid antigen tests in chemists and supermarkets across Australia has left governments scrambling for supplies as they seek to change the way people get tested for Covid. Rapid antigen tests (RATs) have been available in the US, Europe and parts of Asia since March this year, but the Australian testing regime has relied on the more expensive PCR tests as its program’s cornerstone. Now, as case numbers surge and the system comes under increasing strain, state and federal governments have sought to promote RATs as an intermediate step before people join a queue to be tested. In response RATs have been flying off shelves in supermarkets and pharmacies, raising concerns about a lack of supply. Jini Maxwell, a games journalist from Melbourne, said that while they had been able to easily find tests a week and a half ago, they had struggled to find any since Christmas “anywhere”. “There are two chemists near me that I’ve been checking every day that have been sold out for the past three or four days,” they said. Maxwell said that when they finally found a chemist who did have them on Thursday, the shelves were bare by the time they arrived and they were told to come back in an hour while the shop restocked. “I think it represents another massive failure of the federal government to provide adequately for the Australian people during a two-year pandemic,” they said. The Australian Medical Association vice-president, Dr Chris Moy, said the lack of availability amounted to a “market failure”. “You can’t get them. And people really don’t have a reasonable idea about when to use them,” he said. “In a public health response, the government has to ensure that, if they’re going to rely on the private system, the private system is supported so there isn’t a market failure when we really need it.” The Pharmacy Guild of Australia national president, Trent Twomey, said though “tens of millions” of tests are on their way to Australia, they will probably not be available until late January. “This transition [from a focus on PCR tests to RATs] will take weeks, not days. We will have regional outages,” Twomey said. “There are millions coming in the pipeline, there’s tens of millions coming. The issue is what happens in the next fortnight. “We’re airfreighting what we can from overseas, and they will come into play in the next days and weeks. But the big shipments, the ones that are the orders placed with manufacturers, will take several weeks.” Though it is unclear how governments will distribute the supplies they are buying, Twomey said by late January RATs should be widely available. “They’ll be everywhere,” he said. “Those supplies coming towards the end of January will be available through supermarkets and pharmacies, and the supplies available in the next few days will be available through community pharmacies.” The prime minister, Scott Morrison, sought to reassure Australians on Wednesday. He said RATs were different to vaccines as there were many more manufacturers worldwide and governments had been working to secure supplies. These include the 34m additional tests announced by the Victorian state government and the 30m additional tests ordered by New South Wales. As these bulk orders will take time to fill, the prime minister said the private sector would fill the gap, describing the tests as a “precious commodity” in managing the spread of Covid-19. “When you start providing tests through other methods, then you need to be very clear about where and who so they can estimate how many stocks I need in my pharmacy or supermarket,” Morrison said. However, the tests will not be available in Western Australia, where RATs remain banned, despite calls from the Pharmacy Guild’s state branch for this ban to be overturned. Only the state’s chief health officer, Andy Robertson, can overturn the ban, which can see individuals fined up to $20,000 and companies up to $100,000 for administering them. Coles and Woolworths confirmed in separate statements they were experiencing a surge in demand, with Woolworths limiting customers to 10 kits a purchase, but both said stocks were large enough to cope. The Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) maintains a list of approved rapid antigen tests for use within Australia. Most approved RATs are sourced from manufacturers in China, the US and Germany and have to be repackaged into TGA-approved packaging before they can be distributed within Australia. This is to ensure the packaging language is in English and the instructions are clearly explained in a way that ensures they can be used at home. Twomey said industry does not “play favourites” when it comes to supplying different states and territories, but can only quickly respond to changes where governments liaise with industry about changes to policy ahead of time. “Those you don’t hear from, you can’t work with,” he said.Mistakes in a Sydney laboratory that led to nearly 1,000 people getting incorrect Covid test results will cause positive cases to ripple through the community, but epidemiologists say Australia’s infection rate is now so high it might not make a significant difference. Over the Christmas period St Vincent’s hospital told 886 people their result was negative, when in fact they were positive. The hospital’s pathology department, SydPath, has apologised for the “specific human error” that led to the wrong results being delivered. Initially 400 people were sent text messages saying they had a negative result, but were later told they were positive. Another 950 people were told they were negative when the results were not yet known, with 486 of them later told they were positive. “Once again, we are sincerely sorry for this error and acknowledge the significant impact it has had on those involved,” SydPath said in a statement, adding that it had procedures in place to ensure it wouldn’t happen again. Natasha Malani has been told she caught Covid from one of those mistakenly given the all clear, who then travelled to Adelaide and dined at the same restaurant she was in. Malani, the chief executive of the business group South Australian Leaders, said four out of the group of six she dined with were now infected. By the time she knew she was infectious, she had spent Christmas with her family, and had spent time with friends and colleagues. “That person came to Adelaide thinking they were negative … then got a result saying ‘sorry, we made a mistake, it was positive’,” she said. South Australia reported 1,471 new cases on Wednesday, a record for the state. The premier, Steven Marshall, said the Omicron variant was moving “too quickly”, and announced new restrictions on elective surgery and the scrapping of PCR tests for interstate travel due to a lack of capacity. Single events have caused a large number of cases at different times in the pandemic, including many deaths before vaccines became available. More than 850 cases were linked to the Ruby Princess cruise ship after it docked in Sydney and let off 2,700 passengers in March 2020.. But experts say that with daily cases now past the 18,000 mark across Australia, the relative effect of hundreds of people unknowingly spreading Covid is small compared with the early days of the pandemic, even if that is small consolation for the individuals and families affected. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Deakin University’s chair of epidemiology, Prof Catherine Bennett, said the extent to which the error increased the number of cases would depend on how much people were moving around. “It is an unfortunate time of year. Those who did change their behaviour did so because they thought they were cleared – so they went out,” she said. “People were probably getting a test to clear themselves for Christmas. Some of them would have been in isolation anyway, some were in quarantine … “Say a third of them went out and did the family thing, it probably has changed the risk for those families.” But with thousands of positive cases every day, Bennett said, a few hundred wouldn’t make a large overall difference. Mary-Louise McLaws, a University of NSW professor of epidemiology and adviser to the World Health Organization, said it was clear Christmas could be a super-spreader event. “Authorities around the country have heard the potential worst-case scenario from multiple modellers [but] you don’t need models to tell you what could happen,” she said. “It’s not unusual that Christmas is a super-spreader event. “[The SydPath situation] would have the potential of another increase in case numbers. Once you’re given a negative test, at a highly sociable period of the year, they would have gone out immediately … the majority would be young adults going ‘woohoo, I’m negative, I can go and see my friends’.” Michael Lydeamore, a lecturer in Monash University’s econometrics and business statistics department, said the flow-on effect would have made a difference as people travelled in the Christmas period while infectious. But he said with so many cases of community transmission it would not make “as big a difference as people think”. Because authorities were no longer tracking “trees of transmission”, it was unlikely the true effect would ever be revealed.In the final section of Hanya Yanagihara’s tripartite novel, there is an episode that functions as a compressed emblem of the book’s intricately assembled themes and intensely anxious preoccupations. Having already been immersed in narratives set in the 19th and 20th centuries, the reader is now taken far into the 21st, an era in which pandemics sweep the globe in waves, each time altering the civic and political order. As a new virus threatens to take hold, a mother isolates her twin sons, survivors of an earlier sickness that has left them so immuno-compromised they can never again leave the house. After she herself succumbs, and they run out of food, they venture outside, and die. The scientist who discovers their bodies wonders why they didn’t call for help, hypothesising that perhaps it was “because they wanted to see the world. I imagined them joining hands and walking out the door, down the steps, and into their backyard. There they’d stand, holding each other’s hands, smelling the air, and looking up at the treetops all around them, their mouths opening in wonder, their lives becoming glorious – for once – even as they ended.” There are few surface resemblances between A Little Life, Yanagihara’s Booker-shortlisted second novel, and To Paradise, but in both she is deeply, compulsively interested in characters for whom the world seems unattainable, whose histories and temperaments coalesce to render them marginal, held back. Where A Little Life’s Jude St Francis was never able to find release from the relentless abuse he suffered as a child without attempting to wound and destroy himself, the characters in To Paradise are often afflicted by a diffidence more nebulous in origin, a hesitancy powered by an obscure sense of unbelonging or incapacity. Those characters are various in their circumstances and behaviour, although Yanagihara’s device of using the same group of names in each of the three parts suggests a form of figurative, if not literal, reincarnation; as if the perseveration of psychological and emotional difficulty were, like a resurgent virus, resistant to attempts to subdue or eradicate it. But these personal stories are not simply studies in interiority; indeed, unlike the striking atemporality of A Little Life, each section conjures a vivid, often startlingly reconfigured America. The opening section, Washington Square, immediately brings to mind the fictional world of Henry James and Edith Wharton, as well as more prosaically allowing Yanagihara to lay the ground for the fact that a single house will stand at the centre of the novel. Here we encounter David Bingham, the first born of a trio of siblings whose care, following their parents’ death, has fallen to their wealthy grandfather, Nathaniel. But amid the refinement and delicacy of the household – “even the sole had been steamed so expertly that you needed only to scoop it with the spoon held out for you, the bones yielding to the silver’s gentlest nudge” – there are darknesses and silence, not least concerning David’s “confinements”, peculiar periods of illness responsive only to retreat from the world. Another pressing matter is David’s marriage, or lack of it; Nathaniel must ensure that his numerous properties and the family business will have a steward for the future. And here comes one of the earliest moments of wrongfooting; it is 1893, and in New York at the heart of the “Free States” of America, same-sex marriage is not merely legal, but commonplace. Suddenly, we are forced into an alternative history that imagines the past not as an earlier point on a progressive spectrum, but an era far more egalitarian and conducive to love, despite its class barriers and rigid etiquettes. That Yanagihara is set on disrupting our ideas of a journey towards enlightenment becomes clearer when the second section recreates Manhattan in the stigmatic age of Aids, here known only as “the disease”, and the third in a society where virulent illness has ushered in totalitarianism – which, as we might imagine, is thoroughly opposed to freedoms pertaining to love and sexuality. In some ways, this is a work whose fascination with entropy – the breakdown of societies, of property, of the body – makes its job almost impossibly hard; we feel as though we are standing in the centre of ever-decreasing circles. The middle section, in which a group of wealthy, well-connected gay men are pictured in the midst of a lengthy party to take their leave of a friend, a man relieved to have “only” terminal cancer who is taking control of his death, shows us a community closing ranks. A shadow plot reveals the damage inflicted on a family via the American colonisation of Hawaii, and includes perhaps the book’s most deeply affecting section, a near-Nabokovian exploration of mental disintegration in the face of dispossession. Here, Yanagihara concentrates the themes of racial oppression and supremacy that are “the sin at America’s heart”. And in the final section, the protagonist – the novel’s only significant female lead – is a young woman whose illness has robbed her of her capacity to feel and communicate emotions, to procreate, to conceive of herself as a person worthy of love. Aware of her predicament, she also lacks the tools and the ability to fully express it (here, one understands Yanagihara’s admiration of Kazuo Ishiguro, a specialist in exploring this kind of double bind). The possibilities in To Paradise always appear to be shrinking, reducing the chances of freedom and self-possession; the central characters, despite often having distinct material or intellectual potential, gradually come to realise the snares that surround them. The novel’s title invokes a feeling of expectant adventuring, of happiness waiting somewhere; what, perhaps, nation-builders might feel just as strongly as individuals at the beginning of their lives. Where the suffering and hopelessness of A Little Life created an overwhelming experience that left readers divided around the issue of how much they could take, this is a far subtler delineation of those who feel hamstrung, beleaguered, inadequate to the task ahead. In many ways – not least the questions of political and social responsibility it poses, especially in the face of global catastrophe – it is a darker work, and yet a more fruitfully puzzling, multifaceted one. And behind this impressive, significant novel stands the question: what is a life, if it is not lived in freedom? To Paradise by Hanya Yanagihara is published by Picador (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Alright, it’s time to wrap up the blog for the day. Here’s what happened: It was another day of record Covid figures across Australia, with a total of 18,243 cases. NSW recorded 11,201 cases and three deaths; Victoria recorded 3,767 cases and five deaths. Queensland recorded 1,589 cases, as state premier Annastacia Palaszczuk announced that from 1 Jan, interstate arrivals would not require a PCR test for entry but a negative rapid antigen test result would suffice. SA recorded 1,472 new Covid cases, with premier Steven Marshall announcing a reduction in elective surgery, and that the state would no longer conduct pre-departure PCR tests for interstate travellers. The ACT recorded 138 cases, Tasmania 55, the NT 19, while two community cases were recorded in WA. Prime minister Scott Morrison brought forward the planned national cabinet meeting to tomorrow, in light of the growing Omicron epidemic. Pathologists warned Australian laboratories were “running at capacity”, while the Australian Medical Association’s vice president, Dr Chris Moy, said the peak body had asked the government for a testing plan when it announced the country was opening up. Ciao for now! An update on the Perth hills bushfire, from AAP: A bushfire in the Perth hills has been controlled and an evacuation order has been downgraded to watch and act. The blaze is burning within containment lines in High Wycombe, 18km northeast of the city, at the foot of the hills and close to Perth Airport. “There is a possible threat to lives and homes as a fire is approaching in the area and conditions are changing,” the updated warning issued on Wednesday afternoon said. An earlier emergency warning had instructed residents in the path of a bushfire to leave, with homes under threat. A run on rapid antigen tests (RATs) in chemists and supermarkets across Australia has left governments scrambling for supplies as they seek to change the way people get tested for Covid. RATs have been available in the US, Europe and parts of Asia since March this year, but the Australian testing regime has relied on the more expensive PCR tests as its program’s cornerstone. Now, as case numbers surge and the system comes under increasing strain, state and federal governments have sought to promote RATs as an intermediate step before people join a queue to be tested. In response, RATs have been flying off shelves in supermarkets and pharmacies, raising concerns about a lack of supply. Read the full story: It’s hard to believe it’s only two years since much of eastern NSW and Victoria was blackened by the huge bushfires of the 2019-20 Black Summer (which actually began in the spring, but that’s a quibble). Anyway, parts of the south-east will get a blast of summer heat to round out 2021 and usher in the New Year. The Bureau of Meteorology is already putting out a few warnings: Bom has highlighted a heatwave will build in coming days. Melbourne, for instance, is in line for 38C on Friday for New Year’s Eve, which would make it the second-hottest day of 2021 for that city, if that prediction is reached. January 1 won’t be much cooler, with a 23C minimum before a 36C maximum for the Victorian capital. Adelaide is also in the hot zone, with a string of 36, 38 and 37C days, starting tomorrow. Bushfire risks will be elevated in both SA and Victoria, reviving memories of the big blazes from a couple of years ago for more than a few. Residents in the path of a bushfire in the Perth hills have been told to evacuate their homes. The south-west of WA has experienced a record-breaking heatwave this week, with concerns about the rate at which the region is drying out due to climate change. AAP reports: The emergency warning was issued for a blaze in High Wycombe, 18km northeast of Perth at the foot of the Darling Scarp and close to Perth Airport. “You are in danger and need to act immediately to survive. There is a threat to lives and homes,” the warning issued on Wednesday afternoon said. The fire started near the intersection of Sultana Road West and Smokebush Place east of the airport. Residents have been warned that leaving at the last minute could be “deadly”. “If the way is clear, leave now for a safer place,” the warning said. By about 1pm on Wednesday Perth had reached temperatures of 39.5C. To recap, 18,243 new cases were recorded in Australia today: NSW: 11,201 cases, three deaths Victoria: 3,767 cases, five deaths Queensland: 1,589 SA: 1,472 ACT: 138 Tasmania: 55 NT: 19 WA: two cases The test positivity rate reported today was 7.1% in NSW, 6.47% in SA, 5.01% in Victoria, and 4.56% in Queensland – the highest they’ve ever been. To quote NSW chief health officer Dr Kerry Chant from earlier today: “there’s probably more disease in the community than the numbers reflect”. Across the ditch, New Zealand has reported its first community exposure to the Omicron variant. The person, who arrived from the United Kingdom earlier this month, tested positive after briefly being active in the community in Auckland. Read more: Australia’s share market has risen to its highest level in more than three and a half months, according to AAP. The ASX 200 closed 1.21% higher at 7509.8 points. The rise “has been helped by a broad-based rally across sectors as investors largely ignored a surge in Omicron coronavirus cases locally and overseas.” So that’s good news, I guess. A Covid update from SA Health. The figure reported at the press conference this morning was 1,471 new Covid cases in the state, but this appears to have been revised to 1,472 cases. Here’s Adrian Esterman, a professor of biostatistics and epidemiology at the University of South Australia, on the situation in Queensland: And on the NT: As a reminder, the Reff – the effective reproduction number – gives an estimate of the number of people an infected person will pass Covid on to, on average. We’ve been hearing a lot about ridiculously long testing queues over the past week. Our video team has collated some footage from around the country. Take a look: It’s been a tough two years for the arts, with no sign of reprieve anytime soon, unfortunately. Elissa Blake has been reporting on Covid sweeping through the casts of musical theatre shows in Sydney and Melbourne, with major live productions forced to cancel performances. At least 90 performers have tested positive to the highly infectious virus and whole companies have been forced into isolation. Here’s the story: Here’s a summary of today’s Western Australia Covid update: To recap: Two new locally acquired cases were recorded overnight, from 4,352 tests. That brings the state to 25 active cases currently. The first case is a known close contact of the French backpacker and already in quarantine. The second case is yet to be interviewed by contact tracers. WA Health has identified 704 new close contacts (54 yet to be tested) and 1,260 casual contacts (214 yet to be tested). Just a couple of weeks ago, there was every reason to expect Australia’s economy in 2022 would be booming, with the peak nicely aligning with the likely federal election period. The Omicron variant had just landed in the country, though, and posed only a cloud on the horizon at that point. By mid-December, though, modelling indicated NSW alone might be recording 25,000 Covid-19 cases a day by the end of January. On that day, the state registered 1,360 new cases, making the prediction seem a bit of a stretch. That was then. With 11,000-plus daily cases reported today, that 25,000-figure might not be far away given the lag in testing and receiving results, and the limits on how many people can get tested because of holiday curbs and staff shortages. Economists had hoped to be among those enjoying the Christmas to New Year’s lull, not least because the main statistics sources, such as the ABS, won’t resume until 10 January. Now they are among those watching for signs that consumer and business confidence will be dented by disruptions to holiday plans and the fallout that may have on spending in the economy. The answer, so far, is that it’s too early to tell. Transactional data will take a while to be collected to tell if cancelled holidays just mean the money gets spent closer to home. Alan Oster, the NAB Group chief economist, noted the market was already bracing for a negative retail sales figure for December compared with the previous month. That was more because of the growing popularity of Black Friday online sales rather than a demand dent from Omicron. “I would have thought confidence might have had a bit of a hit,” Oster said. “[As for] actual conditions, their sales, their profits, their employment, I suspect less so. “It will be soft, and people will say it was Omicron but it won’t be – it’ll be the change when people buy from Black Friday rather than Boxing Day sales,” he said. NAB’s last economic report for 2021, released on 17 December, predicted Australia’s economy would rebound sharply from the 1.9% contraction in the September quarter. The bank is predicting a 4% expansion for Australia’s economy, less than the Reserve Bank of Australia’s 5.5% forecast. “I’m not sure [Omicron’s] going to change the outcome that much but I would not want to be defending a 5.5 to 6% growth rate in 2022,” Oster said. “We always assumed that international travel wouldn’t really start at least until the middle of next year,” he said, adding NAB’s other key assumption remains that governments will not lock down borders. Thanks Cait Kelly. I’ll be here with you for the rest of the day. In sad news out of Tasmania, 12-year-old Peter Dodt, a victim of the Devonport tragedy, has been remembered by family and friends as a “little hero” who tried to save others caught up in the jumping castle. Peter was enjoying end-of-year celebrations at Hillcrest Primary School on 16 December when a gust of wind picked up the bouncing castle and several inflatable zorb balls. AAP has the story: Peter, one of six who died in the incident, was farewelled at a moving funeral service in Devonport on Wednesday afternoon. Dozens of people gathered for the service, with bright green balloons adorning the walls along with large photos of Peter. His cousin Jye Dodt said while Peter was “always up to a little no good”, he was a hero who fought until the end in hospital, which allowed his father to say goodbye. “Peter was our little hero who was always there to lend a helping hand,” Dodt said. “Peter had his life taken too soon in a tragic accident ... and in typical Peter fashion he was stubborn and fought until the end. “Turns out he wasn’t only our little hero, but it sounds like he attempted to help the other children on the jumping castle as well.” A poem written by Peter’s mother Miranda McLaughlin was read out to mourners. “No words can express the loss that I feel, I’m sure it’s not possibly real. You left behind your heart and soul, never will our hearts feel whole,” the poem said. “Forever young and free you will be, fly high little man and remember me, love Mum.” Two boys badly injured in the accident were moved out of intensive care last week after their condition improved from critical to stable. Funerals for Jalailah Jayne-Maree Jones and Addison Stewart will be held in Devonport on Thursday and Friday. More than $1.4m has been raised for the families via an online fundraising page, while the federal government has committed $800,000 to counselling and support for the region. The Devonport city council is collecting countless tributes left outside the school to create a permanent memorial. The coroner is investigating the circumstances around the accident and will receive reports from Tasmania police and WorkSafe Tasmania. And that is it for the Western Australia Covid presser. I am going to hand over to Donna Lu to take you through the afternoon. The premier says: We have massive orders in for rapid antigen tests for Western Australia. We expect to have 8m by 5 February and we expect to get more after that. McGowan says: One of the advantages of waiting until 5 February is that we can wait and see what happens in other states. There is lots of media and other attacks on us for waiting longer, but the upside of waiting longer is we can watch what has occurred in other states and hopefully learn from what they have done and put in place rules that will hold and work, and what we will be able to do is calibrate what we do in the lead up to 5 February. McGowan continues: Obviously if someone goes in to get a PCR test, it is up to them to give the reason they get the test. It is up to people in South Australia as to how they go and get their test, but the numbers coming in from South Australia are small. We expect it will become less in coming days ... so there will be very few people coming from the other states shortly. At least, until 5 February. McGowan is asked if a PCR test will still be needed to get into the state: That is something up for discussion tomorrow at the national cabinet meeting, so obviously some states do not want to proceed or do not want to continue doing that. We will see and listen to the conversation tomorrow about all of that and whether the nation moves towards RAT testing as opposed to PCR testing. So we will listen to the advice nationally. We will listen to the chief health officer nationally and the state chief health officer to work out the best approach. We would like to continue with PCR testing up until 5 February. We have very few people coming from interstate, so it is not really a burden on other states to do that. McGowan is asked if he is concerned about the increase in cases: That is always the concern but we are in a better position than any other state. We are in a much better position and hopefully we can be confident that we have eliminated it by next Tuesday and we can get back to normal, at least for a month, but we will wait and see. Premier Mark McGowan is back up: We want to lift the restrictions as of January 4, so we will see what the further testing results throw up. Obviously, there is going to be a group of people that we don’t actually find because they have either given us false or misleading information. Perhaps some of them have left the state as well, so that often happens. We don’t exactly know where a very small proportion of these people are, so hopefully we will be able to lift restrictions on the 4 January, Tuesday, I think that is, but we will wait and see what happens. She says contact tracers are struggling with the wrong details: It is also important to keep up other public health and social measures – washing your hands, keep physically distanced, follow the health directions, and if you are not already vaccinated, get vaccinated or get your third dose like the premier has today. And please check in using the SafeWA app. On the SafeWA app, our contact tracers are running into some issues with people having out-of-date information registered on the SafeWA app, and people misspelling their names, addresses and phone numbers. Please make sure on the SafeWA app that you have your most up-to-date address and phone number and you are spelling your details correctly. The Western Australian health minister, Amber-Jade Sanderson, is up: I know it is hot, and our case numbers are low over the last few days, but we can’t be sure we are out of the woods until everyone, particularly from the Mess Hall, has come forward for testing. You may only experience mild symptoms or may not get sick from Covid but others in the community that you could spread it to can get very unwell. Your continued efforts to the community ensure that we have been able to keep our case numbers low so far, and I want to say thank you to our health staff who have spent the holiday period working at the testing clinics and contact tracing, and for police for their assistance. McGowan says they did 6,514 vaccinations yesterday: [That] does not include the doctor’s surgeries and pharmacies, so the numbers will be significantly higher, therefore our percentage will be higher than that once we get all those figures in. In terms of the third dose, there is currently a five-month timeframe for getting your third dose. I just got my third dose. It was fine. I encourage everyone to go and get your third dose as soon as you are eligible. There is currently 600,000 West Australians eligible for the third dose as of January 4. McGowan says there were 4,352 tests in the state yesterday: I am advised that the wait time is short. WA’s vaccination rate is 91.7% first dose over 12 and 83.6% double dose over 12. So our numbers continue to grow each and every day and over this period we will get further cases, further doses, as you can see, rolling out. We urge anyone who is eligible to get the third dose as soon as possible. McGowan says there are 704 new close contacts in the state: Fifty are still to be tested. Of these, 44 were at the Mess Hall event. The number has increased as a result of a reconciliation of the data available. WA police advised that of the 44 contacts from the Mess Hall, 16 people are unlikely to be contacted due to false or misleading information they provided through the contact register or ticket sales. WA police and WA health continued to do everything possible to track the remaining people down. We have now identified 1,260 casual contacts. Of these, 82% had tested negative – 204 people still have to be tested. We urge everyone who was at the Mess Hall or any other exposure site who has not come forward to do so urgently. Western Australia has recorded two Covid-19 cases. The premier, Mark McGowan, is speaking now: One is a close contact of case 1133, the backpacker, who was at the Mess Hall and has been in self-quarantine. This person tested negative initially last week, highlighting that the onset of the virus can occur later when it comes to the Delta variant. The other case is a young woman who is another member of the backpacker community. We don’t believe she was at the Mess Hall events, but she has been in contact with some of the people and, obviously, developed an exposure from some of the backpackers. So it just goes to show that being cautious is the right approach. Cricket Australia says it is safe for fans to attend the New Year’s Ashes Test at the SCG next week. From AAP: Cricket Australia is confident that fans won’t stay away from next week’s Sydney Test amid the record surge of Covid-19 cases in the city. NSW recorded 11,201 new cases today, with more than 8,000 of those from the Sydney metropolitan area. Crowds of above 35,000 are expected for the first three days in Sydney. That drop is in line with figures from around the country throughout the Ashes series, with attendances down across all sports during the pandemic. In Melbourne, the Boxing Day crowd was down significantly for an Ashes attendance, but figures remained high for the rest of the Test as fans opted to go to days where crowds are usually lower. But officials are hopeful the numbers will not dip beyond those levels in Sydney from next Wednesday, where there have been more than 47,000 new cases in the past week. “We’ve got very robust Covid-safe plans that are led by the venues working closely with the health authorities,” the Cricket Australia CEO, Nick Hockley, told ABC. “Outdoor settings we know are lower risk. Everyone will be double vaccinated, they’re seated venues. “As long as everyone follows the advice, I think people can come in the knowledge they’re going to be safe.” Sydney’s famous New Year’s Eve fireworks show will go ahead, despite NSW experiencing a dramatic spike in Covid-19 cases. From AAP: London. Edinburgh. Athens. New Delhi. Paris. Revellers in cities across the globe have been told to stay safe and ring in the new year at home, with public celebrations cancelled. But in Sydney, throngs of people are expected to flock to the city’s vantage points to watch its famous New Year’s Eve fireworks display, despite NSW experiencing a dramatic spike in coronavirus cases. Some 11,201 cases were reported on Wednesday, almost double the state’s previous record, as pyrotechnicians worked on last-minute preparations for the show. The City of Sydney says it can’t predict how many people will turn out for the display, but five of the six locations it manages are sold out with about 17,000 tickets booked. Tickets are still being sold for 25 other locations, which have capacity for almost 87,000 people. Masks are encouraged, unvaccinated people are asked to stay home and tickets for viewing spots are limited, but the spiralling outbreak has largely failed to put a dampener on the event, which last year proceeded with crowds banned from the CBD. A team of 50 from Foti International Fireworks will launch six tonnes of fireworks across two displays at 9pm and midnight. The Northern Territory will not adjust its policy requiring interstate travellers to have a PCR test before arriving in the territory. “I make no apologies,” the chief health officer, Hugh Heggie, says. “We have a younger population and we’ve got to get young people vaccinated because they can transmit the virus.” The Northern Territory has recorded 19 new Covid cases and warned that new health restrictions will be rolled out in the coming days. From AAP: The Northern Territory has detected 19 new Covid-19 infections as another mystery case is found in Darwin. Authorities have warned Territorians health restrictions to slow the virus spreading will be rolled out in the coming days. A nine-year-old girl was diagnosed overnight, with 18 close contacts currently identified. “We’re yet to establish how she has tested positive,” the health minister, Natasha Fyles, told reporters on Wednesday. “She has attended a number of locations over the Christmas period.” Multiple exposure sites are expected. “I know Territorians are learning to live with Covid in the community, and it can appear to be frightening, but we have a highly vaccinated community,” Fyles said. “We expected Covid to come. It is here”. Eight of the other cases are linked to interstate travellers, and three new infections were diagnosed among recent arrivals. Three cases are linked to the Katherine cluster and all were isolating when they tested positive. Two new cases were detected among international flight crews, and three cases are under investigation. Two of these are from a household where a recent arrival to the NT lives but that person has not tested positive for the virus, Fyles said. Twenty people are in hospital due to Covid-19 but only four are in a serious condition and none are in intensive care. Most of the cases are of the Omicron variant of the virus. Alison Pennington is a senior economist at The Australia Institue. She tweeted this opinion on the NSW govts decision to ask some people not to test: This from Samantha Maiden, who is political editor for news.com.au after the PM’s press confernece. The Australian Medical Association vice-president, Chris Moy, says the peak body asked the government for a testing plan when it announced the country was opening up. The Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia president, Dr Lawrie Bott, has released a statement about the pressure on laboratories at the moment. He says: It is fair to say that laboratories are running at capacity and staff have been working under significant pressure with increased demand for PCR testing for nearly two years. Pathologists, scientists and laboratories are working to the highest levels to keep up with a volume of testing that would have previously been unimagined. The efforts from laboratory staff to meet the community’s needs have often been exhausting over the last two years. One factor of note is the pathology workforce and equipment capacity; including pathologists and scientists, who are highly skilled and trained. These staff and equipment cannot be expanded easily or quickly. At the NSW press conference, the premier, Dominic Perrottet, is explaining his state’s order for an additional 30m rapid antigen tests on Wednesday: There are some other changes we’re looking at as well from the NSW government and I also think in addition to the approach from the national cabinet tomorrow will also alleviate some of that pressure, and particularly, I had a discussion with the prime minister this morning in relation to procurement of rapid antigen tests. We here in NSW, we’re putting an order as I’ve said of 20m. Today we’re putting in another order of an additional 30m tests. So this will provide great support to our state as we move through the next phase, but we’ll work very closely with the commonwealth government for a national approach in terms of distribution. And as we move through the next phase, it will become the norm. It will become the norm that we have rapid antigen tests at home or purchase them at the pharmacy. Back at the New South Wales press conference, health officials are explaining how the high circulation of Covid in the community is ballooning PCR testing time turnarounds. In addition to record demands for testing and scores of health workers forced into isolation and on holiday leave contributing to long waits for test results, NSW Health Pathology’s Prof Dominic Dwyer is explaining how “pooling”in laboratories is no longer effective at this stage of the Omicron outbreak. Dwyer says: What we mean by pooling is that, for example, if you have 20 tests that come into the lab, you can take, say, four or six of those or two of those and combine them and then do the PCR on that combined sample. So in other words, you can test four people at the same time. If that test is negative, then obviously all four samples in that pool are negative. If it’s positive, then you’ve got to go back and test each of those individual ones to see which one is a positive case and which one of course is a negative case. There’s that process of going back and having to retest positive pools, but that takes a lot of time. And it takes a lot of effort and it chews up reagents and so on as well. So the ability to pool is limited by how common the diseases in the community and at the moment with this Omicron surge, the numbers are too hard to do pooling in a cost effective and rapid manner. And that’s it from the prime minister. To recap: A national cabinet meeting will be held tomorrow with a focus on the definition of a close contact of someone who has tested positive to Covid. The meeting will also cover the testing regime, with a new focus on rapid antigen tests that people can do themselves instead of PCR tests. Scott Morrison says: As I said, the testing regimes are run by the state and territory governments. The commonwealth has responsibilities for the provision of the vaccines and supporting the testing arrangements that sit in residential aged care facilities – we’re meeting our responsibilities. We met as a national cabinet last week. I mean, the announcements I’m making today haven’t just turned up today. We’ve been working on these over the course of the past week with the chief medical officer. There’s an enormous amount of work done to make sure we can bring that forward to tomorrow’s meeting. That’s what I’ve been focused on. Getting the right decisions, the right outcomes. With that cue from the weather, thank you all for your attendance. Kelly continues: There’s two ways to get to this endemic phase and have protection against Covid altogether, but particularly against Omicron. One is being infected and the other one is being vaccinated. It’s quite likely that most of us will have both of those opportunities in the coming years, or months, or weeks. So my call again is to choose the better path, which is to get vaccinated if you haven’t already and get that booster as quickly as possible once you’re eligible. Kelly says: These RAT tests are a precious commodity. They’re in much greater supply but we need to make sure they’re getting to people who need them. Paul Kelly says we are looking at “the Omicron effect”: I think this is an Omicron effect. A month ago we were looking to live with Covid. We’re still looking to live with Covid. We need to take that new information, that new evidence, into account. We have seen the large number of cases diagnosed. This is a matter of applying that evidence and making an evidenced-based response. Morrison is asked if you have been in the car with a positive case, would you still be considered a close contact under the proposed new definition: I won’t go into the details of the actual definitions at the moment – that’s what is being discussed and finalised at AHPPC today – and we’ll have that in the documentation tomorrow. I think the important principle here is, we need to focus on where the biggest risk is. We have seen, leading up to Christmas, large queues to get into testing, particularly on the east coast, in almost every jurisdiction. We’ve seen a long wait for people to get their results. Frankly, if you have to wait for eight hours in a queue and then 72 to 96 hours to get a result, it’s not fulfilling any useful public health function. And it is delaying proper clinical care. So, really, what we’re trying to do here is to go for the best bang for the buck. Make sure that people that are queuing really need that test, and are at a high likelihood of being positive, so the proper information can be given so the proper public health and clinical action can be taken. The PM is asked if we have enough RATs: I spoke to the Victorian premier earlier today. And their supplies are imminent. Just as the 6m we have coming in also are. And New South Wales will come over the course of this month. And there’s many other supplies that are available in the private market right now, which can also be drawn on. And so this will be an issue that will run over the full course of this year. And the production of these tests is a bit different to vaccines in there’s many more suppliers. So we’re very active in the market, have been for many, many months. Morrison says the states are responsible for health care: We’re different to many other countries. Remember, in the United Kingdom, they don’t have state governments that run hospital systems. In Australia, we do. And so, state governments who run hospital systems have responsibility for the things that go with managing the health system in a state. So, comparing the United Kingdom with Australia is apples and oranges. The prime minister is asked if the federal government will do anything to speed up the purchase of RATs: We have spent $2.5m on tests. We have already secured a large – millions of tests – for the national stockpile, which have already been, they are already being used. We have 4m secured, and another 6m that will be turning up very, very shortly. And we have also applied $375m in additional funding and we’re working through those processes now. We expect those to come into the national stockpile. But states need to be doing their thing at the same time to meet each of our responsibilities. Now, right now, there will be tests that will be available through those channels that I have referred to. In our discussions with our suppliers to the private industry, they notify they have significant supplies coming in, we are talking about the tens of millions into private channels. There’s an area of significant demand, but that’s why we believe we need to focus where we’re putting the tests that we’re able to procure – state governments and commonwealth – to those who require them in the most important settings. Morrison on the cost of RATs: That’s a matter the treasurer and I and the states are discussing right now, in terms of concessional access in the private market. We need to keep as much as possible those tests on the shelves whether they be in supermarkets or pharmacies. And so it’s important that they have the certainty they can go and buy those stocks and know who is going to purchase them. When you start providing tests through other methods, then you need to be very clear about where and who so they can estimate how many stocks I need in my pharmacy or supermarket. Scott Morrison is back up. He is asked about vaccines and people who can’t afford to get RAT: On the first point, there’s a difference between vaccines and tests. Vaccines are what the commonwealth traditionally provides. Whether that’s flu or various other forms of vaccines, that’s a system that we currently run. When it comes to other health equipment that is needed at a state level, that’s done by states and territories. Kelly says people who have not been vaccinated need to get it ASAP: Here in New South Wales, two-thirds of people in ICU are unvaccinated. That is still the very highest risk. Please go ahead and get that vaccination. If you’re due for a booster – if you had your second dose five or more months ago – go and get that booking today. From next week, we move to a four-month phase rather than five months. Please make that booking now. If you have children who are becoming eligible on 10 January, that’s still going ahead, that will be done in parallel with the booster program. Make sure the five to 11-year-olds are also booked in too. Kelly says here and in UK the cases are in younger people: There’s still that little bit of doubt about what happens in older people in Australia in relation to Omicron. What we have seen is some incursions into aged care facilities, for example. We have not seen, as we have seen prior to vaccination and even in the Delta pandemic in Australia, of large numbers having to go to hospital from aged care. So that’s a positive sign. But it is a new challenge. The chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, is up now. He says: We are faced with a new phase of this pandemic in Australia, related to this new variant of concern, been here for just over a month. What we know about that already, it’s highly transmissible and we’re seeing the rise in cases every day, as has been predicted and seen in many other countries that have Omicron. Those cases are rising, they’ll continue to rise. In terms of the severity, we know that – we know how it’s very likely this is less severe than other forms of the virus. How much less severe is still an open question. I have seen estimates from 15% less severe to 80% less severe. And that is still information we’re looking at, particularly overseas, particularly from the UK. Because they’ve such a large number of cases of Omicron and we are able to watch that. Morrison says the government is working with the medicines regulator, the Therapeutic Goods Administration, to approve more RAT tests. I want to be really clear about this – the TGA has to be sure about the testing kits that it approves. We have seen from some applicants their products have been withdrawn in other jurisdictions. So, you know, we’re going to be careful about the tests, given we’re even more reliant now on RAT tests that have been more a convenient testing tool up until now. These RAT tests need to have that authenticity, reliability, they need to meet the mark. The PM speaks about booster shots: Just on boosters, I can confirm again, we’ve got 20m boosters, mRNA, in Australia. There are plenty of boosters. In fact, the booster rate of delivery is running six times faster than the first dose, and its running about twice as fast as the second dose. What we need is what we agreed last week, is for the state-based vaccination hubs to be restored, all of them, so we can get those booster rates back up to the peak of what we were running up at about September, October of this year, and so I know the states are doing that. Morrison says the commonwealth has already had 4m RAT tests delivered: There are another 6m arriving very soon. And we have also approved, the treasurer and I, and the finance minister, $375m in additional funds to procure further RATs to be part of the national stockpile. It’s to deal with the commonwealth’s responsibilities for directly providing these tests. States have the responsibility of providing the tests in their settings. The PM says state governments are responsible for RAT tests: State governments are responsible for securing those tests, or the supplies that go with those tests, the arrangements that go with the conducting of them, and the commonwealth shares those costs 50-50 ... Where a RAT test is required, state governments as always are responsible for securing the RAT tests, providing them to people, and we’ll share the cost 50-50 with the state government. The commonwealth also has responsibility for RAT tests and other tests, that’s in residential aged care facilities and a range of other high-risk settings we’re responsible for. We’ll continue to do that and we have been doing that. Morrison says: So what would happen in these circumstances if you are a close contact is would be a seven-day quarantine, and you would have RAT tests on day six, and if that’s not positive then you would be able to go back into the community, and on day 12 you would also have a RAT test. Now, on RAT tests, there is no need for you to be required to have a RAT test simply because you may have been somewhere at some point in time. Close contacts need to have RAT tests. People who are symptomatic need to have RAT tests, and indeed people who are symptomatic a PCR test, but what’s not necessary is for people to be going out and bulk purchasing RAT tests and having them every other day on a casual basis. If you are symptomatic then you should take one. The PM says under the suggested definition, if you got pinged from a QR code you would not have to get a PCR test: You just have to monitor your symptoms, you have got to be conscious of where you are going, not the best idea to go and visit an aged care facility in that situation for a week or so. And also to take your normal precautions of wearing masks and things like this. This is how people responsibly manage their own wellbeing and the wellbeing of others in the Omicron pandemic. Morrison says: What’s important with this definition is to try and understand that you are dealing with a high volume of cases and we just can’t have everybody just being taken out of circulation. Because they just happen to be at a particular place at a particular time. The uncertainty of that, the impacts on the economy, and particularly given the fact we are not seeing this impact on our hospital system, means that it’s an impractical way to live with the virus in this next phase. And so it is important that we move to a new definition of close contact that enables Australia to keep moving, for people to get on with their lives. If they find themselves in a close contact, genuine close contact setting, then, yes, we need to take some precautions but otherwise, you monitor your symptoms. The PM says: If I went down to a restaurant down the road and I happened to pop in and get some takeaway and there was a case there, I would not be a close contact. Morrison says the definition that will be suggested is someone that lives with a case: A household contact is someone who lives with – in or in this a care setting – and has spent more than four hours with them in a house accommodation or care facility setting. So we are talking about someone that they are living with. We are talking about someone like me and my family here who are living here together – if one of my kids, Abbey or Lily, got it, or of course if Jenny or any of the household staff here got it, then we would find ourselves in that situation and I would be a close contact. The PM says states are moving at different stages, so applying the same settings for each would not match the requirements: So to be applying exactly the same settings in all the states and territories would not match the reality of what’s happening on the ground. So what we are looking to do tomorrow is to ensure we get a definition of close contact and which tests are used in what circumstances and how they are provided to manage a large volume of cases. And as states move into that phase where they have more high volume cases than they – I would expect to move towards adopting the perhaps what we are seeing in states like – the practices that we are seeing in states like NSW and Victoria. So that is what tomorrow will help us achieve, so there’s a clear pathway, everybody knows where it’s going, and we can respond accordingly. So the key implications for that are to redefine what is a close contact. Because a close contact then defines, well, what sort of test do I need? And what do I need to do? Do I need to stay at home? For how long? What does that mean for people I work with? What does it mean for the people I live with? Morrison says: As we have consistently said in the course of Omicron, the issue is not the number of cases, the issue is the incidence of serious disease. It is the incidence of impacts on our hospital system in particular, in the ICUs. So while we do have a high volume of cases, which is what Omicron presents as a challenge, there are 1314 people in hospital, there are 126 in ICU and 55 on ventilators. Now what that says is there is ample capacity in our hospital system to deal with the challenges that we are presently confronting. We, of course, will continue to see cases rise but those cases are not translating into the sort of serious disease and a proportional impact on our hospital system. Scott Morrison says the challenge of Omicron is the volume of cases we will get: With the pace at which Omicron is moving it’s not surprising that I have called a further meeting of national cabinet bringing forward the meeting we had scheduled for next week to tomorrow and I will be returning to Canberra with the chief medical officer, who joins me today, for that meeting with the other premiers and chief ministers. The PM is up now so we are going to him. Chant says if you test positive on a RAT you need to get a PCR test. She says there are likely more cases in the community that are not being picked up: As we move forward, our testing resources whilst great through the labs have actually been constrained by the fact that we have the more prevalent disease and so when you have a higher positivity rate it tells us two things. That we probably are not ascertaining – getting to all of the cases. So there is probably more disease in the community than the numbers reflect. But it also has impacts on our laboratory and that’s a good segue to Prof Dwyer who can talk about how when we have got that higher positivity rate it means some of the techniques the laboratories have used to increase that lab through-put are no longer able to be used. That’s decreased our overall capacity. The NSW chief health officer, Kerry Chant, is up and talking about the jump in cases. She says: What that number reflects is some testing that’s been obviously occurring and reflects some tests that have been conducted over previous days. So the numbers will jump around a little bit over coming days as we reflect testing numbers that have been performed over the Christmas and Boxing Day period. We are continuing to see a rise in cases of Omicron. We are seeing doubling every two to three to four days. But each of us have a role to play in suppressing the spread of the virus. Some of the key things we can do is not be out and about when we have symptoms instead go and get a test and some changes that have been put in place around making sure that we preserve that fast testing capability that our residents have come to appreciate in NSW. Hazzard says there is a backlog in PCR tests and some supply issues with RAT. “There are some challenges in supply but they are trying to get as many as possible on board,” he says. Hazzard says some people still need to get vaccinated: We are still hearing that people are declining to get vaccinated – they know better, they are watching social media. Stop. Forget it. Get off social media. Switch off your social media and switch on reality and go and get a booster. We know vaccinations and boosters will keep you far safer. You can mix it in with the other health requirements that we have all learned – social distancing, mask-wearing, masks really work. Just stop listening to social media and make sure you are not the one lying in the ICU on a ventilator because you made the – be the one who dies. Hazzard says people need to stop getting PCR tests if they don’t need one: The worried well should not be lining up for these tests, people who are travelling to Queensland should not be lining up PCR testing. We need to take the pressure off the pathology laboratories. The health minister, Brad Hazzard, is up now. He says: We are moving into another major stage of this pandemic. We are seeing a lot more Omicron, as is being seen across the world. We know that Omicron, on all the evidence internationally and in NSW and Australia, is certainly far more transmissible – chances are you will get it, we will all get it. Perrottet again says don’t get tested if you don’t need to: The clear message today: the system will improve – some of the changes that have been made from the Queensland premier today will really help ease pressure on that system – but still the number one thing we can do is follow the advice we received from Health, if you are not unwell or you have not been advised by NSW Health to receive a PCR test, you should not be lining up for one. Perrottet says if you are not sick you should not be lining up for a PCR test, and he thanks the Queensland government for changing the PCR requirements from 1 January: There are many people who are lining up who do not need to be there. We are doing everything that we can to increase capacity and put downward pressure on those queues. If you are not sick, if you do not have any symptoms and you are not unwell or have not been advised by NSW Health to receive a PCR test, you should not be lining up for one. We still are hearing that there are many people receiving these tests who are lining up and by doing that, you are taking the place of somebody who needs to receive one of those PCR tests. Perrottet says there is strong capacity in the NSW hospital system: It is clear from the evidence and when you look at hospitalisations and ICU numbers, where we have 95% of the population vaccinated across the state, the overwhelming majority of people in ICU are unvaccinated. Vaccination protects you and your family. If you have received your first dose but haven’t received your second, please go and get it so we can get that rate to 95% and above. We are still waiting on the PM, but the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, has started speaking in Sydney. He says: I’d like to make the point today in relation to booster shots ... our target in the booster shot has moved from five to four months. If you received your second dose vaccination on 28 August, you are now eligible for a booster shot. And for many people over the last six months, they would have received their vaccination through the GP. If your GP is unavailable over the Christmas break, you can receive that booster shot through one of our 40 vaccination centres across NSW. While we wait for Scott Morrison, we should mention that the federal Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, teed off at the prime minister at a press conference in Adelaide this morning. Albanese said: Australians once again are doing the right thing but Scott Morrison and his government are once again showing a lack of leadership, consistently passing the buck to state and territory governments. Why is it that there is no issue too big for Scott Morrison to show how small his vision for this country is? Scott Morrison refuses to step up. We have the NSW government trying to purchase rapid antigen tests that will be available, wait for it, at the end of January, when we have a crisis right now. We have businesses that are unable to open. We have people that are waiting day after day after day to get the results of their tests and we have some people who simply can’t get tested so they are just staying isolated because there is some doubt over their health concerns. We need to do much better. Scott Morrison, as we end 2021, has been in government now for four years. Everything that he does is characterised by being too little, too late, it’s characterised by failing to get ahead, saying of course it wasn’t a race, now he says with the rapid antigen tests that not only not a race, they’re not even on the field at all. They are leaving it completely to the states – it’s not a matter of delay, it’s a matter of no action whatsoever. We need a government prepared to provide leadership. Hello everyone, this is Cait. We are waiting on the PM, who should be speaking any moment now. OK, and with that I will hand over the blog to the always prepared Cait Kelly, to take you through the PM’s presser and the afternoon’s news. Thanks for reading. The ripple effects of growing case numbers continue to be felt, this time by the A-League, which has had another three round seven men’s matches postponed. That means only two matches will be held over round seven, all due to Covid outbreaks. The Central Coast Mariners’ match against Macarthur has been postponed, along with the Newcastle Jets’ home match against Melbourne City and the Melbourne Victory against Brisbane Roar. NSW Health has released a statement urging interstate travellers to “avoid” getting tested, in light of long queues, delays in results and Queensland’s decision to lift PCR requirements for entry. The statement says that getting a result within 72 hours was unlikely because of the delays. It add that travellers should essentially just wait until the 1st of January, when they can enter Queensland with a rapid antigen test: NSW Health is advising people who attend NSW COVID-19 testing locations seeking results to travel interstate that they are unlikely to receive their results within 72 hours. The delay means NSW travellers who intend to holiday in Queensland will not get their result before its January 1 changes to PCR swab requirements come into effect. Interstate travellers to Queensland will then only need to get a rapid antigen test. The decision by Queensland brings the Sunshine State in line with most other jurisdictions including New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and the ACT. Holidaymakers are now urged to avoid testing queues to help ease pressure on laboratory testing. As at 27 December 2021, pathology services in NSW had processed more than 24 million tests but like other states, “tourism testing” has stretched testing capabilities So with that a raft of Covid pressers has come to an end, and as we wait for the NSW and PM’s update, I thought it would be a good time to post a quick summary: Queensland has lifted the requirement to get a PCR test before entry, with the change coming into effect from 1 January. Queensland also recorded 1,589 new cases. South Australia has recorded 1,471 new cases, but the number of people in hospital remains at 36. SA premier Steven Marshall announced the state will no longer provide pre-departure PCR tests for people leaving the state. Marshall flagged it would “soon” be mandatory for frontline health workers to get the booster shot.Elective surgeries in SA were also limited to category 1 and urgent category 2. Victoria recorded a daily record of 3,767 new cases and five deaths. The Victorian government has also secured 34m rapid antigen tests that it will distribute for free until the end of January. Victoria’s health minister Martin Foley said a national cabinet meeting will be held tomorrow. New South Wales has flagged it will change isolation period requirements for Covid-positive patients. NSW reported a record high of 11,201 new cases, nearly double the tally from the day before. Tasmania reported 55 new cases. I think we’re all caught up – now for the next batch of clashing press conferences. Covid outbreaks are starting to impact the 2022 Sydney festival, with one of the flagship shows, the cabaret musical Qween Lear, cancelling its season. In a statement on its website, organisers said: Unfortunately, due to COVID-19 and positive confirmed cases within the company, the season of Qween Lear at Sydney Festival has been cancelled. All ticket holders will be refunded in full automatically. The queer version of the Shakespearean tragedy King Lear was due to be staged at the Hordern Pavilion from 7-16 January. We are expecting to hear from the prime minister at 12.30pm AEDT today. Marshall has added that people should take seriously the calls to work from home, saying it was his “strong message from today”. He said that message would likely remain until the end of January. Marshall also said frontline health workers will need to get their booster within two weeks of becoming eligible. He added that only category one and urgent category two surgeries will be available from today. Ok, lots happening right now, but SA premier Steven Marshall has announced that the state will no longer carry out pre-departure PCR tests for people leaving the state. Marshall also announced that booster shots will now be mandated for frontline health workers across the state. Finally, he also announced a reduction in elective surgery, so as to be able to reallocate health resources to the pandemic. Case numbers are coming in again, with South Australia reporting a record increase in daily cases, with 1,471 new infections. The Victorian government has confirmed it has secured 34m rapid antigen tests, which will be handed out for free by the end of January. In his announcement, health minister Martin Foley said the tests would help maintain the “gold standard” of testing in Victoria, and took a swipe at the federal government for not “stepping up” to “fill the gap.” Rapid antigen tests should be free and we will be making them free. Rapid antigen tests should be widely available and we will be making them widely available, and that will be part of a process that has fallen to the states. We would much prefer to have a national approach to what is the national indeed and international supply issue. But failing that, as per usual, the states have had to step up over the course of this pandemic and fill the gap that’s been left. Sticking in Queensland for the moment, Gerrard has zeroed in on looking at ICU numbers, saying it is the best indication of the severity of the pandemic in the state. He said he could think of two people not in intensive care but “are significantly unwell,” and reiterated that case numbers will rise, but said the focus should be on ICU numbers. I mentioned before there are no cases of Covid-19 in intensive care or or ventilated and I think this is one of the most critical numbers to monitor when we’re getting some gauge of how severe this disease actually is. Looking at that intensive care number is so particularly useful as a gauge of the severity of the disease. So we do have 93 people in hospital at the moment with Covid-19. But we know that the majority of them are not there because they’ve been treated for symptoms of Covid-19. Queensland has reported a record 1,539 new cases today, with over 6,000 cases currently active. Despite the increase, the state’s chief health officer Dr John Gerrard welcomed the fact that there are currently no cases in ICU. Victorian authorities are up first, with health minister Martin Foley addressing the spike in infections, saying both Omicron and Delta variants are circulating “widely”. Foley recommended people look to seated service at New Year’s Eve parties and gatherings, to hold them outside and for dance floors to be “minimised” or outdoors. Finally, he encouraged people to get vaccinated and get their booster shots. We are also expecting to hear from Queensland authorities shortly. Back to the press conference dump I see. NSW deputy Liberal leader Stuart Ayres has confirmed on Channel 7’s Sunrise that the state government is indeed looking to reduce isolation times for Covid-positive patients. Ayres said earlier this morning that it was important the government continues to “adapt” to the Omicron strain, and reiterated calls for people to limit PCR testing unless they have symptoms or are directed to take a test. The rules are changing, and we have got to keep adapting with Omicron. We know this variant is not as severe, we know we have got an incredibly well-resourced hospital system that can take care of our most sick patients. So this is about adapting to make sure we can continue to strike the balance between health and economic challenges. We want people to just get tested, isolate until they receive that negative test, only going to get tested if you are symptomatic or if you are a household contact of a Covid case. That will reduce the queues, but it will also allow our health teams a little bit more time to assess what is required for those people that are infected and whether they need to stay in isolation as long as they have for past variants. OK, we have some press conference times to bring you. Victorian authorities are due up at 11am AEDT (in 10 minutes), while NSW authorities are due at 12.30pm AEDT. We’re also expecting to hear from federal Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, at around 11am AEDT as well. Stay tuned. Tasmania has recorded 55 new Covid-19 cases today, with 300 people currently infected in the state. One person is in hospital, 63 are in community management clinics and 158 are being managed at home. A further 23 people are being assessed. It comes after Tasmania opened to fully vaccinated travellers on 15 December, having been Covid-free beforehand. Concern is growing at the impact of rising coronavirus cases on New Year’s Eve plans in NSW. Australian Cruise Group executive director Sudhir Warrier, who is in charge of the cruises in Sydney Harbour during the NYE fireworks, said ticket sales are badly down this year. He told Sky News earlier this morning that consumer confidence “is totally shattered”: Business has completely dried up in the last 10 days or so, consumer confidence is totally shattered. This is the second year in a row. The year before we had the northern beaches outbreak. This is the second year where basically we’ve built up a huge amount of consumer confidence over the last seven or eight weeks, that is shattered in three days. The guests who have made the bookings are very happy to cruise and enjoy themselves. For example on Christmas Day we had 400 guests between two boats. It’s just the fear to book – we’re basically dealing with confidence. Broadway’s revival of The Music Man on Tuesday cancelled performances for five days after star Hugh Jackman tested positive for Covid. In the latest New York City show to fall victim to the surging coronavirus, Jackman, 53, said on Twitter that he had only mild symptoms, including a scratchy throat and runny nose, and that as soon as he was cleared he would be back on stage. Producers announced that all performances of the musical would be canceled through 1 January. Jackman tested positive after his co-star Sutton Foster came down with the coronavirus last week and was replaced by an understudy. Foster will return on 2 January but Jackson is expected to be out until 6 January. Dozens of Broadway shows, including Hamilton, The Lion King and Aladdin, have been forced to cancel performances over the past two weeks as the virus has raged through the city despite vaccine mandates for cast, crew and audiences. Some, like the annual Christmas show by the Rockettes at Radio City Music Hall, shut down entirely, while musicals Jagged Little Pill and Ain’t Too Proud have closed weeks earlier than scheduled because of breakthrough cases and sluggish ticket sales during the normally busy holiday season. The surge couldn’t have come at a worse time for Broadway, which reopened only in September after an 18-month closure because of the pandemic. January and February are traditionally the leanest months to bring in audiences, and large musicals need full houses to make money. Music Man is currently running in preview ahead of an official opening scheduled for 10 February. Ticket demand has been strong despite an official top price of US$699 a seat, and are changing hands on secondary websites for more than $2,000 each. – Reuters And, Perrottet has tweeted his reaction (to Queensland changing its border rules, not the number of cases today): So, sticking to NSW for now, last night premier Dominic Perrottet was on 2GB, and was backing his government’s approach to restrictions, after easing most of them on 15 December. Perrottet said he had “no regrets” about easing most of the restrictions, and said he believed the state was in a “very strong position”: We look at the evidence in front of us, we make the assessment, we tailor our settings to where they are. We’ve always said as we open up case numbers will increase, these are the difficulties we are going through in this next phase. NSW, despite this, is in a very strong position, very strong position as we move through. He also urged people to NOT get a test unless they have symptoms or have been advised by health authorities to get tested: The reality is as case numbers are increasing there are obviously going to be challenges along the way. One of the key issues for us which we are trying to resolve and I have had many constructive discussions with my counterparts, premiers from other states, is that there is no reason why someone should be getting a tourism test if they don’t have any symptoms and are travelling interstate. So NSW’s numbers have caused a storm of reactions online, with many expressing panic and despair at the new daily record. Victoria has also seen a jump in case numbers, reporting 3,767 new infections, another daily record. Five people with Covid died in the latest reporting period. Covid cases have jumped again in New South Wales, significantly this time, with the state recording 11,201 new infections today. It’s the highest ever tally recorded by a state in a single day, and the first time a state has recorded more than 10,000 cases in a day. Sadly, three people have lost their lives overnight. So what has been a recurring theme for a week now, long queues at testing locations, looks to continue today. It also comes as reports emerge that NSW Police are having to turn people away from a testing location in Penrith: Queensland has once again made a change to the testing requirements to cross the border. From 1 January (Saturday), travellers will be able to present a negative rapid antigen test to be able to cross the border. That means PCR tests are no longer the only way to cross the border, with hopes this will ease testing congestion. Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk announced the change on Twitter, mentioning that more details will be provided at a press conference later this morning: Good morning all. Mostafa Rachwani with you today, taking you through the morning’s news, and there is much to get stuck into. We begin in New South Wales, with reports that the state government will seek to wind back isolation times for covid positive patients. The Australian is reporting a proposal favoured by officials for people to isolate for only five days after testing positive. It comes as reports the nation’s chief health officers also consider a similar proposal, to match reduced isolation times in the US and the UK. The Sydney Morning Herald is reporting the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee is expected to report back with the recommendations early next year. The discussion around isolation periods also come as waiting times at testing sites in NSW and Victoria are overwhelmed, with reports the system is being strained. Some have reported queuing for hours and being turned away, and many have reported waiting up to six days for results. NSW recorded 6,062 new cases and Victoria recorded 2,738 cases yesterday, with the rush for rapid antigen tests continuing. There is still no national guideline for using the tests, and the federal government has refused to buy kits and provide them en masse, exacerbating the situation. South Australia saw a huge surge in cases, recording 995 yesterday, with concerns numbers could continue to rise. Premier Steven Marshall told reporters the numbers were “doubling every three to four days”. The ACT also recorded its highest daily case numbers yesterday, reporting 252 new cases, as it also faces testing queues. Like in Queensland, the ACT has moved to reduce publishing exposure sites in an attempt to ease the pressure on the testing and tracing systems. Covid will continue to undoubtedly dominate headlines, but we’ll be sure to keep our eyes on everything else happening around the country. Stay tuned.Australia’s peak doctors’ body has revealed that it had warned governments to secure rapid antigen tests when they began planning to open up the country, after Scott Morrison described the scarce screening tool as a “precious commodity”. With fresh claims that the long-standing PCR testing system was “crumbling” as the country recorded more than 18,000 daily Covid cases for the first time, Australians were lining up at pharmacies to try to buy rapid antigen tests (RATs). Some state governments on Wednesday accused the federal government of not “stepping up” to “fill the gap” by failing to procure more supplies of the vital screening tool, while Morrison called a snap national cabinet meeting for Thursday to discuss the sharp rise in cases fuelled by the Omicron variant. Dr Chris Moy, the vice-president of the Australian Medical Association, said the community needed access to RATs and clear, simple instructions about when to use them. “At the moment we have neither,” he said on Wednesday. That was despite earlier warnings from the AMA. Moy said when governments began planning to open up, the organisation “asked and advocated for a clear plan to ensure access for RATs and clear policies for their use, for this very time which was predicted”. Moy said Australia now faced a critical time as people were struggling to access RATs and the long-standing PCR testing system was “crumbling”. Small businesses have said many have had to close during the summer holiday period because of the failure of state and federal governments to bring in free RATs. Morrison addressed reporters in Sydney on Wednesday – the first time the prime minister had held a press conference in a week – and insisted the federal government was “meeting our responsibilities”. He said he welcomed announcements by the New South Wales and Victorian governments to procure RATs, saying pointedly: “That’s their job, and I’m glad they’re doing it. “Where a RAT test would now be required rather than a PCR test, state governments, as always, responsible for securing those RAT tests, providing them to people directly, and we will share the costs of those 50-50 with the state government,” the prime minister said. Morrison said the federal government was responsible for tests in residential aged care facilities and certain other high-risk settings. He said the federal government had been “in the market” for RATs since August, with four million tests already delivered, and “another six million arriving very soon”. Morrison said he had also allocated an extra $375m “to procure further RAT tests to be part of the national stockpile”, to be mainly used to cover the federal government’s responsibilities for directly providing tests. The federal Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, went on the attack, saying Morrison was presiding over a testing “crisis” and was “once again showing a lack of leadership, consistently passing the buck to state and territory governments”. “Everything that he does is characterised by being too little, too late,” Albanese said. Citing Morrison’s past comments about the vaccine rollout not being a race, Albanese added: “Now he says with the rapid antigen tests, that not only is it not a race, they’re not even on the field at all. They are leaving it completely to the states.” Labor’s health spokesperson, Mark Butler, said RATs were “widespread and readily available and highly affordable” in other countries, but pharmacists in Australia were reporting shortages. Butler urged Morrison to “urgently secure a large stockpile of rapid tests that can be used by businesses and members of the Australian community right now”. “Yet again Scott Morrison has left Australians dangerously exposed and at the back of the queue,” Butler said. The Victorian government announced on Wednesday it had secured 34m RATs, to be handed out for free by the end of January. The state’s health minister, Martin Foley, said Victoria “would much prefer to have a national approach to what is the national indeed and international supply issue”. “But failing that, as per usual, the states have had to step up over the course of this pandemic and fill the gap that’s been left,” Foley said. The NSW government also announced this week that it had placed an order for 20m rapid antigen tests, which were expected to arrive by the end of January. A further order of 30m was announced on Wednesday. The federal health department said the government had purchased more than 10m RATs for use in residential aged care facilities, and it would “shortly” purchase a further 50m for the national medical stockpile. A spokesperson for the department said more than 2.8m RATs had so far been supplied to aged care facilities, including 1,650,014 tests to NSW facilities and 1,284,341 to Victorian facilities, the states where the majority of transmission has occurred. Australia reported more than 18,200 new Covid cases on Wednesday – a new record for the country – including 11,201 in NSW, 3,767 in Victoria, 1,539 cases in Queensland and 1,471 in South Australia. Morrison will return from Sydney to Canberra for a meeting with state and territory leaders on Thursday. National cabinet had not been scheduled to meet until next week. Morrison said the country was “going through a gear change” in its approach to Covid. He said with the Omicron variant, the issue was not the “high volume of cases”, but the incidence of serious disease and impacts on the hospital system. He said there were currently 1,314 people in hospital, including 126 in intensive care and 55 on ventilators – suggesting there was “ample capacity in our hospital system to deal with the challenges that we are presently confronting”. Morrison said Thursday’s national cabinet meeting would discuss a federal government proposal to narrow the definition of a close contact: someone who lives with a confirmed Covid case “and has spent more than four hours with them”. The proposed definition will also include people living alongside confirmed cases in care settings. The Australian Health Protection Principal Committee (AHPPC) said just before Christmas that health authorities should consider “more widespread use” of rapid antigen testing. “This may lead to a requirement in the future to rely more heavily on other levers, including indoor mask wearing and strategic use of rapid antigen testing, to control transmission and impacts, particularly in high-risk settings,” the AHPPC said on 22 December.The UK’s first specialist black bookshop is to close after more than 55 years due to financial problems, it has been announced. New Beacon Books in Finsbury Park, north London, first opened in 1966 and staved off the threat of closure as recently as 2016. But with financial pressures exacerbated by coronavirus adding to the competition from online retailers such as Amazon, it has been confirmed the store will close its physical outlet on Stroud Green Road and move online only. Creating a space for black writers, New Beacon Books was founded by the activist John La Rose and his partner, Sarah White. Speaking about the prospect of the UK’s first black publisher and specialist bookshop closing, Prof Augustine John, chair of the Communities Empowerment Network (CEN) charity, said it was “at the heart of the community” and should be saved. “New Beacon Books is the only remaining independent black publishing and bookselling entity in the UK,” he said. “Throughout its 55 years, it has been pivotal to the growth of the Black Education Movement, the Black Supplementary School Movement and current calls for the decolonisation of the curriculum. “Unlike Amazon, Alibris and other online suppliers, New Beacon has been at the heart of communities, building social movements and giving expression to young voices.” Prof John, an award-winning Grenadian writer, added: “It remains a huge part of the history of the adaptation of British society to its historical black presence. Save and develop it for coming generations.” The announcement of the store’s closure, posted on its website earlier this month, has been met with dismay and disappointment on social media. The actor Adjoa Andoh tweeted: “I am so sad about this wonderful bookshop and the haven of cultural solidarity and information it provided to the black and extended communities for over half a century.” Another social media user, Elliot Ross, commented: “How have we in the UK made this a time of unprecedented ‘visibility’ for works by Black authors, while at the same time producing the conditions in which a radical bulwark like New Beacon Books can’t sustain itself after half a century of vital work?” Emeka Forbes tweeted: “Much of what I know about anti-racism, I found between the pages of books purchased at New Beacon when I lived in Finsbury Park.” There have been calls for crowdfunding campaigns to help save the shop, with the actor and poet Francesca Gilbert tweeting that there will be an update “in a few days”. The shop’s director, Michael La Rose, the son of John La Rose who died in 2006, previously told the Guardian that a “sustained movement” was needed to ensure the longevity of specialist black bookshops. He said last year: “The consciousness-raising of the global [Black Lives Matter] movement has made every country question what is going on in their societies – people want to know what has happened in the past, to get books, to get information, to get facts.”Professional football in the New York metropolitan area somehow has become even bleaker in the two-plus years that have passed since the Giants and Jets last played each other. The Jets (2-7) rallied to beat the Giants (2-8) that glum November day in the Meadowlands in the so-called Toilet Bowl, with tailgaters displaying toilet-seat lids with each team’s logo. The NFL’s two NYC-based teams are each 4-11 heading into the homestretch of the 2021 season. It is likely that both will finish the season with 13 losses, which has never happened since New York added an AFL team in 1960. In the last 10 years, only the 2016 Giants reached the playoffs (and they were promptly blown out by Green Bay in the wild-card round). More recently, they have been pro football’s biggest losers: none of the other 30 teams in the NFL have posted a worse record than the Jets (21-58) or Giants (22-57) since 2016. There have been other barren stretches in the city’s football history: the Giants and Jets went through the entire 1970s with neither team making the postseason. The 1977 season ended with the Giants (5-9) losing in the snow and rain at home to Chicago, 12-9, and the Jets (3-11 for the third straight year) falling at Philadelphia, 27-0, before just 19,241 fans. This drought, like the Toilet Bowl, is a shared misery around the metro area. Because the Jets and Giants play in different conferences and don’t face each other as often as the Rangers and Islanders in hockey or Knicks or Nets in basketball, there is less rancor between the local supporters. Baseball fans in New York are more likely to pick a side, either the Yankees or Mets, than football fans. The NFL has, and will, survive with two lousy teams in the nation’s No 1 television market, and it is possible that one team, if not both at the same time, will be good again someday. But what has unfolded this season in New York makes a turnaround for either team look like a long-term project, with brighter days not exactly around the corner. “How is it that the greatest city in the world has the two worst football teams? New York deserves better than the slop the Giants and Jets have been serving up for most of the last decade,” Gary Myers, the author and former long-time NFL columnist for the New York Daily News, tells the Guardian. “The really bad news: There is no end in sight. The NFL promotes parity but somehow the Giants and Jets, despite consistently high draft picks, have combined for only one playoff appearance in the last 10 years. “That 11-5 season by the Giants in 2016 was an aberration,” Myers adds. “They fired their coach Ben McAdoo, who was still learning on the job, in just his second year, 12 games into the following season. The Jets hope they finally got it right with GM Joe Douglas, coach Robert Saleh and rookie quarterback Zach Wilson. The Jets are due for some success. It’s been over 50 years since their one and only Super Bowl season. This will be a huge offseason for each team, but I don’t think any ticker-tape parades are imminent.” Consider, just for starters, what happened on Sunday to the Jets. They held on to beat Jacksonville (2-13) at home, 26-21, but the Jaguars rolled to the Jets’ one-yard line with 12 seconds to play. Only the incompetence of the Jaguars saved the hosts, because Jacksonville, clearly confused, was called for an illegal shift before a hurried incompletion. “Good teams win those games,” said Trevor Lawrence, Jacksonville’s rookie quarterback. Had the Jags scored a touchdown, the Jets would have dipped below Jacksonville in the NFL’s race for the worst record, because of the head-to-head loss. With Tampa Bay and Buffalo to play, the Jets could have sunk below the team that would have had the worst record, Detroit (2-12-1), who finish up with the crumbling Seahawks and the might-be-resting Packers. The Jets have not had the No 1 overall pick since 1996, just before they would win only one of 16 games under the overmatched Rich Kotite. (The Giants, 6-10, were not all that much better, and Dan Reeves was fired as their coach.) At least the Jets ran off six non-losing seasons after that, and the Giants made it to Super Bowl XXXV in January 2001. The historically poor run of form for both teams has turned up the heat on Giants general manager Dave Gettleman and, to a slightly lesser extent, Jets GM Joe Douglas. The Jets do have Wilson and the intense Saleh, who says stuff like, “The guys played their absolute butts off.” The Giants just have problems. With ESPN reporting over the weekend, citing sources, that they plan to bring back second-year head coach Joe Judge and third-year quarterback Daniel Jones in 2022, speculation is well underway as to who might replace Gettleman, whose biggest gambit as GM appears to have bombed. Nearly four years have passed since Gettleman traded up to the No 2 position in the draft to select Saquon Barkley, the dynamic running back from Penn State, rather than a quarterback to eventually replace the fading veteran Eli Manning. Barkley had a terrific rookie season and a solid second year but tore up his knee in the second game of the 2020 season. This season has been a slog for Barkley, who missed four games with a bad-looking ankle injury, and he sure looks as if he has lost a step. The Giants were trailing Philadelphia in the third quarter on Sunday by only 10-3 when Barkley took a handoff and motored upfield – only to be caught from behind after a five-yard gain by Eagles linebacker Genard Avery. Barkley had only one more carry, for no gain, in a 34-10 loss, before Judge took him out, citing the pounding that Barkley has taken this season. Moreover, Barkley was not made available to the media either after the game or on Monday, leading to speculation that he might be shut down for the season – like Jones, who has a neck injury that has not gone away. “In terms of shutting him down for the year, that’s more something that our medical team has not approached me about,” Judge said of Barkley. It would probably be fine with the fans if both teams just shut it down for the year and start over. Once again, like the city itself, it is the renovation project without end.Two years ago, our consumer electronics reviews added a new criteria to be judged – how sustainable the latest device, laptop or tablet is. So have the tech giants made any progress? In some way, yes. But there is a long way to go. More mainstream products now contain recycled material as major tech firms follow through with their sustainability pledges. For example, Apple’s full iPad line and the majority of its computers are now made of recycled aluminium, as are Google’s latest Pixel 6 smartphones. Most of Amazon’s own-brand devices contain recycled plastic, including the Fire HD 10 tablets and Echo devices, as do Microsoft’s Ocean Plastic Mouse and Logitech’s MX Keys Mini keyboard. Most major technology firms offer device recycling, too, even if it is through third-parties and often only when you buy something new. Much more is needed if we are to reach a circular economy, including better recycling. Much of the progress has been brought about by a combination of consumer awareness and investor pressure. Real change can happen in a consumer industry if people vote with their wallets. Access to information on what goes into making a device, the length of software support and the repair options, is still limited but getting better for some things. Some of the biggest companies, including Apple, Microsoft and Google, publish environmental impact assessments, but not for all products and often with limited scope. Software support improving Keeping your device rather than needing to buy a new one is better for the planet and your wallet. Progress has been made on this front, too. One of the biggest issues affecting the longevity of smartphones is the premature expiry of software support. The ending of crucial security updates renders perfectly serviceable devices unsafe to use. It is still very much a problem, with some companies offering as little as two to three years of updates from a device’s release, including big firms such as Oppo, particularly for cheaper models. But with Samsung extending updates to at least four years for a range of phones, not only high-end models, and Google promising at least five years for its Pixel 6 phones, others are finally starting to catch up with Apple’s five to seven years of updates for its iPhones. Repair and resell The repairability of consumer electronics is slowly improving too. Dutch firm Fairphone continues to set the standard with its latest modular phone that can be repaired at home with just a simple screwdriver, is made from ethically sourced and recycled materials, and will have six to seven years of software support. US startup Framework is trying something similar with modular, repairable laptops. Now others are taking notice. Following pressure from the public and shareholders, Apple and Microsoft have recently expanded their efforts to make parts and tools for repairs available to the public. “We are starting to see the pendulum swing in the right direction,” says Kyle Wiens, the chief executive of the repair specialists iFixit. “We’ve seen shifts from major manufacturers, such as Microsoft redesigning the Surface Laptop to make it easier to repair, jumping from a one to a five in our scoring system. But others, including Samsung, appear to have done very little, so we still have a long way to go.” However, where the big tech firms are starting to tread, the cheaper end of the market is not yet following. “Inexpensive, disposable products are a real problem,” Wiens says. Even where products are designed to be robust enough to last, many of the smaller devices such as headphones and wearable technology are difficult to fix and contain irreplaceable batteries that wear out, giving them a finite lifespan. “There’s such a fantastic opportunity for large brands to step up and make their products long-lasting. The resale value is the real test of a product’s impact on the market,” Wiens says. The good news is that access to good, reconditioned secondhand devices is getting better, which, coupled with easier repairs and extended software support, keeps devices out of the recycling for longer. But for devices to be available for a second or third hand, they have to be bought new first, which is why we will continue to thoroughly review devices to help you choose from the best available. How we are changing the way we rate sustainability of consumer electronicsMarch 2020: an insidious virus seeds itself across the globe pitching tens of thousands in the European continent into a life-and-death battle. Most European countries secure their borders; millions of households lock their front doors. Hellish scenes flash by, feeding fears of infection. In Europe a disaster is unfolding, but there is no joint response. The loudest cry comes from Italy, hit by the virus early on. Appeals for help go unanswered and bitter reproaches ensue. The EU is slow to react: the fact that Brussels’ institutions lack the “competences”, or formal powers, to act in the field of public health impresses no one. When, soon thereafter, an economic depression looms, prophets of doom start predicting the end of the EU. Then the union suddenly began to show a remarkable dynamism and resilience. The pandemic led to mishaps, distrust and fierce clashes of all kinds, but it also mobilised unforeseen forces and led to huge political shifts. In the summer of 2020, the bloc’s presidents and prime ministers took two far-reaching decisions: the EU would purchase vaccines centrally, and it would establish a massive coronavirus recovery fund. There was no more talk about “competences”. The EU reinvented itself. How was this possible? During the Covid-19 disaster, more than in previous crises, political decision-making followed public demand for action. All citizens felt threatened in their own bodies. The disease was nobody’s fault. This crisis was so overwhelming – the strange lockdowns, the mass layoffs, the geo-medical “divide and rule” by China and the US – that “Europe” had to do something in response. Pandemic despair forced the union to assume a form it did not previously possess. Day after day, European societies counted and blessed the sick and the dead, tuned in for televised proclamations by monarchs, presidents or prime ministers, sang from balconies and applauded medical staff in the evenings. These were intensely experienced moments of national belonging. At the same time, neighbouring states grew closer than ever in their suffering, their lockdown rules, their intensive-care policies and death rates. Leaving aside pandemic empathy; observing other countries had its uses at home. The media compared their own governments with others. Why was Austria testing more aggressively than France? Why were more people dying in Britain than in Greece? But in the EU, with its single market, currency and shared borders, this went beyond mere comparison. Decisions next door had direct repercussions on people’s lives. What if Germany pumped billions into its own economy and Italy could not? What if Sweden took a lax attitude to Covid and kept their borders open? What if Hungary accepted a Russian vaccine? Some national publics were quick to say to their neighbours: this decision of yours is our business too. Conversely, several national leaders reached out to a broader, European public. This interplay was new. By contrast, the financial storms of 2008 onwards had been calmed in top-down ways. Governments, alarmed by central bankers and experts, had to convince reluctant parliaments of the need for drastic decisions to save the banking system and the currency. The public looked on, not having asked for anything. The economic freedoms introduced by the Brussels machinery from 1957 onwards were likewise bestowed from on high, as a favour, not extracted from below as a demand. In the pandemic, however, primacy lay for the first time with the public. Acknowledging the dynamism of the situation and stepping up to act for the public – these are the responses we demand from our political leaders. Hence the condemnation of the early Brussels defence. When history comes knocking, a lack of formal powers is no excuse. What counts is the capacity shown in the situation at hand to engage in “events politics”, meaning to identify and parry a shock affecting all citizens, to improvise and persuade in the moment; and, by extension, to anticipate events and increase the system’s resilience. Such cases do not require legal competences but rather the acceptance of personal, political responsibility. Few leaders were more keenly aware of this than Angela Merkel. The pandemic was the last big European crisis of her 16 years as German chancellor, and her performance was masterful. By Easter 2020 she could feel how faultlines were hardening, how political fights over solidarity were flaring up between Europe’s north and south. Daily she read reports of how Covid-19 was driving the heart of the eurozone and its Mediterranean periphery apart economically (a risk for German exporters). And so she decided on 18 May 2020, after thorough consideration, to jump. On behalf of the Federal Republic, she assumed responsibility for a €500bn EU coronavirus recovery fund, to be disbursed in the form of grants not loans. Something that had remained taboo during the dangerous eurozone crisis was suddenly possible. Merkel displayed a seismologist’s sensitivity to undercurrents and aftershocks in the public sphere. This unique ordeal could produce heaves and landslips, abrupt emotional eruptions. “Our country is dying,” the leaders in Rome and Madrid told her – and so pandemic aid could not be conditional; that would be humiliating. Nor was it possible to ignore the fact that the Italian public’s trust in the union was plummeting, and for two out of three Italians leaving had become an option. Shifts in the public sphere are pure politics. The outcome is not just the sum of objective forces (such as a country’s trade balance, arsenal or technological capabilities). They are also, indeed above all, a matter of humour and sentiment, gratitude and rancour, memory and expectation, words and stories, expressed in mostly unstable balances and changing majorities. Yet that is no reason to dismiss the public mood as fickle. It can be read, felt and influenced. Moreover, public opinion is capable of pushing aside or shattering many supposedly objective realities, as became clear during the pandemic. In March 2020, the Dutch finance minister Wopke Hoekstra made an insensitive proposal that the European Commission should investigate the absence of financial buffers in Italy and Spain. It was a rude swipe aimed at garnering applause from the Dutch home audience, but it provoked boos and hisses from all over Europe, and Hoekstra had to slink away, having misjudged the nature, size and mood of his European audience. Other actors actively sought out a wider European gallery. Southern Europe revived an old desire from the euro crisis: a call for the issuing of joint debt. It did so classically, in a letter dated 25 March sent from nine government leaders to Charles Michel, the president of the European council. Far more effectively, several days later local politicians in Italy bought a full-page advertisement in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung to appeal to the German public to support “corona bonds”. It is sometimes claimed that because we don’t all speak the same language there is no European public space. That is nonsense. Applause and catcalls are universally understood. The public that politicians deal with consists of more than just the voters whose verdict they submit to every few years. During the pandemic, the European public discovered its role. It became clear that our lives and our health are a public matter. We want politicians who protect us, save lives and chart a path to the future. This swelling emergency call drowned out the usual whistling down of each Brussels initiative as unwelcome interference in national affairs. A European res publica translated itself from formless task into political decision. At a moment of great vulnerability, a pandemonic battle of words made the European Union defend what its people hold most dearly, and gave it new political force. Luuk van Middelaar is political theorist and historian. This article is adapted from his new book, Pandemonium: Saving EuropePeople testing positive to Covid using rapid antigen tests are being turned away from, or are giving up on, getting a PCR test, as the New South Wales government warns that the actual number of Covid cases could be much higher than the 11,201 reported on Wednesday. Wait times for testing clinics have ballooned across NSW, Victoria, Queensland and South Australia. Guardian Australia has spoken to people who have developed Covid symptoms after being in contact with a confirmed positive case, or who have a positive rapid antigen test, who have been trying for several days to get a PCR test but have been turned away. Others were tested before Christmas but are still waiting on their result. Long queues result in wait times of several hours. Some people had been turned away half an hour after a testing site opened because it was over capacity. At others people camped out overnight to ensure they were at the top of the queue. Amy McNeilage and her mother both tested positive on a rapid antigen test earlier this week and were finally able to get a PCR test on Wednesday, after driving an hour from north-west Sydney to Lithgow. McNeilage’s mother was turned away from three testing sites on Tuesday – Castle Hill, Rouse Hill and Penrith. They checked the NSW Health website and saw that Hawkesbury showgrounds would be open from 8am, so got up early and joined the queue at 6.15am. The website later marked it as closed. McNeilage and her partner need official confirmation from a PCR test in order to return to their home in Canberra, and to show their employers why they need time off work. They will quarantine in Sydney until cleared to travel. “I just feel incredibly grateful that I am vaccinated because I have been quite unwell, more unwell than I expected to be with being double vaccinated,” McNeilage says. “I hate to think what sort of shape I would be in if I had not been vaccinated.” Officials in three states – Victoria, South Australia and NSW – have said testing capacity should be reserved for people who have symptoms or have returned a positive rapid antigen test (RAT). The NSW government has blamed the surging testing queues on “tourism testing,” mainly people travelling to Queensland who are required to show a negative PCR test. NSW Health sent texts to people who completed a PCR on Wednesday warning that the wait for results would be 72 hours. In a statement, it said it was taking steps to “limit testing that is not clinically urgent”, prioritising people who have Covid symptoms or a positive rapid antigen test, are a household contact, or have been in a high transmission venue. Karen Lang spent Christmas at home with her partner, her adult son and daughter, and her daughter’s boyfriend, suffering from severe flu-like symptoms from what she assumes is Covid. Her son was identified as a close contact and began to feel unwell on 19 December. He tested positive on 20 December, Lang and her daughter tested negative. Lang and her daughter then began to feel unwell, so they went to get tested again on 23 December. They still have not received a result. Lang’s partner, who got tested on 24 December, also has not received a result. Her daughter’s boyfriend, who also tested on the 24th, received a negative test result back five days later. Lang and her partner are booked to have their booster shots next week, but don’t know whether to keep the booking. If they have had Covid, they should not get the shot for another six months. But if their long-delayed PCR test comes back negative, they should get the shot. “So what do we do?” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Some, like Michael Banford, returned a positive rapid antigen test, looked at the queues for PCR tests, and decided not to get tested at all. Banford began to feel slightly off early last week, and returned two positive rapid antigen tests. It’s now 10 days since his symptoms first appeared and the 53-year-old, who was double vaccinated with AstraZeneca, said he was feeling better. He will take a few more rapid antigen tests before leaving isolation. The NSW chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, said that people who are just seeking a screening test should use a rapid antigen test not a PCR test, but that people who test positive on a rapid antigen test, or who have symptoms, should still get a PCR test. She went on to say the very high rate of positive test results – currently above 5% – meant the testing clinics were “probably not getting to all of the cases”. “So there is probably more disease in the community than the numbers reflect.” The testing queues are slightly shorter in Victoria, with the average result time hovering around two days. Laura Strehlau has taken her family for five PCR tests since 17 December, when her eight-year-old son was identified as a close contact. He tested positive, followed by her six-year-old, and then, yesterday, her four-year-old. So far, Strehlau herself has not tested positive. The longest they have waited for a test result is five days, the shortest eight hours – from a small testing clinic at Healesville. They have also been screening with rapid antigen tests, but Strehlau says expecting people to rely on the increasingly expensive tests was unfair. “I am a single mum, I have had to go into my savings to buy them,” she says. “They are hard to get and they are expensive, it’s the toilet paper of 2021.”Air travel in and out of the UK slumped by 71% in 2021 as the second year of the Covid-19 crisis took its toll on international flying, according to a report. Just over 406,000 international flights operated from the UK up to 22 December this year compared with almost 1.4m in 2019 before the pandemic struck and travel restrictions were imposed, the aviation analytics firm Cirium said. UK domestic flights were found to have declined by almost 60%. International travel has been slow to recover because of testing and quarantine requirements, which have changed throughout the year, and fears of countries being added to the UK’s red list which involve mandatory hotel quarantine for 10 days. The budget carrier Ryanair remained the largest airline in the UK, Cirium said, operating more than 100,000 UK flights in 2021, followed by easyJet, with more than 82,000 flights, while British Airways was third with 77,460 flights. The busiest international route was between London’s Heathrow and New York’s JFK, even though the US only reopened its borders to UK travellers in November. Travellers from the US had been able to fly to the UK since 28 July. BA, Virgin Atlantic, American Airlines, Delta Air Lines and JetBlue operated a total of 2,410 flights on the route. Short-haul flights were the most popular, though, with eight out of the 10 busiest routes to mainland Europe. They included London Heathrow to Amsterdam, Paris Charles de Gaulle and Frankfurt. The UK’s busiest domestic route was the 31-mile flight between Land’s End in Cornwall to St Mary’s on the Isles of Scilly, with 2,330 flights recorded this year. With new Covid infections soaring across Europe and the US, and hitting record highs in the UK amid the rapid spread of the Omicron variant, the outlook for next year remains uncertain. Thousands of flights have been cancelled over the past few days because of staff testing positive for Covid-19, and bad weather in parts of the US. By Wednesday morning, a further 2,100 flights had been cancelled globally, after 3,000 cancellations on Tuesday, including 1,300 into or out of the US, according to the tracking website FlightAware. Globally, airlines cancelled more than 6,000 flights between Christmas Eve and Boxing Day, normally the busiest time of the year. One in eight UK travel and tourism jobs – 205,000 roles – will be unfilled at the beginning of 2022, according to the London-based World Travel and Tourism Council. The staff shortage could have an “enormous impact” on the UK’s economic recovery from the coronavirus pandemic, the WTTC said. It called for a series of measures to tackle the issue, such as more support for remote working, reskilling workers and increasing the number of apprenticeships. “If we cannot fill these vacancies, it could threaten the survival of travel and tourism businesses up and down the UK,” said the council’s chief executive, Julia Simpson. Separately, Indonesia has lifted the ban on the Boeing 737 Max, more than three years after a Lion Air plane flying from Jakarta crashed in October 2018, killing 189 people. In March 2019, there was a second disaster involving the 737 Max model when an Ethiopian Airlines plane crashed soon after takeoff from Addis Ababa, killing 157 people. Boeing’s bestselling aircraft was then grounded globally. On Monday, Ethiopian Airlines said it would resume 737 Max flights in February.The Guardian Weekly looks forward and back in this, our final edition of 2021. Our longstanding foreign affairs commentator Simon Tisdall offers his perspective on what to expect in 2022, a year that appears fraught with problems on almost every front. There’s also consideration of prospects for the environment, technology and space exploration. Then, you’ll find cultural reflections on the year drawing to a close, with agency photographers of the year, memories of those we lost, and critics’ picks of the best film, music and more. A year ago, Britain formally exited the European Union in one of the most traumatic and divisive political acts in the nation’s history. For our big story this week, the Observer’s political and economics experts consider the benefits – or otherwise – of “taking back control”. The passing of the anti-apartheid icon Desmond Tutu, at the age of 90, sparked a week of mourning in South Africa and heartfelt tributes from around the world. From Cape Town, Jason Burke reflects on the legacy of the man who coined the term “rainbow nation”, and who bore a moral authority equalled by few others. As data trickles in, scientists, epidemiologists and governments have been grappling with how to respond to the fast-spreading Omicron Covid variant. The Observer’s science editor Robin McKie brings us up to speed with what we know so far. Get the Guardian Weekly magazine delivered to your home.For Paul Bowles, the Sahara was “one of the last great terrae incognitae left on this shrinking planet”. His 1949 novel The Sheltering Sky was inspired by the desert’s “intensely poetic” dunes and in a later essay he described its impact on him: “In this wholly mineral landscape lighted by stars like flares, even memory disappears; nothing is left but your own breathing and the sound of your heart beating … For no one who has stayed in the Sahara for a while is quite the same as when he came.” The Sahara is vast, covering about a third of the continent of Africa. From the Atlantic to the Red Sea it sprawls across 4,800km, and from its southern to its northern limit is a distance of some 1,800km . It is, said Bowles, “a continent within a continent”, with its own mountain ranges, plains, dunes, valleys and volcanic craters. And yet its lakes are made of salt and its forests are no longer alive but petrified fossils. For most of this lunar landscape is without vegetation or even soil. He found the experience like travelling to another planet: “Not a blade of grass for hundreds of miles. Stark black hills rising from endless plains with a thin surface layer of fine gravel. Great humpbacked sand dunes aligned in seemingly endless rows parallel to the wind. Sand, dust, and wind; wind, dust, and sand.” But it has not always been like this. Martin Williams, a professor of earth sciences at the University of Adelaide, has seen for himself how, on rock faces deep in the desert, prehistoric artists had scratched or painted evocative scenes of long-lost people herding cattle, as well as images of giraffes and elephants. He helped excavate the oldest complete domestic cow skeleton ever found in the Sahara, a relic from 5,000 years ago. The bones were stumbled upon during an early morning walk at the isolated mountain of Adrar Bous which, he notes, is “about as far inland as it is possible to be in north Africa, which is one reason why it is so dry”. This, together with the discovery of Neolithic pottery and tools, proved that farmers and herders were living in that area 5,000 years ago. According to Williams, “the stark contrast between present aridity and the overwhelming evidence of a recently wetter past has led me on a lifelong journey”. Williams’s book is the fruit of that journey. The general reader may find it technical in parts, but it is a detailed and authoritative account that reveals the rich and fascinating story of this unique landscape and its climate, geology and natural history. The Sahara began to dry out some 7m years ago, principally due to the slow drift of the continent of Africa into latitudes characterised by drier air. Rain-bearing clouds shed their moisture before they could get to it. “The Sahara existed as a desert millions of years before humans ever appeared on the scene,” writes Williams. But on a number of occasions the Sahara has been a green and pleasant land. The last time was between 15,000 and 5,000 years ago. Back then, the tropics received more radiation from the sun, and summer and winter rains reached into the heart of this now barren land. Vegetation belts in the north and the south spread more than 1,000km farther inland than their current limits. It was a land of tropical savannah and grassland, with lakes and rivers filled with an abundance of life. But from about 5,000 years ago the Sahara began to dry out again. Williams rejects theories that early humans were the principal cause of this, due to deforestation and overgrazing: “The Sahara is dry today for good and sufficient geographical reasons that have nothing to do with humans.” In answer to the question of whether the Sahara will one day be green again he replies: “Yes, but not for a long time to come.” Williams admires those who continue to live in the Sahara for their deep understanding of nature and ability to survive in such a harsh environment. He describes how on one journey they needed to drink from a muddy pool. When he offered to filter the mud using his shirt, their “aristocratic young Tuareg guide curled his lips in scorn and dispatched his younger brother with a small axe to obtain some pieces of bark from a particular tree”. Added to a calabash of the muddy water, the bark caused the organic matter to settle within minutes, leaving the liquid crystal-clear. Williams’s book offers a wonderful insight into how climate can transform the landscape across long stretches of time, as well as how delicately balanced are the ecosystems on which we depend. All the more reason, Williams writes, to “cherish the wisdom of past peoples who learned to live in greater harmony with their land than many of us have presently managed”. • When the Sahara Was Green: How Our Greatest Desert Came to Be by Martin Williams is published by Princeton (£22). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.I am in the pub. It is dark, loud and at full capacity. Sitting with a group of people, my mind drifts towards something funny that happened at work. I wonder if it is funny enough to repeat and, if so, how it would sound if I were to say it out loud. I mouth the story to myself, word by word, trying out different intonations. Further inane questions skip through my mind. How do I start the story? Do I provide dialogue? Do I do voices? Under the table, my hands rehearse the accompanying gestures. Just as I am about to speak, I sense an ambient dread rising up, like reflux. I blush and the conversation moves on. I am not always this anxious on a night out – jokes sometimes land, ripping yarns are occasionally told – but I would love to be able to tell a simple story without enduring all … this. Although it has never been clear exactly what “this” is, a pattern has emerged over the years: talking, to a number of people, usually in a loud or public setting, isn’t easy for me. It could be social phobia, or stage fright; perhaps a bit of both. Whatever it is, I want it to stop. With this in mind, I did something people like me rarely do and signed up for an improv class. I soon found myself alongside six people in a well-lit room inside the Irish Centre in Camden, north London, one Thursday evening, ready to be cured. There is a sizeable industry dedicated to helping (or making a few quid) people like me: TedX Talks; apps such as Speeko; toastmaster courses. I chose improv because it’s real – you can’t stage something that literally takes place on the stage – but also because it has been around for ever. From the Italian Commedia dell’arte to the House of Commons, the ability to think and perform on your feet, script-free, is a skill that can lead to greatness. And who doesn’t want to be great? The Free Association is the UK’s largest improv theatre group. Founded in 2015, the FA now trains several thousand students a year in rooms above pubs in north-east London. There is a syllabus and a handbook; students have to learn the fundamentals in order to graduate from one level to the next – there are five in total – performing as they go. Many go on to form groups and perform at ticketed events. Sitting with the others in a circle, I notice the room is rigged for activity: bottles of water, open windows (because it gets hot), everyone in practical shoes. The attenders, aged between 20 and 50, make small talk and I soon feel that familiar dread. I try to think about the worst that could happen (shame?), but, alas, terror doesn’t care for logic. I want to leave. The host, Scott, has us warm up with physical bonding exercises: Vroom, Screech (where we pretend to be cars – funnier than it sounds); a mnemonic game (Memory, but with mimes); and my favourite, the Story Game, where players bat single words between them to tell a tale. Ours involves a llama, deep societal poverty and a Saw-like death using a corkscrew. Water is drunk; more windows are opened. We are then paired up to play “Yes, and”, a call-and-response activity designed to help build scenes. Pointing at random objects in the room, my partner and I riff off each other. “The chair is blue,” she shouts. “Yes, and it’s ugly,” I cry out. The bedrock of improv, “Yes, and” prevents you from stalling in a scene, but it also encourages you to talk. In life, the loudest hog the floor; with “Yes, and”, you have no choice but to speak. Scott started doing improv after Wikipedia-ing his favourite comedians to see how they started out. While he now performs on stage, he credits improv with providing him with “a general fuck-it-ness approach” to life. “I’ll be shy until the day I die, but improvising has this strange way of making me less scared of the world,” he says. “Like, I don’t know what’s going to happen, but what’s the worst that can happen?” Successful improv sketches hinge on a kind of telepathy among players, but at our level the key is “active listening”. Rather than waiting for your turn to talk, you pay attention, make eye contact and forget that it is your turn until it is. Translated to real life, it is a bit pie-in-the-sky (you can’t surround yourself with excellent listeners), but it is a good reminder that the problem is not always you. I am not sure when I started struggling to talk in front of groups, but I usually chalk it down to a few difficult moments I would rather forget. The time at university when I appeared in a Pinter play and ruined a key pause with the sound of my prop flapping loudly and nervously in my hand. The time I was celebrating my 10th birthday over pizza and became so overwhelmed by the attention that I had to run to the loo to throw up. Or even the time last year when I tripped spectacularly over my words while trying to explain to my in-laws what it is I do for a living. The situation changes, but the anxiety remains: boring but pervasive. Over the years, I have tried to investigate it, but to little effect. I used to have a stammer, but I grew out of that in my teens. I definitely mumble, but have sharpened my diction over the years. Clearing out my childhood home last year, I found a picture of a tiger with the words “I’m scared so mush of the world” written inside a speech bubble, drawn when I was six. My therapist thinks I was born cursed. The only thing I hate more than talking in front of an audience is people who do it well – so it is remarkable that I would have a baby with one of those people. But while I begrudge the ease with which my boyfriend can discuss big pharma on Canadian radio (he, too, is a journalist), it is the everyday stuff that really pains me. The sparkling small talk at soft play; the dinner-table gags; his ability to recount mundane details of his everyday life in a pub without fear of friends switching off, or his disregard if they do. Perhaps the answer is this – not caring. Like avant garde theatre, improv follows the tenet that performing in order to entertain your audience is a lowering of one’s artistic standards. It is about what happens on stage – and to hell with who’s listening. This so-called “fuck-it-ness”. The class is wrapping up. It is only when Scott congratulates us for turning up that I realise everyone is actually like me. Some are even worse. The woman to my left joined because she wants to be a comedy writer, but the one next to her joined because she is “crap at public speaking”. On the one hand, improv is the basis of the modern US comedy landscape, but in a society that considers it a moral virtue to be able to communicate in public, improv also has a 12-step side to it. People come to be healed. The final piece is performed on stage. Standing in threes, we play the one-word game as if – stay with me here – we were a “three-headed wild-swimming nun”, answering audience questions about our favourite stroke, or how we have aligned our faith with cold-water swimming. Five hysterical minutes later, I return to my seat, stunned that I survived, yet barely able to remember what happened. Most baffling of all, I am sad to no longer be on the stage. The following week, at a friend’s gallery opening, I start telling a story about a train journey. Slowly, people gather. I still sweat and trip over words, but ultimately finish the tale – not quite healed, but without dying in the process.ACHITOPHEL 1 R. J. Heald: Devoid of principles, coach with help that’s dodgy? (anag. less first letters, &amp; lit.). 2 R. Vaughan-Davies: Leading characters to caution Hamlet toying with Ophelia in distress – is Polonius one such? (anag. incl. c, H, t). 3 J. A. Butler: Initially acclaimed counsellor, his ill-conceived treachery obviously perplexed his erstwhile lord (first letters &amp; lit.; ref. King David &amp; Absalom). VHC D. &amp; N. Aspland: Unprincipled adviser Allegra’s front starts to cause harm – is the office party heralding electoral lynching? (A + first letters). M. Barley: In the Bible, wise man advanced before child Prince in squalid hole (a + chit + P in anag.). T. C. Borland: Mandarin once proving tricky, I engaged a Chinese to help out (I in a Ch. to + anag.) T. Clement: One like Thomas Cromwell, perhaps, chap to lie freely around Henry (H in anag.). Dr I. S. Fletcher: Plot hatched, I concealed signs of treachery David missed (anag. less t, D, &amp; lit.). H. Freeman: Treacherously, wanting David’s head, I hatched unfulfilled plot (anag. less D, t, &amp; lit.). M. Lunan: A calming hand intended initially to help confused cautious person (first letters + anag.). D. F. Manley: A companion and help to leader of Israel becoming rebellious (a CH + I in anag., &amp; lit.; ref. 2 Sam., chs 15-16). C. Ogilvie: Rebellious counsellor with forlorn hope left after a slip (a chit + anag. + l). D. Price Jones: A chief, one needing a lot of help, takes on board ‘most senior adviser’ (a ch. + top in I hel), T. Rudd: Mark leaves the old map smudged round ‘X’ – my direction’s dubious (chi in anag. less DM). Dr S. J. Shaw: Betrayer of David, leader of party’s in awkward hole after Conservative bash (a C hit + p in anag.; ref. Cameron &amp; Johnson). D. P. Shenkin: Cautious fellow, i.e. chap loth to order or arrange (anag.). P. L. Stone: Being careful to avoid traps somehow hole a pitch (anag.; ref. golf). R. C. Teuton: Sage adviser to help Corona’s latest variant bearing Greek letter (chi in anag. incl. a). J. R. Tozer: Hope itch cures with a bit of lotion (one that isn’t rash) (anag. incl. a l). J. Vincent &amp; Ms R. Porter: One playing it safe surprisingly holed a pitch cutting drive initially (anag. less d). L. Ward (USA): A renegade adviser primarily had optical worries, he claimed (he in anag. incl. h; ref. D. Cummings). A. J. Wardrop: Operator, initially honourable, beset by ethical failing? (op. H in anag., &amp; lit.). A. Whittaker: OT chap I held devious, wanting the smallest hint of decency, an unscrupulous counsellor (anag. less d, &amp; lit.). HC D. Appleton, M. Barker, C. J. Brougham, D. Carter, P. &amp; J. Chamberlain, C. A. Clarke, R. Gilbert, P. F. Henderson (New Zealand), S. Hicks, G. Johnstone, D. C. Jones, J. C. Leyland, P. W. Marlow, P. McKenna, Rev. Prebendary M. R. Metcalf, J. R. C. Michie, C. G. Millin, T. J. Moorey, S. J. O’Boyle, D. J. R. Ogilvie (USA), S. Randall, W. Ransome, J. Smailes, A. J. Varney, Mrs A. M. Walden, J. Walker, Ms S. Wallace, G. Willett, K. &amp; J. Wolff. Comments I must be brief this month, with the Christmas and January competitions following close behind the delayed November comp. 130 entries this time, and no mistakes. Favourite clue, of 15 mentioned, was ‘Catch walrus? It makes one very sad’ for HEARTACHE. Mercifully the postal delivery problems in Oxford seem to be over, though with postmen working extra-hard at this time of year, the time taken for post to arrive is unpredictable, regardless of the value of stamps used. ACHITOPHEL proved a tricky customer (and where, as one or two of you asked, did Chambers get the idea that he was ‘cautious’?).The spelling, used by Dryden in his famous satirical poem Absalom and Achitophel to represent the Earl of Shaftesbury as a treacherous friend and adviser, was taken from the Vulgate and Douay bibles. The King James Bible shows ‘Ahithophel’. (Achithophel is a further variant.) I’m pleased to say that the Observer will start awarding prizes again, now that the paper’s staff are back in the office. Further details when I have them. Meanwhile my wife joins me in wishing all Azed solvers the best of the festive season and offering you our hopes for a less fraught new year. Our thanks for all the good wishes and cards we have received.A lack of lateral flow tests (LFTs) in UK pharmacies is a “huge” problem as people have been requesting them every five minutes over the Christmas period, providers have warned. Leyla Hannbeck, the chief executive of the Association of Independent Multiple Pharmacies, said a lack of LFT kits over Christmas and new year had put those “doing the responsible thing” in an impossible situation. “What our members are telling us is that demand for the lateral flow tests is very high at the moment due to the current guidelines around self-isolation. Pharmacies are reporting that every five minutes, approximately, somebody comes into the pharmacy asking for a test,” she told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “But, unfortunately, because of the issues around supply being patchy and inconsistent, it means that those who come for the test don’t always get it, which is very stressful; not just for the pharmacy team, but for the patient. “The scale of the problem is huge because the demand is high, because of the current guidelines. “People are doing the responsible thing by wanting to be tested. And we are in the Christmas area of time and the new year is just around the corner and people want to be with family and friends.” Current rules in England allow anyone who has tested positive to cut their self-isolation from 10 days to seven if they have negative LFTs on days six and seven. In Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland the self-isolation period for those who test positive remains 10 days. The UK Health Security Agency has said nearly 900,000 test kits are being provided each day, double the supply before 18 December. The government’s policy has driven demand for LFTs in England, adding to the seasonal demand throughout the UK among those wanting to see family and friends over Christmas, and the underlying testing requirements. Hannbeck, whose organisation represents 2,000 pharmacies around the UK, told Today: “It just simply isn’t enough to meet the demand and it’s patchy. Some days you get one box delivered and other days none. It isn’t enough for the pharmacies to deliver to the patients. “We want to make sure that the message is clear to the government that the supply needs to be consistent.” It comes after government websites reported in the weeks before Christmas that LFTs were “not available right now”, and many people trying to book walk-in PCR tests were being directed to sites several miles away or told none were available.Calls for a reduction in England’s Covid self-isolation period from seven days to five in order to ease NHS staff shortages have been dismissed by a government minister. Chloe Smith, the minister for disabled people, health and work, said the previous period of 10 days had only recently been cut by three. That came after a senior NHS official warned that staff absences due to Covid over the winter months – exacerbated by underlying shortages – was likely to pose the NHS a bigger problem than the number of Omicron-related patients being hospitalised. “There are no current plans in England to change that period,” Smith told BBC Breakfast on Wednesday. “Of course, we have actually only recently taken it down from 10 to seven, and we want to look at that – we want to make sure that that is working as we believe it ought to. “We think the current period, therefore, is the right one, so we haven’t any plans to change that further.” On Tuesday, US health authorities halved the recommended isolation time for people with asymptomatic Covid to five days. A leading immunologist suggested the UK could follow a similar path if rapid testing capacity and quality could support it. Sir John Bell, regius professor of medicine at Oxford University and the government’s life sciences adviser, said illness associated with Omicron was proving less severe than with previous variants. “My view is that lateral flow tests are quite a good way of marking who is infectious and who isn’t and, as you know, we’ve dropped from 10 days to seven days if you have sequential lateral flow tests. That is a much better way to measure and quantitate whether we are allowing people to go back into the community who are infectious,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Wednesday. Asked if he thought that should lead to a further cut to the self-isolation period in England, he said: “If it was supported by lateral flow data, yes.” Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation, which represents the healthcare system in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, told Today that a decrease in the self-isolation period would help ease the staffing crisis. But he acknowledged that ministers needed to carefully balance that against the risk of increasing transmission. Boris Johnson, who has ruled out any additional restrictions in England before the new year, has been accused of going missing in action this week. Dr Chaand Nagpaul, the chair of the British Medical Association’s ruling council, suggested the prime minister has ignored “the elephant in the room” of staff absence levels, the Financial Times reported on Tuesday. And the chief executive of NHS Providers, Chris Hopson, has warned that the effect of greater social mixing over Christmas is still to come, telling BBC Breakfast the same day that the NHS was bracing for an increase in patients being hospitalised with Omicron. Staff self-isolations are putting the NHS under severe strain, with one union leader saying that already overstretched public services are in a “perilous state” and experts warning of a “worst case scenario” in which up to 40% of NHS staff in London are unable to work. Hopson added: “We’re now seeing a significant increase in the level of staff absences, and quite a few of our chief executives are saying that they think that that’s probably going to be a bigger problem and a bigger challenge for them than necessarily the number of people coming in who need treatment because of Covid.”The prospect of John Boyega playing an idealistic New York public defender in a John Grisham-style thriller is a very appealing one. But his talent deserves better than this clapped-out vehicle, a movie that constantly feels like it’s about to run out of narrative gas. The big gimmick here is a freaky sci-fi backdrop to the legal drama: unbeknown to the characters, the universe is about to implode (something to do with black holes causing ripples in space). It begins 10 days before what is described as “the collapse”. Boyega is a lawyer called Casi who is only three years into his career but already burned out and disillusioned by the US justice system. You can spot he’s a good guy by his brown corduroy suit – Hollywood’s liberal crusader uniform. The people Casi represents don’t stand a chance. Take his latest client, a drug user who got clean while out on bail; Casi believes he deserves another opportunity. The view of his nemesis, cynical veteran Judge Cymbeline (Linda Lavin), is that the guy is healthy and therefore fit enough to send to prison for a three to six year stretch. The pair’s courtroom spats are the high point of the movie. As Casi edges towards disbarment, one of his clients, Lea (Olivia Cooke), gets mixed up in a plan to steal drugs belonging to a Mexican cartel. The gangsters are all standard-issue and the heist is a non-starter. Meanwhile, New York City is experiencing unexplained blackouts and blips – at one point Casi levitates, his feet a good couple of inches off the ground. But not even an impending apocalypse adds much in the way of urgency. Still, Boyega is very credible and at 29 he’s beginning to look like a leading man with real gravitational pull. Likely he’ll file this on his CV under misfire. • Naked Singularity is released on 2 January on Sky Cinema and NOW.In March 2020, Covid-19 pandemic lockdowns disrupted one of the most routine aspects of pediatric medicine – getting young kids vaccinated against preventable diseases, from measles to whooping cough to influenza. Now, nearly two years into the pandemic, the number of shots going into young arms has rebounded. But an emerging body of evidence is also beginning to show lingering effects of the pandemic, as Black families in particular struggle to get kids caught up on routine vaccinations, just as the Omicron variant of Covid-19 threatens to once again disrupt daily life. “We might have a cohort of children who are forever behind” on vaccinations, said Dr Brian P Jenssen, a pediatrician at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia. A recent comment piece in the Journal of the American Medical Association Pediatrics by Jenssen and fellow CHOP pediatrician Dr Alexander Fiks warned of a growing gap between the most and least disadvantaged children. “If we don’t address this we’re going to be setting ourselves up for the next pandemic, period.” Health authorities at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommend 15 vaccinations for infants from birth to 15 months. These shots cover a range of preventable diseases from measles to polio. Then, from 15 months to 18 years old, health authorities recommend another 15 vaccinations, including boosters. Covid-19 vaccines have been recommended for all children older than five, but have not yet been added to this formal vaccine schedule. Federal vaccine purchasing programs have helped improve disparities in vaccination rates between white and Black children in recent years, because they removed cost barriers for many vaccines. Nevertheless, disparities have persisted, and adults also experience disparities in vaccination rates based on race and ethnicity. When the pandemic hit in March 2020, federal scientists found childhood immunizations plummeted, in part because many of the places children get vaccinated went into lockdown with the rest of the country. School-based clinics, health departments and pediatricians’ offices closed for months. America’s health system is fragmented and largely private, but glimpses of the scale of decline came from federal vaccine ordering programs, local programs in New York City and Michigan and then a CDC report that assessed 10 vaccination programs. In just one example, a CDC study out of Michigan found from March to May 2020, when stay-at-home orders were in place, the share of five-month-old babies up-to-date on vaccines dropped from an average of roughly two-thirds to less than half. Those rates began to recover when stay-at-home orders were lifted, in the summer of 2020. Between June and September 2020, the rates of vaccination “approach pre-pandemic baseline levels,” more CDC research found. However, they “did not increase to the level that would have been necessary to catch up children who did not receive routine vaccinations on time”. Now, a growing body of research suggests the kids least likely to have caught up on vaccinations are those who were least likely to have been up-to-date before the pandemic. In other words, the pandemic did not just temporarily slow childhood vaccinations, but worsened disparities between groups. CDC researchers found children on Medicaid, the public health insurance program for the poor and disabled, were less likely to be caught up on vaccines. In another recent study, in JAMA Pediatrics, Black families were less likely than Hispanic or Asian families to have kids up-to-date on vaccines. The JAMA study compared the rates of children who are up-to-date on vaccinations in 2019 to fall 2020 across more than 1.4 million children in a private health system that spans six states. Although the proportion of Black children in the study was lower than in the general population, these families still appeared to struggle to get catch up. Here, researchers looked across a range of ages from infants to adolescents. They found 18-month-old children were the most likely to be affected. At 18 months, Asian children were the most likely to be up-to-date on vaccines, with 76% up-to-date, versus 41% among Black infants. Terrence Shirley, CEO of the Community Health Center Association of Mississippi, said he was “not really surprised” to learn low-income and Black and brown children have fallen further behind. “Think about where a lot of the underserved, underprivileged individuals will access care, or try to access care – those institutions that actually went into lockdown,” said Shirley. School-based clinics, a vital pipeline for vaccinating many children, were among the first to shut down and often stayed closed for months. Reopening clinics then proved challenging, as nurses who once staffed them moved on to contract work, which paid better as hospitals overwhelmed with Covid increased nurse wages. Many low-income families lost work during the pandemic, may have lost access to transportation, or lack the internet needed to make an appointment. Even now, public health resources remain focused on the fight against Covid-19, especially as the Omicron variant threatens to create a new wave of cases and hospitalizations nationally. “We focused so much of the resources, the financial resources, on combatting Covid,” said Shirley. “We have to re-tool”. To some extent, difficulty distributing routine childhood vaccines is a global phenomenon. Lagging measles programs have caused particular concern for global health authorities. In November, the World Health Organization (WHO) and CDC released a joint statement to call on governments to strengthen measles inoculation programs after more than 22 million infants missed measles doses. Noting how resources had been devoted to battle Covid-19, Dr Kate O’Brien, the director of WHO’s department of immunization, vaccines and biologicals said, “Routine immunization must be protected and strengthened. Otherwise, we risk trading one deadly disease for another.” Shirley also noted that some conservative states, such as Mississippi, have made policy decisions that exacerbate inequality. A dozen conservative-led US states refuse to expand Medicaid, even though the federal government would pay at least 90% of the program. “All of these social determinants of health are driven by the political determinants of health,” said Shirley. “Unless and until we’re willing to address the politics … we’re going to be behind the eight ball for years to come”.I planned to be in Lagos this Christmas. The season is called Detty December (as in “dirty”), and it’s a whirlwind of weddings, parties and concerts that go on till the early hours of the morning. The dress code is “slay queen” – dress to slay – and there’s only one rule: enjoyment. I booked my flight months in advance to avoid the price hikes that happen close to Christmas. I readied my outfits. I packed my sunscreen. And then, as of 7 December, the UK government put Nigeria on the red list. I was scheduled to fly the day before. I sought counsel. My bolder friends encouraged me to travel because the rules might change before my return flight. My more cautious friends advised that I should only risk it if, in the event that the travel ban was not lifted, I was ready to pay £2,120 for hotel quarantine. I was not ready to pay £2,120. I postponed my trip. So far, so pandemic. We’ve all had to cancel flights, weddings, graduations and birthday parties in the last two years. The cancellation was not the shock. It was my calm response to the shelving of a long-awaited holiday that surprised me. The Chibundu of 2019 would have gone on a rant that started with my family and progressed to social media, where it would eventually burn out in a very long Twitter thread: 30 tweets minimum. I would have started with Boris Johnson, worked my way through the cabinet and finished with a diatribe against Covid itself. I would have railed against the double standards that turned African travellers into international pariahs when the Omicron variant was present in other countries around the world. Then I would have locked myself in my room for a week, sat in darkened silence and mourned my lost Detty December. Instead, I exchanged my ticket for a travel voucher and made new plans for Christmas. It was the pandemic. The pandemic had made me more comfortable with uncertainty. I was willing to accept that things might not go according to plan, and that was all right, because as long as I was alive and in good health then I could make new plans. One of the side effects of a virus sweeping across the world and locking us down and separating me from my family in Nigeria was that I was growing this strange, wonderful emotional muscle called resilience. Even though it has atrophied somewhat through my years of living in England, I grew up with resilience. My childhood was spent in 90s Nigeria, which meant military-rule Nigeria, which meant coups, dictatorships, fuel scarcity, labour strikes, social unrest and much more. You could wake up one morning and the president had changed. And how did my parents cope with all this uncertainty? They planned for the future but they lived in the present. They realised that tomorrow was not guaranteed so they did not spend their days fretting about what might happen. They had enough foresight to make plans but they had enough flexibility to change them. They moved through life with a certain ease and grace that I in my 20s and 30s, living in a country with more political stability and economic opportunity, struggled to replicate. There’s nothing wrong with planning. There is something harmful with believing that because you have planned something then it must be so. That is a prerogative that was formerly only attributed to the divine but is now the hubris of the western world. Those in Washington, London and Paris see western dominance, economic growth and excessive consumption stretching into the future for ever. I look at my discarded plans from 2020, and I approach the future with more humility and flexibility. I look at the uncertainty of Brexit Britain, in particular the petrol shortage of the summer and the queues that lasted for hours. All this reminded me of petrol scarcities in Lagos. It reminded me that the fact I lived in relative ease and prosperity was not because I was better than anyone. It wasn’t because I was smarter or a better planner. It was simply time and chance. In the old days, people used to say: “There but for the grace of God go I.” It could be you who is living in a country at war, forced to flee with nothing but the clothes on your back. It could be you crossing the Channel in a rubber dinghy, hoping that the coastguard won’t let you drown if you capsize. All of us, in the last two years, have faced enough uncertainty to show compassion to those fleeing instability. But will we learn? Will we learn? In the end, Christmas in England was fine. There was no Burna Boy concert or Tems concerts. There were no red-carpet weddings or beach parties. I didn’t get to see my family in Nigeria but I saw my family in England: three nieces, two sisters, two brother-in-laws, one nephew, one cousin and one very special boyfriend. There was jollof rice and chicken; and even though somebody was too tired to fry the plantain, we made do without. It wasn’t my first plan. But I made a new plan, and life went on. Chibundu Onuzo is a Nigerian novelist living in London.After a brief wait to the faint whirr of moving machinery parts, the tiny cardboard box that drops into the plastic-covered tray is reassuringly warm. Inside is a perfectly passable burger in a chewy white bun, topped with a blob of ketchup and diced fried onions. No human interaction occurred in the making of this transaction. The Guardian’s alfresco lunch came courtesy of one of dozens of vending machines in Sagamihara, an unglamorous town near Tokyo. Nostalgia has preserved the 90 or so jidō hanbaiki here, but after decades of steady decline in their number nationally, the coronavirus pandemic has triggered a vending machine revival in Japan as retailers pin their hopes on “untact” sales to customers still nervous about buying food, drink and other items in the traditional way. As the lunchtime trade picks up, truck drivers join young couples, customers at a nearby tyre garage and curious tourists as they edge along the row of machines on a chilly day in early winter. They are spoiled for choice. The ageing machines – whose contents are impeccably fresh – offer a multiple-course meal, perhaps beginning with tempura soba noodles or curry and rice, with an ice-cream for dessert and a cup of hot matcha tea to finish. Despite their declining numbers, it is practically impossible to walk down a street in any Japanese town or city and not spy the telltale light emitting from a vending machine in the distance. According to the Japan Vending System Manufacturers Association, the number peaked at 5.6m in 2000, or one for every 23 people. That had fallen to just over 4m by last year, but the country still has the largest number of vending machines per capita in the world. More than half of Japan’s ubiquitous machines sell food or drink, but their eclectic stock extends to items that appear slightly out of place behind a pane of glass: anime and manga merchandise, figurines, underpants, toothbrushes, skincare products, umbrellas and, since the start of the pandemic, masks and Covid-19 test kits. Kenmin Foods is one of a growing number of firms turning to non-contact customer service to make up for sales lost during the pandemic. The rice-noodle maker installed a vending machine in front of its headquarters in Kobe in September and pulled in ¥23m (£153,000), three times its initial target, according to the Yomiuri newspaper. A seafood seller in Hokkaido, meanwhile, has started fillets of fresh salmon and mackerel after many of its regular clients closed due to the pandemic. In the central city of Nagoya, three companies have joined forces to sell food – including bread and instant noodles - nearing its expiry date from vending machines at up to 50% off its normal price. Maruyama Seimen now sells its frozen noodles and dumplings via vending machines in 30 locations and plans to expand that to 100 by April 2023. At the peak of the pandemic in Japan the machines were being emptied of more than 10,000 packs a month, the Nikkei business newspaper reported, while traditional sales slumped by a fifth. “The convenience of vending machines is being re-evaluated because of the pandemic,” Prof Hidehiko Nishikawa, a marketing expert at Hosei University, told the Yomiuri Shimbun newspaper. “Efforts to increase added value, such as giving points through apps for vending machines, are important to draw in customers.” In Sagamihara, two women pull down their masks and eat just-dispensed bowls of steaming udon in the back of their people carrier, while a couple feed coins into a machine selling sweet snacks. After a lunch comprising a burger and a bowl of noodles, the Guardian decides, with a carb-heavy heart, not to join the queue.A fear of catching Covid-19 is not a protected belief under the Equality Act, a judge has ruled, after a woman claimed she was discriminated against by her employer when she refused to go into work during the pandemic. A tribunal held in Manchester this month heard that the claimant refused to return to her workplace in July 2020 because she had a “genuine fear” of contracting coronavirus and passing it on to her partner, who was at high risk of becoming seriously unwell. Neither the woman nor her employer were named in the judgment. In a statement given to the tribunal, the worker said her employer had refused to pay her and she had suffered financial detriment as a result. She said: “I claim this was discrimination on the grounds of this belief in regard to coronavirus and the danger from it to public health. This was at the time of the start of the second wave of Covid-19 and the huge increase in cases of the virus throughout the country.” Asked what her belief was, she told the tribunal: “A fear of catching Covid-19 and a need to protect myself and others.” In his ruling, the employment judge Mark Leach said he accepted the woman had a genuine fear but he did not believe it met the criteria for a “philosophical belief” that would be protected under section 10 of the Equality Act 2010. He said: “I do not find that the claimant’s fear amounts to a belief. Rather, it is a reaction to a threat of physical harm and the need to take steps to avoid or reduce that threat. Most (if not all) people instinctively react to perceived or real threats of physical harm in one way or another. “It can also be described as a widely held opinion based on the present state of information available that taking certain steps – for example, attending a crowded place during the height of the current pandemic – would increase the risk of contracting Covid-19 and may therefore be dangerous. “Few people may argue against that. However, a fear of physical harm and views about how best to reduce or avoid a risk of physical harm is not a belief for the purposes of section 10.” Leach added: “Fears about the harm being caused by Covid-19 are weighty and substantial. They are certainly not minor or trivial. They are about also aspects of human life and behaviour.”From a tiny railway bridge for dormice in the UK to elk, deer and bears benefitting from a slew of new animal crossings in Colorado, wildlife bridges are having a moment. As the human footprint on the planet continues to expand, a growing number of roads and railways include provisions for wildlife to pass through fragmented landscapes. In January, we reported on Sweden’s plans to build a series of “renoducts” to help reindeer traverse the country’s main roads. The Swedish Transport Administration has since completed an ecoduct over the E6 in Skåne in southern Sweden, the third in the county. In southern California, work is due to begin on the largest wildlife bridge in the world in 2022, to connect isolated mountain lion populations north of Los Angeles that are becoming dangerously inbred. Joe Biden has earmarked $350m (£260m) of his $1.2tn infrastructure package for wildlife bridges to lessen the multibillion annual cost of collisions. “Ten years ago, wildlife bridges were experimental. We didn’t know whether they would work or not. Now they’ve shown they get huge reductions in collisions. In some cases, 85% to 99% reductions,” says Rob Ament, a road ecology expert at Montana State University. “You can design them for many species. Even out in the plains, we’re getting moose crossings in North Dakota.” Wildlife bridges are found on every continent: there is an elephant underpass near Mount Kenya; the Netherlands has a network of ecoducts that may help the country’s first wolf pack in more than 140 years gain a foothold across the densely populated country; suspended water pipes are helping Java’s endangered lorises; and a bison bridge may help the animals cross the Mississippi. Here are five projects from around the world helping animals make their way: Alligator Alley, Florida The 129km (80-mile) stretch of road between Naples and Fort Lauderdale bisects the Everglades, an enormous wetland that is home to thousands of alligators, deer and the endangered Florida panther. It used to be notorious for high-speed collisions with wildlife until the road was upgraded to a four-lane motorway and crossings were installed. Today, dozens of underpasses and fencing help wildlife navigate the road. A camera trapping exercise found panthers, black bears, skunks, deer, bats, birds and even fish use the crossings, and hope is growing the state’s wildlife bridge network could be extended north to connect potential habitats for the Florida panther. “Fencing is critical along Alligator Alley. It is a 10ft-high chain link fence with three-strand barbed wire on top. That’s to keep the wildlife off the roadway and on the crossing,” says Brent Setchell, a design engineer at Florida Department of Transportation, who identifies potential crossing sites by monitoring road collisions with panthers and bears. “The fascinating thing is we just started monitoring the crossings four or five years ago. We found an abundance of wildlife.” ‘The tunnel of love’ on the Great Alpine Road, Australia Stretching through the Victorian Alps in south-east Australia, the Great Alpine Road posed an existential threat to a colony of critically endangered mountain pygmy possums. Even though there are only about 150 of the marsupials on Mount Little Higginbotham, testing revealed genetic differences between sub-groups separated by the road, which are also threatened by fire, disappearing food sources and invasive species. Conservationists decided to build a “tunnel of love” between the isolated groups to improve mixing and strengthen their chances of survival. Over the last two summers, 30 possums have been identified using the tunnel of love, often in spring when they wake up from hibernation. The tiny marsupials can cross the nearly 15-metre tunnel in just 15 seconds – sometimes too fast for remote sensing cameras to capture them. India’s tiger corridor India’s first dedicated wildlife underpasses were a hard-fought victory for environmental campaigners. The nine crossings in the Pench tiger reserve were a court-ordered mitigation measure on the country’s longest road, the 4,112km National Highway 44, which runs down the middle of the country. Collisions with big cats still happen on the multi-lane motorway, but environmentalists say the underpasses have highlighted the need for more wildlife crossings on India’s road network. A 2019 camera trapping exercise found at least 18 species use the crossings, including tigers, wild dogs, sloth bears, civets and leopards. “According to our calculation, some 55,000km of roads pass through India’s forests and protected areas, many of them through wildlife corridors,” Milind Pariwakam, a road ecologist with Wildlife Conservation Trust Mumbai, told the Hindu. More infrastructure projects now have wildlife passes, including the 1,380km Delhi-Mumbai expressway currently under construction, which includes India’s first animal bridges. Bhutan’s elephant crossing Nearly 700 Asian elephants roam Bhutan’s forest on the eastern edge of the Himalayas. The small Buddhist country sandwiched between China and India is known for its dramatic landscapes and environmental leadership, as one of the few carbon negative countries in the world. On the 183km east-west motorway, Bhutan’s first elephant underpasses were constructed to help the threatened animals move through the landscape.Monitoring from 2015 to 2017 found that 70 groups of elephants were recorded near the passes, with three-quarters passing through the structures. Sloth bridges in Costa Rica Wildlife passes are not always bridges or underpasses. In Costa Rica, canopy bridges are used to help sloths, monkeys and other wildlife cross roads to combat collisions, dog attacks and electrocutions on power lines. The rope bridges, which cost about $200 (£150), are installed by the Sloth Conservation Foundation in areas where rainforest has been interrupted by human development on the country’s Caribbean coast. Crossing roads is often deadly for the slow-moving creatures and the canopy bridges also help combat inbreeding. “People look at them and think that they’re so poorly equipped to survive because you see them crossing roads and trying to move around and they look so awkward and useless,” Rebecca Cliffe, head of the Sloth Conservation Foundation, told Bloomberg earlier this year. “But if you put them in a well-connected rainforest, then they are masters of survival.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresLondon’s benchmark stock index has finally returned to the level it stood at in February 2020 before the Covid-19 crisis sent global markets into one of the biggest panics ever seen. The FTSE 100 gained more than 1% on Wednesday morning after a two-day Christmas break, moving 50 points beyond the mark it was at just before the pandemic crash 22 months ago. It hit a high of 7,457.14 points before closing at 7,420.69, up 0.7%. The landmark came amid growing evidence that the Omicron coronavirus variant may cause less severe symptoms – although record daily UK case numbers meant Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland introduced new restrictions on Boxing Day. The FTSE 100 closed on Friday 21 February 2020 at 7,403.92. When it opened again on Monday 24 February it slumped by 3.3%, the first day of an unfolding market panic that had few precedents. The severity of the coronavirus outbreak was already clear by then in China but investors – not to mention politicians – had not yet appreciated the depth of the changes it would wreak on the global economy. The World Health Organization that day said the outbreak was not yet a “pandemic”. Yet Italy had just reported its seventh death from Covid-19, and lockdowns were in place in its northern regions, a sign of the wave of infections that was about to sweep through Europe and the rest of the world’s richest economies. China had announced its first lockdown a month earlier, on 23 January. From 21 February until its low three weeks later, the FTSE lost more than a third of its value, or 2,500 points. The 10.87% drop on 12 March 2020 was the biggest single-day loss since Black Monday in October 1987, and the second biggest in the index’s history. That became the biggest quarterly contraction in London-listed share values since 1987. It was also the fastest fall into a bear market – 20% below the previous high – ever seen on Wall Street. Yet from that low point markets surged back, thanks to a combination of extraordinary monetary stimulus from central banks such as the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of England combined with a huge bout of government spending. US markets recovered much faster than those in the UK thanks to the abundance of giant New York-listed technology companies, whose dominance was cemented by people around the world working from home during pandemic lockdowns. By contrast, the UK’s FTSE 100 is dominated by old-economy stalwarts such as oil and gas companies, mining firms and banks. The technology sector represents only 1% of the FTSE 100 by market value, compared with 40% of the S&amp;P 500, according to Refinitiv’s categorisation, which excludes other big tech-dependent gainers such as the electric carmaker Tesla. The global equity market rally has helped to bolster oil markets, which climbed to near one-month highs despite fears over recent weeks that the Omicron variant may bring a return of travel restrictions which would sap demand for transport fuels. The oil price climbed by more than 1% on Wednesday to just over $80 (£59) a barrel for the first time since late November, as traders turned their attention to data from the US which showed a slump in fuel stocks. Traders are also wary about crude supplies into the global market following a decision by the Opec oil cartel and its allies to keep a lid on their output through January, and production problems in countries including Ecuador, Libya and Nigeria. Travel stocks, which have proven particularly sensitive to coronavirus restrictions, served as a reminder that the pandemic is still likely to drag on some companies’ earnings. The British Airways owner, International Airlines Group, was the second-worst performer on Wednesday, down by 2.2%, while on the FTSE 250 holiday company Tui lost 6.1%. Oliver Males, an analyst at Spreadex, an online trading platform, said the falling value of UK travel stocks reflected record numbers of people infected with coronavirus in the US and much of Europe.The Guardian’s men’s Test team of the year is back, for its eighth edition. This year’s selectors were Ali Martin, Jonathan Liew, Rob Smyth, Emma John, Adam Collins, Tim de Lisle and myself. Eagle-eyed readers may spot that there’s not a single Australian in it. That has everything to do with the fact that when we picked our XI (before the Boxing Day Tests) the team had played only four Tests this year, all at home, and nothing to do with the Australian selector being outnumbered six to one. Promise. 1) Rohit Sharma, India 906 runs at 48 A unanimous pick. Made important contributions during India’s series win in Australia, then stepped up a gear when he made a match-defining 161 in India’s 317-run victory against England on a spinning pitch in the second Test in Chennai. He followed that with 15 consecutive double-figures innings, a run that finished with his first overseas century, another match-winning innings against England, in very different conditions, during their 157-run victory in the fourth Test at the Oval. Finishes the year as India’s white ball captain, so one of the most influential men in world cricket. 2) Dimuth Karunaratne, Sri Lanka 902 runs at 69 The captaincy has been the making of Karunaratne, who had the best year of his long career. Away from home, his 103 was the one bright spot in an embarrassing defeat to South Africa at the Wanderers, and he also batted four hours to secure a draw in the second Test on tour in West Indies. England’s 2-0 victory in Sri Lanka might have worked out differently if he’d been fit, because his home form has been imperious. He made 244, and 118 against Bangladesh, and 147 against West Indies. Is averaging 50 as skipper. 3) Kane Williamson, New Zealand (captain) 395 runs at 66 Williamson has been struggling with an elbow injury, which he nursed through tours of England and India. It meant that more than half his runs came in one innings, when he made 238 against Pakistan in Christchurch. But he was back, and right in the thick of it, for the biggest match his team played, the World Test Championship final against India in Southampton. He made an over-my-dead body 49 in the first innings, and was there unbeaten on 52 at the finish. It was a fitting reward for the most impressive captain in the sport. 4) Joe Root, England 1,708 runs at 61, 14 wickets at 30 No Englishman has had a year quite like Root did in 2021, when he finally became the truly dominant batsman he always promised to be. He started with 228 and 186 in two Tests against Sri Lanka in Galle, and followed that with his monumental 218 against India in Chennai. Back home, he peeled off 109, 180* and 121 in successive matches against India. Which meant his 89 in the first Ashes Test almost felt like a failure. Right now, he is the world’s best batsman. The shame is that, at the end of it all, his team have so few Test victories to show for it. 5) Fawad Alam, Pakistan 571 runs at 57 Ungainly, unorthodox, but irresistibly effective, Alam lapped up a first full year of Test cricket. He had spent a decade waiting for a second chance after he made his debut in 2009, 88 Tests on the sidelines, and this was his chance to show the Pakistan selectors what they had been missing. Made the top score of 109 in Pakistan’s victory over South Africa in Karachi, after the team had been 27 for four, followed it up with 140* against Zimbabwe in Harare and 124* against the West Indies at Sabina Park. He was the only century-maker on either side in all three matches. 6) Rishabh Pant, India (wicketkeeper) 706 runs at 42, 26 catches, six stumpings (not including current Test v South Africa) If the only thing Pant did in 2021 was hit that one reverse-lap sweep for four off Jimmy Anderson, you would still remember his year. As it was, his devil-may-care batting made him one of the key players in India’s series victory in Australia, where he made a crucial 97 in the draw at Sydney and an extraordinary 89* in the win at Brisbane. He worked over England, too, with 91, 58*, and 101 in the series at home. His form fell away on the return tour later in the summer but he still finished with a fine 50 at the Oval. 7) Ravichandran Ashwin, India 337 runs at 28, 52 wickets at 16 (not including current Test v South Africa) Ashwin played only eight of India’s 13 Tests this year, and somehow he still ended up as the leading wicket-taker in Test cricket (at the time of writing). After years of ceaseless tinkering and thinking, he has turned himself into the greatest spin bowler of his era. At home, he’s unplayable. He picked up 32 wickets in four Tests against England, and another 14 in two home Tests against New Zealand. In among all that, he made a handsome century against England in Chennai, and was unbeaten on 39 at stumps when India drew in Sydney. 8) Jason Holder, West Indies 253 runs at 23, 22 wickets at 23 Holder may have lost the captaincy after five and a half years in charge when the selectors replaced him with his friend Kraigg Brathwaite, but he has plenty to be getting on with, batting at No 6 or 7, often opening the bowling, and catching bullets in the field. His batting has suffered, although he played two crucial innings when he made 71* in a draw against Sri Lanka and 58 in a victory over Pakistan, and his parsimonious medium pace means he’s currently the world’s top-ranked all-rounder. 9) Kyle Jamieson, New Zealand 27 wickets at 18 Took to Test cricket like he had been built for it in a laboratory hidden somewhere in the reaches of New Zealand’s south island. He destroyed Pakistan when he took 11 for 117 in Christchurch at the start of the year and at the moment it mattered most turned in a man-of-the-match performance in the World Test Championship final. He took seven wickets in the match, including five for 31 in the first innings when he dismissed Rohit Sharma and Virat Kohli when they were threatening to run away with the game. 10) Jasprit Bumrah, India 25 wickets at 29 (not including current Test v South Africa) Bumrah is way off the sort of electric form he showed in his first year of Test cricket but with his clockwork toy action and wicked yorker, he’s one of the reliably entertaining bowlers in the game. He dominated England in the first Test of India’s summer tour at Trent Bridge, where he took four cheap wickets in one innings and five more in the other, and was even better in India’s victory at the Oval, where he turned the game on its head with a wildfire six-over spell on a tarmac-flat track late on the fifth day. 11) Shaheen Shah Afridi, Pakistan 47 wickets at 17 Still only 21, Afridi has grown into the most electric player on the international circuit. His devilish left-arm pace, all waspish full balls and ripping bouncers, cut through every team he’s played this year. He has taken wickets in New Zealand, Zimbabwe and Bangladesh, and against South Africa in Pakistan, but was at his best in the second Test against West Indies at Sabina Park, where he took career-best figures of 10 for 94. • This is an extract from the Guardian’s weekly cricket email, The Spin. To subscribe and get the full edition, just visit this page and follow the instructions.The children’s social care system in England is unfit for purpose and often puts vulnerable teenagers in greater danger, according to the former children’s commissioner. Anne Longfield now runs the Commission on Young Lives, which warns in a report that the children’s social care system is “handing over” some vulnerable teenagers to criminals and abusers by moving them “out of area” to live in dangerous unregulated accommodation that is sometimes targeted by criminals. In London, where there is a particular shortage of care places for teenagers, thousands of children in the past year have been placed outside their local borough, according to data from 22 out of 32 London boroughs gathered via freedom of information (FoI) requests. At least 1,516 looked-after children from London spent some or all of their time in placements outside the capital in 2020-21, the data shows. In addition, almost 2,000 looked-after children in London were living in semi-independent accommodation, which is often unregulated, unsuitable and, according to the commission, “a magnet for criminal and sexual exploiters”. These figures are a low estimate and are likely to be much higher across London given some boroughs with the largest numbers of children in care did not respond to the FoI request. Out of Harm’s Way, the first of the commission’s series of reports into teenagers at risk, calls for a ban on the use of unregulated accommodation for under-18s in care; the re-establishment of the government’s defunct serious violence taskforce; a new “teenager in need’ support form; and long-term funding for violence reduction units and young adder (addiction, diversion, disruption, enforcement, recovery) programmes to reduce the numbers of teenagers at risk of exploitation. The report shows how an overreliance on a limited number of residential places where demand significantly outstrips supply, inadequate early identification of those children at risk of exploitation, cuts to funding for early intervention programmes, outdated fostering models, a broken children’s home “market” and the frequent criminalisation of children in the care system is allowing too many children in care to fall into danger. The report argues that a care system that was largely designed for small children is struggling to adapt to the needs of older children, including operating inflexible hours and work practices that are not suited to the often chaotic lives of vulnerable teenagers. The commission’s report also reveals how the care system is failing some black boys. Evidence provided to the commission describes how black boys in care are more likely to go on and enter the youth justice system, and how this problem is worsening as the number of those going into care rises. Black children are already more likely to be in care compared with their share of the under-18 population, while the number of black children in care who were adopted dropped by 50% between 2015 and 2019. Longfield, the commission’s chair, said: “A children’s social care system that is supposed to protect vulnerable teenagers is frequently putting them in even greater danger. Often, we may as well be handing over children directly to ruthless gangs and criminals. It is unfit for purpose. “We know the number of vulnerable teenagers at risk of exploitation entering the care system is becoming older, with more complex and expensive needs, and growing. We also know this is putting an enormous strain on the whole children’s social care system. The recent horrific murders of two young children show the tragic consequence of a child protection system stretched to its absolute limit.” A Department for Education spokesperson said: “We recognise many vulnerable young people face new and growing risks, which is why we are providing targeted support through our specialist alternative provision and SAFE [Support, Attend, Fulfil, Exceed] taskforces, backed by £45m, to keep these young people engaged in their education and to prevent them becoming involved in criminal activity. “While the independent review of children’s social care continues, we are urgently reforming the system to address growing pressures. This includes by introducing national standards and new oversight from Ofsted for supported accommodation, and maintaining and increasing the number of places in these homes backed by £259m.”Scottish revellers planning to travel to English cities for Hogmanay celebrations have been urged to stay at home, to avoid spreading the Omicron variant. John Swinney, Scotland’s deputy first minister, said travelling to England to bypass the closure of all nightclubs in Scotland would be the “wrong course of action” and went against the spirit of Scottish policy. “People are free to take those decisions, but I would discourage them from doing so,” Swinney said on BBC Breakfast on Wednesday morning. “I think it is the wrong course of action for people to take because we have a serious situation we have got to manage and we encourage everybody to play their part in addressing that.” Swinney, the Scottish government’s Covid response minister, said the rate of spread of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 was “alarming” and rising far faster than any previous variant. Earlier this week, Scotland reported its highest ever number of daily cases reported on Sunday, at 11,030. Nicola Sturgeon, the first minister, is due to update the Scottish parliament later on Wednesday and may unveil further restrictions. She said the country should be braced for even more cases in the near future. The Scottish government ordered all nightclubs to close for at least three weeks from 27 December in an effort to suppress the latest waves. At the same time, outdoor events were limited to 500 people. The country’s main open-air Hogmanay and New Year’s Day events, including the street party and concerts organised in Edinburgh, have been cancelled. With Omicron infections surging, Scottish ministers have urged people to limit any celebrations to a maximum of three family groups. Unlike in England, where venues are being allowed to remain open, the Welsh government has also shut down nightclubs and ordered pubs to impose 1-metre social distancing. Furious business owners in Wales fear revellers will cross the border to English venues instead. Welsh urban centres are much closer to England than Scotland’s major cities. Swinney said he was asking for voluntary restraint, but his request echoes restrictions on travel over the Scotland-England border in July 2020 after a significant outbreak in the Dumfries area, with linked cases in Carlisle. That led to Nicola Sturgeon, the first minister, ordering people not to travel further than five miles from home. Swinney, the Scottish government’s Covid response minister, said: “People have got to make their own choices, they have got to follow the advice we put in place. We have the power in Scotland to put in place certain restrictions and we have done those on what we consider to be a proportionate and appropriate basis.”Simple plastic beads could save the lives of some of the thousands of porpoises and other cetaceans that get caught in fishing nets each year, scientists say. Harbour porpoises use echolocation to find their prey and for orientation. However, their acoustic signals cannot pick up the mesh of a gillnet, and as a result they often become trapped. Daniel Stepputtis, a marine biologist at the Thünen Institute of Baltic Sea Fisheries in Rostock, Germany, says a porpoise will notice floats and leadlines, “but when it detects two obstacles with a few metres of space in between, it obviously thinks ‘I can pass through there’.” Stepputtis and his colleagues have come up with an elegant new concept to make the nets visible to aquatic mammals using echolocation. They fit the nets with transparent beads made of acrylic glass. The material has approximately the same density as water, so it adds hardly any extra weight to the fishing gear. But when it is hit by biosonar, the polymer sends back an extraordinarily strong echo, warning animals that there is something ahead. The first trials of the technology, conducted off the Danish island of Funen in the western Baltic, have shown promise. Harbour porpoises hunting in the area kept clear of a bead-equipped net. Researchers recorded the acoustic signals of the animals, which should give more insight into their exact behavioural responses. The method may have some limitations, though. The scientists conducted another series of tests in the Black Sea, where a turbot fishery produces a very large bycatch of harbour porpoises. Sometimes more than a dozen are killed in a day, says Stepputtis. The researchers carried out 10 hauls each with a standard gillnet and a net fitted with the beads. Five porpoises were killed in the standard nets and two in the modified nets. Stepputtis suggests the entangled animals might have been asleep. Dormant porpoises keep on swimming but only occasionally switch on their biosonar. For this reason, Stepputtis and colleagues are also using a new acoustic alerting device that emits synthetic porpoise warning signals. In field trials, the device reduced bycatch by almost 80%. The polymer beads can be adapted for optimal resonance at the frequencies that different species use. Stepputtis says it should be able to be adapted for all species that use echolocation, including the Amazon river dolphin. Combining the two concepts has the potential to save thousands of animals, the scientists say. Every year millions of dolphins, turtles, seabirds and other marine fauna die in various kinds of fishing gears. Experts estimate the total annual toll for whale species amounts to about 300,000. Bycatch poses a serious threat to the survival of various species. Illegal gillnet fishing in the Gulf of California has pushed the vaquita to the brink of extinction, while in the north-west Atlantic, critically endangered right whales get entangled in the lines of lobster pots.It’s a now-perennial headline: Facebook has had a very bad year. Years of mounting pressure from Congress and the public culminated in repeated PR crises, blockbuster whistleblower revelations and pending regulation over the past 12 months. And while the company’s bottom line has not yet wavered, 2022 is not looking to be any better than 2021 – with more potential privacy and antitrust actions on the horizon. Here are some of the major battles Facebook has weathered in the past year. Capitol riots launch a deluge of scandals Facebook’s year started with allegations that a deadly insurrection on the US Capitol was largely planned on its platform. Regulatory uproar over the incident reverberated for months, leading lawmakers to call CEO Mark Zuckerberg before Congress to answer for his platform’s role in the attack. In the aftermath, Zuckerberg defended his decision not to take action against Donald Trump, though the former president stoked anger and separatist flames on his personal and campaign accounts. Facebook’s inaction led to a rare public employee walkout and Zuckerberg later reversed the hands-off approach to Trump. Barring Trump from Facebook platforms sparked backlash once again – this time from Republican lawmakers alleging censorship. What ensued was a months-long back-and-forth between Facebook and its independent oversight board, with each entity punting the decision of whether to keep Trump off the platform. Ultimately, Facebook decided to extend Trump’s suspension to two years. Critics said this underscored the ineffectiveness of the body. “What is the point of the oversight board?” asked the Real Oversight Board, an activist group monitoring Facebook, after the non-verdict. Whistleblowers take on Facebook The scandal with perhaps the biggest impact on the company this year came in the form of the employee-turned-whistleblower Frances Haugen, who leaked internal documents that exposed some of the inner workings of Facebook and just how much the company knew about the harmful effects its platform was having on users and society. Haugen’s revelations, first reported by the Wall Street Journal, showed Facebook was aware of many of its grave public health impacts and had the means to mitigate them – but chose not to do so. For instance, documents show that since at least 2019, Facebook has studied the negative impact Instagram had on teenage girls and yet did little to mitigate the harms and publicly denied that was the case. Those findings in particular led Congress to summon company executives to multiple hearings on the platform and teen users. Facebook has since paused its plans to launch an Instagram app for kids and introduced new safety measures encouraging users to take breaks if they use the app for long periods of time. In a Senate hearing on 8 December, the Instagram executive Adam Mosseri called on Congress to launch an independent body tasked with regulating social media more comprehensively, sidestepping calls for Instagram to regulate itself. Haugen also alleged Facebook’s tweaks to its algorithm, which turned off some safeguards intended to fight misinformation, may have led to the Capitol attack. She provided information underscoring how little of its resources it dedicates to moderating non-English language content. In response to the Haugen documents, Congress has promised legislation and drafted a handful of new bills to address Facebook’s power. One controversial measure would target Section 230, a portion of the Communications Decency Act that exempts companies from liability for content posted on their platforms. Haugen was not the only whistleblower to take on Facebook in 2021. In April, the former Facebook data scientist turned whistleblower Sophie Zhang revealed to the Guardian that Facebook repeatedly allowed world leaders and politicians to use its platform to deceive the public or harass opponents. Zhang has since been called to testify on these findings before parliament in the UK and India. Lawmakers around the world are eager to hear from the Facebook whistleblowers. Haugen also testified in the UK regarding the documents she leaked, telling MPs Facebook “prioritizes profit over safety”. Such testimony is likely to influence impending legislation, including the Online Safety Bill: a proposed act in the UK that would task the communications authority Ofcom with regulating content online and requiring tech firms to protect users from harmful posts or face substantial fines. Zuckerberg and Cook feud over Apple update Though Apple has had its fair share of regulatory battles, Facebook did not find an ally in its fellow tech firm while facing down the onslaught of consumer and regulatory pressure that 2021 brought. The iPhone maker in April launched a new notification system to alert users when and how Facebook was tracking their browsing habits, supposedly as a means to give them more control over their privacy. Facebook objected to the new policy, arguing Apple was doing so to “self-preference their own services and targeted advertising products”. It said the feature would negatively affect small businesses relying on Facebook to advertise. Apple pressed on anyway, rolling it out in April and promising additional changes in 2022. Preliminary reports suggest Apple is, indeed, profiting from the change while Google and Facebook have seen advertising profits fall. Global outage takes out all Facebook products In early October, just weeks after Haugen’s revelations, things took a sudden turn for the worse when the company faced a global service outage. Perhaps Facebook’s largest and most sustained tech failure in recent history, the glitch left billions of users unable to access Facebook, Instagram or Whatsapp for six hours on 4 and 5 October. Facebook’s share price dropped 4.9% that day, cutting Zuckerberg’s personal wealth by $6bn, according to Bloomberg. Other threats to Facebook As Facebook faces continuing calls for accountability, its time as the wunderkind of Silicon Valley has come to a close and it has become a subject of bipartisan contempt. Republicans repeatedly have accused Facebook of being biased against conservatism, while liberals have targeted the platform for its monopolistic tendencies and failure to police misinformation. In July, the Biden administration began to take a harder line with the company over vaccine misinformation – which Joe Biden said was “killing people” and the US surgeon general said was “spreading like wildfire” on the platform. Meanwhile, the appointment of the antitrust thought leader Lina Khan to head of the FTC spelled trouble for Facebook. She has been publicly critical of the company and other tech giants in the past, and in August refiled a failed FTC case accusing Facebook of anti-competitive practices. After a year of struggles, Facebook has thrown something of a Hail Mary: changing its name. The company announced it would now be called Meta, a reference to its new “metaverse” project, which will create a virtual environment where users can spend time. The name change was met with derision and skepticism from critics. But it remains to be seen whether Facebook, by any other name, will beat the reputation that precedes it.It’s January and we are ritualistic creatures: a Christmas of decadence and overindulgence often means that the new year starts with our take on “healthy”. I’m not usually one for months without cakes or desserts, because I love them and they’re my job, but nonetheless I genuinely enjoy these wholemeal banana pancakes. They aren’t sickly-sweet and they utilise the wholemeal flour and oats that I often have sitting in my cupboard. Wholemeal banana pancakes Prep 20 min Cook 10 min Makes 4, to serve 2 2 ripe bananas (about 90g each) 1 egg 2 tsp honey 2 tbsp ricotta 50g wholemeal flour 20g rolled oats 1 pinch salt ½ tsp baking powder 20g unsalted butter Maple syrup, honey, peanut butter and extra bananas, to serve In a large bowl, mash the bananas with a fork, then stir in the egg, honey and ricotta. Mix the dry ingredients in a separate bowl, then add to the banana mix and combine gently to make a batter. Leave to rest for 10 minutes. Meanwhile, heat a heavy-based frying pan. Add the butter, swirl to coat the pan, then tip the melted butter into the batter bowl and stir it through. Drop two dollops of the batter mixture into the pan, cook until the two pancakes look dry around the edges and have a few bubbles on top, then gently flip and cook for a few minutes on the other side. Transfer to a plate, cover with a tea towel and keep warm while you repeat with the remaining batter. Serve warm with maple syrup, honey, peanut butter or more banana. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoIt is easy to dismiss self-help books and those who read them. But not only do we need serious self-help, we must also take self-help more seriously. Valued at $11bn (£8bn) worldwide, self-help is a major global industry. It both reflects and generates many of our prevailing ideas about the self and about the cultures in which we live. The self-help industry not only seeks to shape the way in which we think, feel and behave, but also provides many of the core metaphors on which we rely to talk about our inner lives. Many of those metaphors, not least that of the mind as a computer that might require reprogramming, are at best unhelpful. Critics of self-help believe that its current popularity is part of an all-pervasive neoliberal imperative to maximise efficiency. They see it as a sinister plot to direct all responsibility for our wellbeing back upon ourselves. Self-help, they feel, casts all our problems as personal, and our failures as owing to a lack of willpower and resilience, when they are in fact caused by the politics of capitalism. But while this may be true of some self-help, the idea of self-improvement has a long and rich history, extending back to ancient wisdom traditions. The wish to improve ourselves is bound up with our need for self-knowledge, for mastery and for transformation. It is a timeless desire and an essential part of what makes us human. And some self-improvement literature really can help us to become better people. I mean better not in a competitive but in an ethical sense: the improved self is more able to direct attention outwards, towards projects, other people and the communities of which we are a part. 1. Meditations by Marcus Aurelius The Roman emperor and Stoic philosopher Marcus Aurelius (AD 121–180) believed that all suffering is in our minds. Suffering is caused not by external events but by our reactions to those events – by faulty judgments and unrealistic expectations. Given that most external events are beyond our control, Aurelius argues in his Meditations that it is pointless to worry about them. Our evaluations of these events, by contrast, are completely within our control. It follows that all our mental energies should be directed inwards, with a view to controlling our minds. The key to a happy life, then, lies in adjusting our expectations, because “only a madman looks for figs in winter”. 2. Feeling Good: The New Mood Therapy by David D Burns (1980) The science underpinning Burns’s book may no longer be cutting-edge, but its core message remains a powerfully relevant one. A more down-to-earth version of Stoicism, it is based on the premises of cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT). Feeling Good illustrates how our feelings are shaped by our thoughts, and contains some great techniques for training our minds to question negative thinking about ourselves and others. 3. The Happiness Trap by Russ Harris (2007) We are, of course, not purely rational creatures. Sometimes our attempts to control our thoughts can become counter-productive. Here, Australian psychologist Harris explains the principles of acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT). He invites us not to try to control our negative thoughts or uncomfortable feelings, but simply to de-fuse with them, to accept them and then to let them go. That way we have more energy to commit to value-based action. 4. Tao Te Ching by Lao Tzu Spiritual self-cultivation through the art of letting go is the central theme of the Tao Te Ching (the classic study of “The Way and Virtue”, usually dated to the sixth or fourth century BC). In Daoism, letting go centres on the idea of offering no resistance to the natural order of things. It promotes a sophisticated form of submitting our will to cosmic forces, by accepting what is and loosening our attachments to our desires and expectations of specific outcomes. The Tao suggests that we can improve ourselves by returning to a simpler, more authentic and intuitive way of life. A key concept is wu wei – “non-action” or “effortless action”. Wu wei can perhaps best be described as a spiritual state marked by acceptance of what is and the absence of selfish desires. 5. The Power of Now: A Guide Book to Spiritual Enlightenment by Eckhart Tolle (1998) We are not our thoughts, argues Tolle in this bestselling book. Most of our thoughts, Tolle writes, revolve around the past or the future. Our past furnishes us with an identity, while the future holds “the promise of salvation”. Both are illusions, because the present moment is all we ever really have. We therefore need to learn to be present as “watchers” of our minds, witnessing our thought patterns rather than identifying with them. That way, we can relearn to live truly in the now. 6. Altruism: The Science and Psychology of Kindness by Matthieu Ricard (2015) In many theologies and wisdom traditions, altruism is the highest moral and spiritual value. More recently, psychologists have shown that altruistic acts not only benefit the recipient but also lead those who perform them to be happier. Moreover, practising altruism, the French Buddhist monk Ricard argues, is the key not just to our personal happiness but also to solving our most pressing social, economic and environmental problems. Altruism enables us “to connect harmoniously the challenges of the economy in the short term, quality of life in the mid-term, and our future environment in the long term”. 7. Walden by Henry David Thoreau (1854) The American transcendentalist philosopher Thoreau famously withdrew to a cabin in the woods near Walden Pond, in Concord, Massachusetts, where he sought to live simply and “deliberately”. It was there that he developed the intriguing notion of “life cost” – the perfect antidote to unthinking materialism and the toxic Protestant work ethic to which so many of us are still enslaved. Most of us find it normal to trade our life time for goods, believing that productivity and success are secular signs of grace. Thoreau saw paid work as a necessary evil to which we should dedicate as little time as possible. His aim was not to work a single minute more than was necessary to cover his most basic living expenses, and to spend all his remaining time doing what he truly cherished. 8. Grit by Angela Duckworth (2017) According to the psychologist Angela Duckworth, grit tops talent every time. That is music to the ears of anyone inclined to identify with Aesop’s plodding tortoise rather than the effortlessly speedy hare. “Our potential is one thing. What we do with it is quite another,” she writes. Here grit is a drive to improve both our skills and our performance by consistent effort. Gritty people are always eager to learn and are driven by an enduring passion. They learn from their mistakes, have direction and live more coherent lives. 9. The Divine Comedy by Dante Alighieri (1308–21) This 14th-century poem chronicles the gradual overcoming of the middle-aged and burned-out Dante’s spiritual weariness. Guided by his mentor Virgil, he journeys from Hell to Paradise, where he is eventually reunited with his beloved Beatrice. The epic can be read as a cautionary Christian tale or as an extended revenge fantasy in which many of Dante’s personal enemies get their gruesome come-uppance. But we can also read it as an archetypal story of spiritual growth and self-overcoming. The doubting Dante is systematically re-educated by his many encounters in Hell, Purgatory and Heaven. The inhabitants of Hell show him how not to live his life, and the costs of their bad choices. In the end, purged of his own weaknesses, Dante reaches a higher spiritual plane and glimpses the divine. 10. The Epic of Gilgamesh (circa 2100–1200 BCE) Almost all forms of self-improvement resemble a quest narrative or a heroic journey. Such narratives show the hero or heroine venturing into the unknown – a dark wood, an underground kingdom or the belly of a beast. There they encounter obstacles and often have to battle with an enemy or a temptation. Having overcome these challenges, they return from their adventures transformed and ready to share what they have learned to help others. The oldest surviving narrative of this kind recounts how the formerly selfish Mesopotamian king Gilgamesh returns from the wilderness bearing the plant of eternal life. Rather than eating it himself, he shares his boon with his people. Anna Katharina Schaffner is Professor of Cultural History at the University of Kent. Her book The Art of Self-Improvement: Ten Timeless Truths is published by Yale University Press.Community care services have been hit by staff absences and increasing numbers of patients as Omicron cases have continued to rise in England. Community care, particularly nursing, could end up being rationed, the Royal College of Nursing has said. We would like to hear from people affected by these staff shortages. Are you struggling to access community services for yourself or a loved one? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Inflation is near a 40-year high. Central banks around the world just promised to intervene. However, a critical factor that is driving up prices remains largely overlooked: an explosion in profits. In 2021, US non-financial profit margins have reached levels not seen since the aftermath of the second world war. This is no coincidence. The end of the war required a sudden restructuring of production which created bottlenecks similar to those caused by the pandemic. Then and now large corporations with market power have used supply problems as an opportunity to increase prices and scoop windfall profits. The Federal Reserve has taken a hawkish turn this month. But cutting monetary stimulus will not fix supply chains. What we need instead is a serious conversation about strategic price controls – just like after the war. Today economists are divided into two camps on the inflation question: team Transitory argues we ought not to worry about inflation since it will soon go away. Team Stagflation urges for fiscal restraint and a raise in interest rates. But there is a third option: the government could target the specific prices that drive inflation instead of moving to austerity which risks a recession. To use a metaphor: if your house is on fire, you would not want to wait until the fire eventually dies out. Neither do you wish to destroy the house by flooding it. A skillful firefighter extinguishes the fire where it is burning to prevent contagion and save the house. History teaches us that such a targeted approach is also possible for price increases. The White House Council of Economic Advisers suggests that the best historical analogy for today’s inflation is the aftermath of the second world war. Then and now there was pent up demand thanks to high household savings. During the war this was a result of rising incomes and rationing; during Covid-19 that of stimulus checks and shutdowns. At both times supply chains were disrupted. This is as far as the White House advisers’ interpretation of the parallel between the two episodes goes. What they do not tell us is that the inflation after the war was not without an alternative. During the second world war the Roosevelt administration imposed strict price controls and instituted the Office of Price Administration. In comparison with the first world war, price rises were low, while the increase in output was almost beyond imagination. After the war, the question was what to do with the price controls. Should they be released in one big bang as southern Democrats, Republicans and big business were urging? Or did price controls have a role to play in the transition to a postwar economy? Some of the most distinguished American economists of the 20th century called for a continuation of price controls in the New York Times. This included the likes of Paul Samuelson, Irving Fisher, Frank Knight, Simon Kuznets, Paul Sweezy and Wesley Mitchell, as well as 11 former presidents of the American Economic Association. The reasons they presented for price controls also apply to our present situation. They argued that as long as bottlenecks made it impossible for supply to meet demand, price controls for important goods should be continued to prevent prices from shooting up. The tsar of wartime price controls, John Kenneth Galbraith, joined these calls. He explained “the role of price controls” would be “strategic”. “No more than the economist ever supposed will it stop inflation,” he added. “But it both establishes the base and gains the time for the measures that do.” President Truman was aware of the risks of ending price controls. On 30 October 1945, he warned that after the first world war, the US had “simply pulled off the few controls that had been established, and let nature take its course”. And he urged, “The result should stand as a lesson to all of us. A dizzy upward spiral of wages and the cost of living ended in the crash of 1920 – a crash that spread bankruptcy and foreclosure and unemployment throughout the Nation.” Nevertheless, price controls were pulled in 1946, again triggering inflation and a boom-bust cycle. Today, there is once more a choice between tolerating the ongoing explosion of profits that drives up prices or tailored controls on carefully selected prices. Price controls would buy time to deal with bottlenecks that will continue as long as the pandemic prevails. Strategic price controls could also contribute to the monetary stability needed to mobilize public investments towards economic resilience, climate change mitigation and carbon-neutrality. The cost of waiting for inflation to go away is high. Senator Manchin’s withdrawal from the Build Back Better Act demonstrates the threat of a shrinking policy space at a time when large scale government action is in order. Austerity would be even worse: it risks manufacturing stagflation. We need a systematic consideration of strategic price controls as a tool in the broader policy response to the enormous macroeconomic challenges instead of pretending there is no alternative beyond wait-and-see or austerity. Isabella Weber is an assistant professor of economics at the University of Massachusetts Amherst and the author of How China Escaped Shock TherapyPubs, bars and restaurants missed out on more than £10,000 each in the week leading up to Christmas, figures show, as concern about the Omicron variant and government guidance to work from home ruined the crucial festive period for the second year in a row. Sales were down by as much as 60% compared with the same period in 2019, according to the trade body UKHospitality. Trading had been close to pre-pandemic levels before the emergence of Omicron but plummeted as consumer confidence collapsed, it said. Work from home guidance meant city centre venues were particularly hard hit, while takings at the average venue were down £10,335 compared with 2019 levels on a nationwide basis. Kate Nicholls, UKHospitality’s chief executive, said the figures showed that the government should not impose any new restrictions affecting the sector and should increase the level of government support on offer. Before Christmas, Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, announced a package of measures to help the sector, including grants of up to £6,000. However, the UKHospitality figures suggest venues have lost considerably more than the value of the grants in a single week. “Hospitality businesses have been hit hard during a key trading period – and this after missing out on the crucial Christmas and new year sales last year,” Nicholls said. “Restrictions must be kept to a minimum and must be lifted as quickly as possible to help an already beleaguered sector or many will simply not survive – and those who do make it through face a return to 20% VAT in April.” UKHospitality and businesses within the sector have repeatedly called on the government to extend the temporary lower VAT rate of 12.5% for hospitality, or even to return it to the emergency 5% rate that was in place until October this year. While hospitality has been hard hit by measures intended to slow the spread of Covid-19, figures suggest that the pandemic is yet to have a significant effect on pub closures. The number of pubs in England and Wales dropped by 400 during 2021 to 40,173. However, the rate of decline was slower than in previous years. England and Wales lost 446 pubs in 2020 and 473 in 2019, the last full year with no pandemic effect. The steepest fall in recent years occurred in 2018, when 918 pubs were lost during the year.Sajid Javid has criticised the Welsh government for limiting outdoor gatherings after parkrun decided to cancel its events. The UK health secretary tweeted: “Parkrun has helped so many people improve their health across the UK. I can’t see how restricting outdoor exercise in this way is justified or proportionate.” Since 26 December, all outdoor gatherings of 50 or more adults have been prohibited in Wales. The rule prompted parkrun to put a temporary stop to its Welsh events, which often attract more than that number. Junior parkruns, which are for children aged four to 14, can continue. Parkruns in England, Scotland and Northern Ireland have been going ahead as usual. “We know that some Welsh parkrun events regularly have fewer than 50 people attending. However, it would take a very small influx (at what is typically a very busy time of year) for them to exceed the limit,” parkrun said in a statement. “We understand that this news will be incredibly disappointing to many Welsh parkrunners, and we’d like to reassure you all that we will do everything we can to bring parkrun events back across Wales as soon as these restrictions are lifted.” The former communities secretary Robert Jenrick called the Welsh decision on outdoor gatherings “madness”. He tweeted: “Having worked with councils to restart parkrun in England this summer, it would be madness to stop it again in Wales or elsewhere. It’s outdoors, and quite obviously brings huge health benefits.” The Welsh Athletics boss James Williams also called on Wales’s government to reconsider the move. “Of all the activities that can’t take place, sadly the one that probably provides the biggest health benefit to everyone across Wales is the one activity that sadly has to stop,” he told the BBC Radio Wales Breakfast programme. This month researchers estimated that UK parkrun – which organises free 5km runs every Saturday morning – generates at least £150m in health and wellbeing impact each year.John Terry is set for a return to Chelsea next month after agreeing to take up a part-time role as a coaching consultant in the club’s academy. The former England captain has been looking for a fresh opportunity after leaving his role as Aston Villa’s assistant manager last summer. Terry is keen to become a manager and hopes to gain more coaching experience by working with Chelsea’s youngsters. The 41-year-old, who is regarded as one of the greatest players in Chelsea’s history, will contribute to coaching discussions with colleagues, mentor academy players and support parent dialogue. The Stamford Bridge club said that the flexibility will allow Terry to continue his coaching development and maintain other commitments. “We are delighted to be welcoming John back to Cobham in a role that will involve coaching and mentoring the next generation of young players in our Academy,” Neil Bath, Chelsea’s academy director, said. “It goes without saying that John’s experience in the game, both as a world-class player and more recently as an assistant coach in the Premier League, will be invaluable for everyone in the building. He will be a great mentor for our players and a fantastic asset to our coaching staff. We can’t wait for him to get started.” Terry joined Chelsea as a 14-year-old scholar and went on to enjoy an illustrious playing career. He became Chelsea’s captain and established himself as one of the best defenders in the world before joining Villa in 2017. Terry would go on to enjoy his time at Villa Park. He became Dean Smith’s assistant after retiring in October 2018 and helped Villa win promotion from the Championship in 2019. Chelsea have been keen to bring former players back to the club. Petr Cech, their former goalkeeper, is the club’s technical and performance adviser and Paulo Ferreira, Ashley Cole, Carlo Cudicini and Claude Makélélé have roles.The west is “sleepwalking into the biggest humanitarian crisis of our times” in Afghanistan, Gordon Brown has warned, as he called for a support package to save the country from economic and social collapse after the Taliban’s takeover. Four months after the western-backed government was overthrown following a mass military withdrawal, the former UK prime minister said the case for action was not based only on morals but also “in our self-interest”. He said more than half the Afghan population was facing extreme hunger, including 1 million children at risk of starving to death, citing International Monetary Fund predictions that the country’s economy would contract by 20-30% in the next year. “No country in recent times is suffering from such ‘universal poverty’ in the way that Afghanistan may do,” Brown wrote in an article for the Times. “It is ironic that when the whole international community is pledged to achieve the sustainable development goals – to free all the world from absolute poverty this decade – almost every citizen of Afghanistan will be condemned to that dire fate. “Instead of no absolute poverty in any country, we will have the horror of practically an entire country living in absolute poverty.” Brown stressed the effects may be felt within Europe, given thousands of Afghans would be faced with the choice of starving or emigrating. About $4.5bn (£3.3bn) should be pledged by countries to the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Brown urged, adding that the “largest humanitarian response ever agreed for a single nation” was required. He continued: “It cost America trillions to fight the war in Afghanistan. It is not beyond our capacity to find $4bn to prevent starvation amid this uneasy peace. “This tragedy foretold cannot be a tragedy unresolved.” Brown also said the frantic military retreat from Afghanistan, when tens of thousands of people tried to flee on evacuation flights before the last troops pulled out, signalled the end of the notion allies could “impose liberal western values overnight” in other countries. However, speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, he cautioned: “What it cannot do is remove the obligation on each of us to understand that we are in an integrated and interconnected world where we are all affected by decisions that are made in other countries and we have got to do something to help those, particularly those who face starvation. “Otherwise, not just for moral reasons but for self-interested reasons, this will come back to haunt us.” According to the Disasters Emergency Committee, 8 million people are on the brink of famine in Afghanistan, while 95% of the entire population does not have enough to eat. The situation has been compounded by the Covid pandemic and the worst drought in 27 years – and is expected to get worse through the winter as temperatures drop. Prince Charles, who is a patron of the International Rescue Committee UK, recently urged people to donate to its fundraiser, calling the situation in Afghanistan “truly catastrophic”. Damning new light was shed on the UK’s handling of its withdrawal from Afghanistan earlier this month, when a Foreign Office whistleblower who helped sort requests for evacuation revealed the chaos and confusion at the heart of the operation. He said the government falsely claimed each request was logged, prioritisations were made with little consistency or checks and there was a lack of staff, experience and equipment.On the brink of a new year, the world faces a daunting array of challenges: the resurgent Covid-19 pandemic, the climate emergency, the struggle between democracy and authoritarianism, humanitarian crises, mass migration, and trans-national terrorism. There is the risk of new inter-state conflicts, exacerbated by the breakdown of the rules-based international order, and the spread of lethal autonomous weapons. All in all, for most people on Earth – and a handful in space – 2022 will be another year of living dangerously. Middle East Events in the Middle East will make global headlines again in 2022 – but for positive as well as negative reasons. A cause for optimism is football’s World Cup, which kicks off in Qatar in November. It’s the first time an Arab or a Muslim country has hosted the tournament. It is expected to provide a major fillip for the Gulf region in terms of future business and tourism – and, possibly, more open, progressive forms of governance. But the choice of Qatar, overshadowed by allegations of corruption, was controversial from the start. Its human rights record will come under increased scrutiny. Its treatment of low-paid migrant workers is another flashpoint. The Guardian revealed that at least 6,500 workers have died since Qatar got the nod from Fifa in 2010, killed while building seven new stadiums, roads and hotels, and a new airport. Concerns will also persist about Qatar’s illiberal attitude to free speech and women’s and LGBTQ+ rights in a country where it remains dangerous to openly criticise the government and where homosexuality is illegal. But analysts suggest most fans will not focus on these issues, which could make Qatar 2022 the most successful example of “sports-washing” to date. More familiar subjects will otherwise dominate the regional agenda. Foremost is the question of whether Israel and/or the US will take new military and/or economic steps to curb Iran’s attempts, which Tehran denies, to acquire capability to build nuclear weapons. Israel has been threatening air strikes if slow-moving talks to revive the 2015 nuclear deal fail. Even football fans could not ignore a war in the Gulf. Attention will focus on Turkey’s authoritarian president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, whose neo-Islamist AKP party will mark 20 years in power in 2022. Erdoğan’s rule has grown increasingly oppressive at home, while his aggressive foreign policy, rows with the EU and US, on-off collusion with Russia over Syria and chronic economic mismanagement could have unpredictable consequences. Other hotspots are likely to be Lebanon – tottering on the verge of becoming a failed state like war-torn Yemen – and ever-chaotic Libya. Close attention should also be paid to Palestine, where the unpopular president, Mahmoud Abbas’s postponement of elections, Israeli settler violence and West Bank land-grabs, and the lack of an active peace process all loom large. Asia Pacific The eyes of the world will be on China at the beginning and the end of the year, and quite possibly in the intervening period as well. The Winter Olympics open in Beijing in February. But the crucial question, for sports fans, of who tops the medals table may be overshadowed by diplomatic boycotts by the US, UK and other countries in protest at China’s serial human rights abuses. They fear the Games may become a Chinese Communist party propaganda exercise. The CCP’s 20th national congress, due towards the end of the year, will be the other headline-grabber. President Xi Jinping is hoping to secure an unprecedented third five-year term, which, if achieved, would confirm his position as China’s most powerful leader since Mao Zedong. There will also be jostling for senior positions in the Politburo and Politburo standing committee. It will not necessarily all go Xi’s way. Western analysts differ sharply over how secure Xi’s position truly is. A slowing economy, a debt crisis, an ageing population, huge environmental and climate-related challenges, and US-led attempts to “contain” China by signing up neighbouring countries are all putting pressure on Xi. Yet, as matters stand, 2022 is likely to see ongoing, bullish attempts to expand China’s global economic and geopolitical influence. A military attack on Taiwan, which Xi has vowed to re-conquer by any or all means, could change everything. India, China’s biggest regional competitor, may continue to punch below its weight on the world stage. In what could be a symbolically important moment, its total population could soon match or exceed China’s 1.41 billion, according to some estimates. Yet at the same time, Indian birth rates and average family sizes are falling. Not so symbolic, and more dangerous, are unresolved Himalayan border disputes between these two giant neighbours, which led to violence in 2020-21 and reflect a broader deterioration in bilateral relations. The popularity of Narendra Modi, India’s authoritarian prime minister, has taken a dive of late, due to the pandemic and a sluggish economy. He was forced into an embarrassing U-turn on farm “reform” and is accused of using terrorism laws to silence critics. His BJP party will try to regain lost ground in a string of state elections in 2022. Modi’s policy of stronger ties with the west, exemplified by the Quad alliance (India, the US, Japan, Australia), will likely be reinforced, adding to China’s discomfort. Elsewhere in Asia, violent repression in Myanmar and the desperate plight of the Afghan people following the Taliban takeover will likely provoke more western hand-wringing than concrete action. Afghanistan totters on the brink of disaster. “We’re looking at 23 million people marching towards starvation,” says David Beasley of the World Food Programme. “The next six months are going to be catastrophic.” North Korea’s nuclear brinkmanship may bring a showdown as Kim Jong-un’s paranoid regime sends mixed signals about war and peace. The Philippines will elect a new president; the foul-mouthed incumbent, Rodrigo Duterte, is limited to a single term. Unfortunately this is not the case with Scott Morrison, who will seek re-election as Australia’s prime minister. Europe It will be a critical year for Europe as the EU and national leaders grapple with tense internal and external divisions, the social and economic impact of the unending pandemic, migration and the newly reinforced challenges, post-Cop26, posed by net zero emissions targets. More fundamentally, Europe must decide whether it wants to be taken seriously as a global actor, or will surrender its international influence to China, the US and malign regimes such as Vladimir Putin’s Russia. The tone may be set by spring elections in France and Hungary, where rightwing populist forces are again pushing divisive agendas. Viktor Orbán, the authoritarian Hungarian leader who has made a mockery of the EU over rule of law, democracy and free speech issues, will face a united opposition for the first time. His fate will be watched closely in Poland, the Czech Republic, Slovenia and other EU member states where reactionary far-right parties flourish. Emmanuel Macron, the neo-Gaullist centrist who came from nowhere in 2017, will ask French voters for a second term in preference to his avowedly racist, Islamophobic rivals, Marine Le Pen and Éric Zemmour. Polls put him ahead, although he also faces what could be a strong challenge from the centre-right Republicans, whose candidate, Valérie Pécresse, is the first woman to lead the conservatives. With the left in disarray, the election could radicalise France in reactionary ways. Elections are also due in Sweden, Serbia and Austria. Germany’s new SPD-led coalition government will come under close scrutiny as it attempts to do things differently after the long years of Angela Merkel’s reign. Despite some conciliatory pledges, friction will be hard to avoid with the European Commission, led by Merkel ally Ursula von der Leyen, and with France and other southern EU members over budgetary policy and debt. France assumes the EU presidency in January and Macron will try to advance his ideas about common defence and security policy – what he calls “strategic autonomy”. Macron’s belief that Europe must stand up for itself in a hostile world will be put to the test on a range of fronts, notably Ukraine. Analysts suggest rising Russian military pressure, including a large border troop build-up and a threat to deploy nuclear missiles, could lead to renewed conflict early in the year as Nato hangs back. Other trigger issues include Belarus’s weaponising of migration (and the continuing absence of a humane pan-European migration policy) and brewing separatist trouble in Bosnia-Herzegovina and the Balkans. The EU is planning a China summit, but there is no consensus over how to balance business and human rights. In isolated, increasingly impoverished Britain, Brexit buyers’ remorse looks certain to intensify. Relations with the US, which takes a dim view of European autonomy but appears ambivalent over Ukraine, may prove tense at times. Nato, its credibility damaged post-Afghanistan, faces a difficult year as it seeks a new secretary-general. Smart money says a woman could get the top job for the first time. The former UK prime minister Theresa May has been mentioned – but the French will not want a Brit. Latin America The struggle to defeat Jair Bolsonaro, Brazil’s notorious rightwing president, in national elections due in October looks set to produce an epic battle with international ramifications. Inside Brazil, Bolsonaro has been widely condemned for his lethally negligent handling of the Covid pandemic. Over half a million Brazilians have died, more than in any country bar the US. Beyond Brazil, Bolsonaro is reviled for his climate change denial and the accelerated destruction of the Amazon rainforest. Opinion polls show that, should he stand, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, the former president who was jailed and then cleared on corruption charges, would easily beat Bolsonaro. But that assumes a fair fight. Concern is growing that American supporters of Donald Trump are coaching the Bolsonaro camp on how to steal an election or mount a coup to overturn the result, as Trump tried and failed to do in Washington a year ago. Fears grow that Trump-style electoral subversion may find more emulators around the world. Surveys in Europe suggest support for rightwing populist-nationalist politicians is waning, but that may not be the case in South America, outside Brazil, and other parts of the developing world in 2022. Populism feeds off the gap between corrupt “elites” and so-called “ordinary people”, and in many poorer countries, that gap, measured in wealth and power, is growing. In Cuba, Nicaragua, Haiti and Venezuela, supposed champions of the people have become their oppressors, and this phenomenon looks set to continue. In Chile, the presidential election’s first round produced strong support for José Antonio Kast, a hard-right Pinochet apologist, though he was ultimately defeated by Gabriel Boric, a leftist former student leader, who will become the country’s youngest leader after storming to a resounding victory in a run-off. Argentina’s president, Alberto Fernández, faces a different kind of problem in what looks like a tough year ahead, after elections in which his Peronists, one of the world’s oldest populist parties, lost their majority in Congress for the first time in nearly 40 years. Mexico’s president, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, will face ongoing tensions with the US over trade, drugs and migration from Central America. But at least he no longer has to put up with Trump’s insults – for now. North America All eyes will be on the campaign for November’s mid-term elections when the Democrats will attempt to fend off a Republican bid to re-take control of the Senate and House of Representatives. The results will inevitably be viewed as a referendum on Joe Biden’s presidency. If the GOP does well in the battleground states, Donald Trump – who still falsely claims to have won the 2020 election – will almost certainly decide to run for a second term in 2024. Certain issues will have nationwide resonance: in particular, progress (or otherwise) in stemming the pandemic and ongoing anti-vax resistance; the economy, with prices and interest rates set to rise; and divisive social issues such as migration, race and abortion rights, with the supreme court predicted to overrule or seriously weaken provisions of the landmark 1973 Roe v Wade decision. The Democrats’ biggest problem in 2022 may be internal party divisions. The split between so-called progressives and moderates, especially in the Senate, undermined Biden’s signature social care and infrastructure spending bills, which were watered down. Some of the focus will be on Biden himself: whether he will run again in 2024, his age (he will be 80 in November), his mental agility and his ability to deliver his agenda. His mid-December minus-7 approval rating may prove hard to turn around. Also under the microscope is Kamala Harris, the vice-president, who is said to be unsettled and under-performing – at least by those with an interest is destabilising the White House. Pete Buttigieg, the transportation secretary who sought the Democratic nomination in 2020, is a man to watch, as a possible replacement for Harris or even for Biden, should the president settle for one term. Concern has grown, meanwhile, over whether the mid-terms will be free and fair, given extraordinary efforts by Republican state legislators to make it harder to vote and even harder for opponents to win gerrymandered congressional districts and precincts with in-built GOP majorities. One survey estimates Republicans will flip at least five House seats thanks to redrawn, absurdly distorted voting maps. This could be enough to assure a Republican House majority before voting even begins. Pressure from would-be Central American migrants on the southern US border will likely be a running story in 2022 – a problem Harris, who was tasked with dealing with it, has fumbled so far. She and Biden are accused of continuing Trump’s harsh policies. Belief in Biden’s competence has also been undermined by the chaotic Afghan withdrawal, which felt to many like a Vietnam-scale humiliation. Another big foreign policy setback or overseas conflagration – such as a Russian land-grab in Ukraine, direct Chinese aggression against Taiwan or an Israel-Iran conflict – has potential to suck in US forces and wreck Biden’s presidency. In Canada, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau is expected to push new policy initiatives on affordable childcare and housing after winning re-election in September. But in 2021’s snap election his Liberals attracted the smallest share of the popular vote of any winning party in history, suggesting the Trudeau magic is wearing thin. Disputes swirl over alleged corruption, pandemic management, trade with the US and carbon reduction policy. Africa As befits this giant continent, some of 2022’s biggest themes will play out across Africa. Among the most striking is the fraught question of whether Africans, still largely unvaccinated, will pay a huge, avoidable price for the developed world’s monopolising of vaccines, its reluctance to distribute surpluses and share patents – and from the pandemic’s myriad, knock-on health and economic impacts. This question in turn raises another: will such selfishness rebound on the wealthy north, as former UK prime minister Gordon Brown has repeatedly warned? The sudden spread of Omicron, first identified in South Africa, suggests more Covid variants could emerge in 2022. Yet once again, the response of developed countries may be to focus on domestic protection, not international cooperation. The course of the global pandemic in 2022 – both in terms of the threat to health and economic prosperity – is ultimately unknowable. But in many African countries, with relatively young populations less vulnerable to severe Covid harms, the bigger problem may be the negative impact on management of other diseases. It’s estimated 25 million people in Africa will live with HIV-Aids in 2022. Malaria claims almost 400,000 lives in a typical year. Treatment of these diseases, and others such as TB and diabetes, may deteriorate further as a result of Covid-related strains on healthcare systems. Replacing the Middle East, Africa has become the new ground zero for international terrorism, at least in the view of many analysts. This trend looks set to continue in 2022. The countries of the Sahel, in particular, have seen an upsurge of radical Islamist groups, mostly home-grown, yet often professing allegiance to global networks such as al-Qaida and Islamic State. Western efforts to counter this upsurge in jihadist violence may become more organised in 2022. This follows a cooperation agreement between the US and French presidents Joe Biden and Emmanuel Macron, who had wound down French military operations in Mali for lack of support. Western governments are watching with alarm the spread of radical Islamist ideas from key countries in west Africa, such as Nigeria, to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and energy-rich Mozambique. The failed state of Somalia, where the al-Shabaab group is active, is a cautionary tale of what may befall a country when terrorism is uncontained. In a year when the US is due to convene a second “summit for democracy”, the issue of global democratic governance – of the lack of it – will also loom large. In Africa, which experienced several coups in 2021, most recently in Sudan, this issue is especially pressing. Inextricably linked to it are the challenges posed by extreme poverty. According to the International Rescue Committee charity’s 2022 emergency watchlist, 12 of the 20 countries at greatest risk of worsening humanitarian crises are in Africa. They are Ethiopia, South Sudan, Democratic Republic of Congo, Somalia, Sudan, Nigeria, Burkina Faso, Central African Republic, Mozambique, Mali, Niger and Cameroon. (The most vulnerable, non-African countries are Afghanistan, Yemen, Syria, Myanmar, Haiti, Honduras, Lebanon and Venezuela.) In the Horn of Africa, what the IRC calls Ethiopia’s “perfect storm” of problems is being exacerbated by a worsening civil war that threatens the break-up of the country amid increased meddling by neighbouring Eritrea’s violently Stalinist regime. Meanwhile, the UN is warning a rapidly worsening drought will put 7.7 million Somalis at extreme risk by April. Unicef, the UN children’s charity, has launched a record $9.4bn worldwide funding appeal for 2022 to help more than 327 million people, including 177 million children, affected by humanitarian crises and Covid. These emergencies provide the context for another great challenge of 2022: international migration, whether it involves refugees from conflict, politically persecuted asylum-seekers, or economic migrants forced out of their homes by climate change, famine and drought. The UN’s International Organisation for Migration says a record 281 million people, or 3.6% of the global population, were classified as international migrants in 2020. This figure is climbing despite pandemic restrictions on movement across international borders. These extraordinary population shifts have yet to produce a coordinated, or even rational, response from most governments, notably in wealthy North America and Europe. Maybe this will change in 2022. But don’t hold your breath. Antarctica, the Arctic … and beyond Cop27, the follow-up to the Cop26 Glasgow climate crisis conference, will be held in Egypt in November. It will provide progress reports on the Glasgow pledges to reduce carbon and methane emissions, halt deforestation, “phase down” coal production, cut fossil fuel subsidies and provide finance to mitigate the loss and damage suffered by poorer countries. It’s unrealistic to expect any swift improvement in the global climate heating outlook in the coming year. Extreme weather events of the type seen across the world in 2021 – fires, droughts, floods, storms and record temperatures – are almost certain to be repeated. As before, these effects will be particularly felt in the world’s more sensitive environments, not least the Antarctic and Arctic. Both polar regions will see increased human activity in 2022 – not necessarily a happy prospect. In Antarctica, for example, mass tourism is taking off with the advent of ice runways accommodating wide-bodied jets. More problematic still is the growing interest of China, with other countries, in tapping into Antarctic’s resources and establishing military facilities there. Likewise the melting ice of the Arctic has opened up commercial and naval sea-lanes across the top of the world, currently being developed by Russia in heated competition with several other countries. Long neglected Greenland is a new El Dorado for mineral and mining companies, and also of growing interest to defence planners – but local people’s resistance to issuing licences is growing. It will be a busy year in space in terms of exploration and military competition. Nasa is preparing 18 separate missions in 2022 as it gears up to resume manned flight to the moon. A new space station – Gateway – is planned. Russia, South Korea, India and Japan will launch lunar spacecraft. The European Space Agency plans to send a mission to Mars. China is said to be hoping to have a fully functional orbiting space station by the end of the year. Meanwhile space tourism organised by Russia and private companies such as Richard Branson’s Virgin Galactic and Jeff Bezos’s Blue Origin is taking off. More sinisterly, a nuclear arms race in space will also accelerate. The US, Russia and China are all experimenting with new weapons, such as orbiting hypersonic glide vehicles capable of launching nuclear missiles from anywhere in the heavens. Russia caused anger in late 2021 with its reckless test of an anti-satellite missile. Others will follow suit, potentially threatening global communications. Not to be outdone, Nasa is planning to knock a giant asteroid off course in September by orchestrating a head-on collision, using a spacecraft launched on a rocket built by Elon Musk’s SpaceX. The US calls this “planetary defence” – but the technology plainly has offensive applications. Some will deem this progress, others a giant backward step for mankind.An MP has called for a change in the law after an abusive husband inherited his wife’s estate despite an inquest linking her suicide to domestic violence. Florence Eshalomi, the Labour MP for Vauxhall in south London, said there was a clear “hole in the law” when the husband, who was also convicted of attacking her, could benefit. The case was raised with Eshalomi by the woman’s son, one of her constituents, who discovered his mother on the day after she killed herself. The 29-year-old, who asked that neither he nor his family members be named, said: “You would think that if one court finds you guilty of domestic violence and another court links your violence to a death, there might be some consequences. Not for my stepdad… he is set to inherit close to £1m. “Putting aside the fact that he contributed nothing to their marriage – my mum owned her house outright before meeting him and earned her pension and savings through years in the NHS – how can it be right that her abuser benefits financially at all? “I can’t put into words how angry I am. Not only has he taken my mum from my brother and me but he has insulted her memory by trampling all over her very clearly documented wishes.” His mother, a GP, married her second husband in July 2012. In August 2019, while on holiday in France, he attacked her, punching her in the head and pressing his thumbs into her cheekbones. She left him afterwards, taking out a non-molestation order and occupation order, prohibiting contact. But having previously had severe depression, she had a relapse, as well as panic attacks, and in June last year, aged 56, she killed herself. At an inquest in November last year, the senior coroner Dr Fiona Wilcox concluded: “She took her own life while suffering anxiety precipitated by a domestic violence incident.” The woman’s husband was originally due to stand trial in France for domestic violence in March last year but was eventually convicted a year later after it was delayed because of Covid. His estranged wife rewrote her will, leaving everything to her sons but it was deemed invalid, because it was only witnessed by one person. Eshalomi, who, with her constituent, is meeting Boris Johnson next month to discuss the issue, said in relying on victims to disinherit an abusive partner, the law failed to recognise the severe mental health impacts domestic abuse could have. She said: “There is already precedent for this in murder cases, where the ‘forfeiture rule’ prevents killers from inheriting from those they murder by default. “An extension of this to cases of abuse where this is found to be a contributing factor in the victim’s death would close the loophole that my constituent and his family have fallen foul of. We must ensure this is never allowed to happen to anybody else.” She said since raising it at prime minister’s questions she had been contacted by several others who had been similarly affected. Her constituent said: “If you are violent to your partner you have broken the terms of your marriage. As a result, all legal benefits of marriage should be automatically revoked, and that includes the right to inherit.” • In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 and the domestic violence helpline is on 0808 2000 247. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14 and the national family violence counselling service is on 1800 737 732. In the US, the suicide prevention lifeline is 1-800-273-8255 and the domestic Violence hotline is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgRaheem Sterling has hailed Gareth Southgate for transforming the culture and atmosphere within the England squad but insisted their journey will not be complete unless it ends with a major tournament victory. Speaking as part of his appearance as the guest editor on Radio 4’s Today programme, Sterling admitted that the players had felt “scarred” by their performances at Euro 2016, where they were defeated in the last-16 by Iceland, and felt a huge weight on their shoulders until Southgate helped the team come together. England have since finished fourth at the 2018 World Cup and lost in the final of Euro 2020 earlier this year. However Sterling says he was left unsatisfied by the penalty defeat to Italy at the Euros, despite it being England’s best performance in a major tournament for 55 years. “Everyone after the tournament was congratulating me. Congratulating me for what?” he said. “That is not what the team set out to do. Yes, it was a great journey. But at the same time we want to have our hands on a trophy. Because there is nothing more important or bigger than winning a major tournament with England.” England will head to Qatar next year among the favourites to win the 2022 World Cup, and Sterling is confident the team can go all the way. “I think we have players at the right ages, challenging for the right things and have the mentality to be the best in their position,” he added. Sterling also credited Southgate for changing the mood in the squad after he took over following the departure of Sam Allardyce in 2016. “From when I first came into the squad to now you can see with conversations with the boys how enjoyable it is just to come,” said Sterling. “Everyone can’t wait. We are speaking on texts nowadays and I don’t think it was quite that way in previous years. Players felt a huge weight on their shoulders. “The belief wasn’t there within the team after Euro 2016. But when Gareth came in, he really tried to make us understand that yes, that’s what the scarring is, but how are we going to change it? The team has grown as one. We want to do things as a collective.” Southgate said the decision to take a knee before games to highlight racial injustice – despite sharp criticism from the prime minister Boris Johnson and home secretary Priti Patel – had helped build unity within the England squad during Euro 2020. But he said that coming together on racism had begun two years earlier after Danny Rose and Sterling suffered abuse in Montenegro in March 2019. “This decision we took last year from a team perspective really started in Montenegro when Raheem and Danny suffered abuse,” he said. “I wasn’t aware of it until very close to the end when Danny got booked and there was a reaction from the crowd. So when we got to the changing room I am having a go at Danny for being booked, and I had to apologise on the plane because it suddenly emerged that this had been going on during the game. “I didn’t like the fact that the boys felt they couldn’t mention it in the changing room at half-time or report it,” added Southgate. “For me, it was like: ‘God this is awful. How is this an environment where our players are allowed to be abused on the pitch and they don’t even feel comfortable to report it or that anything is going to happen?’ “This had to be a team where we were united in how we saw it and we could send a message to young kids watching. I think the lads didn’t think how powerful that would be and they wanted to be judged on the football. I wanted to represent the players in the best way I could.”Queues at food banks, schools charging parents’ mobile phones, and plumbers fixing boilers for nothing so pensioners don’t freeze have become a routine part of life in the UK: the result of more than a decade of crippling austerity and a pandemic that hit the lowest paid the hardest. On the Guardian’s video team, where I’m a producer, we’ve spent a year speaking to individuals who have gone far beyond the extra mile to support their communities, to fill the gaps where state support is lacking. We rightly celebrate these people as inspirational, but rarely do we question what burden this puts on them. Deep into the winter lockdown we met Pastor Mick Fleming. He was called to officiate at Covid funerals people couldn’t afford, to stock bare cupboards, and to be on the end of the phone when they were feeling suicidal. He ran his ministry – known as the Church on the Street – from his van and his mobile phone. Deep structural inequalities, including deprivation, a high incidence of chronic illness and insecure work left towns such as Burnley particularly vulnerable to the pandemic, and the former drug dealer-turned-vicar explained that for a lot of people the pandemic was one more problem on an already long list. He has since moved in to an old gym just off the high street, where he sees up to 1,000 people a week, paid for by a crowdfunder because people were so moved by Mick’s media appearances. It has been a big year for Mick, but he has also made some significant sacrifices: not least living in a separate house from his wife. This is partly because she was having cancer treatment and he didn’t want to bring Covid home when she was vulnerable. Also, the magnitude of what they deal with – his wife also works for Church on the Street – means that they need their own space to process everything. Mick is frequently confronted with his past experiences of child abuse and drug taking as he fields requests for help. He has no formal training to deal with these often difficult conversations, but uses the basic principle of compassion, inspired by his own recovery. He cries a lot and encourages his volunteers to do the same. In Glasgow we met Peter Krykant, the man behind the UK’s first “drug consumption van”. He would drive to the city centre four times a week in his converted ambulance stocked with needles, naloxone supplies and clean water. Within minutes people would turn up to make the most of a warm, dry and sterile environment where they could inject. Peter and his team of volunteers would supervise every injection, and were always on hand if anyone wanted to chat. Many of the van users we spoke to had experienced deep personal trauma that had contributed to their drug use. Scotland has the highest drug mortality in Europe, with deaths disproportionately represented in the most deprived areas, and while the Scottish government has shown interest in the potential use of overdose prevention centres, Peter’s van has been the only attempt at such a facility to date – and it was never formally sanctioned. He relied on crowdfunding to support what he was doing and because he lost his job when he started the van project, he estimates he has racked up debts of about £10,000. Peter risked arrest as a result of running the service, but the biggest consequence has been the impact of witnessing so much trauma. The nature of his approach meant that he could not access professional psychological support, and after being clean for 11 years Peter started taking drugs again. He told me he was in so much “pain emotionally”. He might have been providing respite for some people, but it wasn’t sustainable for one man to shoulder the entire burden. Six months on, Peter believes that Scotland is now edging towards an official injection site, and that the hours he has put into the van have contributed to that. He now has a job with a substance misuse charity, but the van regulars are always on his mind. He thinks about what they are doing now “in the winter, injecting in alleyways”, and “feels guilty” that he can no longer be there for them. We visited Blackpool in November, where the cuts to universal credit were taking their toll. One man tearfully told us that he now has to choose between feeding himself and his dog. He is one of hundreds who visit the Amazing Graze soup kitchen on a cold Friday night for a hot meal and a bag of groceries to help get him through the week. It’s run by Mark and Abbie Butcher, a couple who provide so much more than meals. They ring round hotels to find beds for homeless people, plead with charities to get others into detox programmes and provide pastoral care and housing for their chefs – many of whom were themselves once homeless. It has become such a part of their lives that they’ve had to promise their children they won’t invite anyone extra to Christmas dinner this year (they will make a Christmas dinner at the soup kitchen before the big day instead). Amazing Graze doesn’t get council grants but funds most of what it does with the profits from a pizza restaurant, and also has crowdfunding boosted by its media appearances. Yet it’s still a scramble for donations. As the queue grows outside, volunteer Sue explains that the hardest thing is when they don’t have much to give, and tonight it’s just fruit and bread. She had put out a call for more food on Facebook but got nothing. “Maybe everyone is struggling now.” She later admitted to spending £25 a week of her own money on pet food so other people’s pets didn’t go hungry. There have been others too. In Newham, east London, which has the highest number of children living in poverty in the city, we met ex-offender Raheel Butt who sold his house to set up a gym to try to steer young people away from gang violence. And Nicole Bello, who drove from Kent into the borough every day to run a summer school for the children of parents who needed to go to work in the holidays. She knew the parents needed help because she met them at the food bank she had set up in the pandemic. These volunteers, and so many others we met, are providing a vital service. Someone to speak to in person, not at the end of a phone line. A hot meal in the warm. Someone who will offer support where others might call the police. They are the bedrock of our communities, and exactly what Mick believes will help heal “the deep social scars inflicted by the pandemic”. But he’d like to see opportunities for projects such as his, driven by a desire to help others, to be able to bid for funding. When we clapped for health workers during the pandemic, they said thank you but also asked for a pay rise. It’s now time to think about how the initiatives that we celebrate can be nourished and sustained. No one should be left strung out, broke or worse off because they wanted to make their community better.On 1 December, a United Airlines passenger plane flew from Chicago to Washington powered solely by fuel made from cooking oils, agricultural waste and other materials rather than fossil fuels. Billed by the airline as the world’s first fully-loaded passenger flight to run on 100% sustainable aviation fuel (SAF), it was United’s latest attempt to demonstrate its climate credentials. United’s CEO Scott Kirby called it “a significant milestone” for efforts to decarbonize the industry. But to critics, it was another attempt to make sustainable aviation seem a lot closer than it is in reality and give the impression people can fly guilt-free. The global supply of SAF remains very limited and there are big obstacles to scaling it up. Yet despite these challenges, United Airlines is pursuing a growth strategy which includes increasing flight numbers, adding new routes and investing in supersonic aviation. When Covid restrictions ease again and the world opens back up, airlines including United are hoping to see rapid recovery. In the US, the industry is already expecting pre-pandemic levels of travellers this holiday season despite the rise of the Omicron variant. At the same time, it is under increasing pressure to tackle its climate footprint. Aviation makes up about 2.5% of global emissions but the UN has projected that carbon emissions could triple by 2050. While airlines have been slow to make net zero commitments – the industry is heavily reliant on fossil fuels, and technologies to decarbonize flying are a long way from scaling – some are starting to come out with pledges. United has sought to position itself at the front of the industry’s efforts. In 2020, the airline promised to become “100% green” by 2050 – a commitment to reach net zero without using carbon offsets, which are widely used by the rest of the industry. Kirby, who has called climate change “the biggest issue facing our generation” has criticized offsets as a “fig leaf”. Instead, “we’re taking our dollars, our time and our commitment and really focusing all of it on those solutions that can actually pull the emissions out of flying,” said Lauren Riley, managing director for global environmental affairs and sustainability at United. The airline is making big investments in sustainable aviation fuels, including an investment in Fulcrum Bioenergy, a company that makes jet fuel from household garbage. SAFs can reduce emissions by 80% on a lifecycle basis compared with conventional fuel, according to aviation industry body IATA. United is also funding projects that suck carbon directly from the air. “Direct air capture is going to play a massive role,” said Riley. United is planning to invest in the project 1PointFive, said Riley, which is building a direct air capture plant in Texas. “One of these plants will remove as much CO2 as 40m trees,” she said. But the challenges to scaling up these technologies are immense. Direct air capture is not yet operating at anything like the scale required. There are only 19 DAC plants in operation globally, which collectively remove about 10,000 tons of CO2 annually – a long way from the 85m tons a year the IEA estimates must be removed by 2030 as part of measures to keep to 1.5C of warming. And when it comes to sustainable fuels, supplies remain limited. Globally SAF still makes up less than 0.1% of aviation fuel and it costs about three to four times more than conventional fuel. Riley readily acknowledged that United currently uses tiny amounts of SAF. The airline burns about 4bn gallons of fuel in a typical pre-pandemic year, only 1m gallons of which is SAF. “And we have the most supply so that’s just bananas,” Riley said. A big challenge to scaling up SAF is finding the right feedstocks, ones which don’t themselves cause environmental damage. For bio-based fuels, using cooking oils and agricultural waste, can keep the waste from landfill or being left to rot, but this source has limited availability. Growing crops to produce fuel can bring problems of land clearing, deforestation, agricultural pollution and could compete with food production. And while sources for synthetic fuels – made by combining hydrogen produced by renewable energy and recycled carbon – are technically abundant, the process remains very expensive and will require huge amounts of clean energy. Airlines have been talking about SAFs since at least 2009, said Dan Rutherford, who directs the International Council on Clean Transportation’s aviation and marine programs. “The history actually is very clear that these things aren’t scaling.” While SAF mandates are being considered by governments including the US and the EU, he said take-up “is not going to be as fast as the airlines think it is”. Yet United’s strategy involves scaling up flying. It has increased the number of daily flights to London and in October it announced several new routes, including flights to Amman, Jordan, and Tenerife in the Canary Islands. Perhaps the airline’s biggest move – and to some experts, the most surprising – is its leap into supersonic travel. In June, United announced a deal with Denver-based company Boom Supersonic, agreeing to spend an estimated $3bn on 15 Overtures – Boom’s supersonic passenger jets. Both companies say supersonic flight fits in with net zero commitments. The supersonic jets are “designed to run on 100% SAF”, said Riley. They will be “net zero carbon”, said a spokesperson for Boom Supersonic, who added “we’re highly optimistic about SAF supply by 2029, when Overture is slated to carry passengers”. But despite this confidence, there are questions about where this fuel will come from and what it would mean for decarbonizing the rest of the industry. Supersonic jets can burn five to seven times more fuel than traditional aircraft. Boom said it was too early to give numbers on how much SAF the Overtures would use but said that fuel efficiency is “a top priority”. “What we do have to recognise here,” Riley said, “is that innovation is going to continue but also core to that is that we’re committed to all of these innovations, doing them sustainably.” Experts remain very skeptical. “Putting these fuels into supersonic jets … would be an insane use of scarce resource,” said Cait Hewitt, policy director of the UK non-profit the Aviation Environment Federation. Rutherford said United’s bet on supersonics “is just completely baffling to me – why you would take pretty pro-climate commitments on one hand [and] on the other hand sign on to an aircraft that we know is going to be at least five times as carbon intensive as subsonic aircraft.” According to his calculations, United’s 1m gallons of SAF a year would operate 15 supersonic jets for two days. For some experts, reducing flying is the only genuine path to achieving net zero, especially as emissions from industry growth pre-pandemic outpaced those saved by efficiency measures and other climate policies. The “flight shame” movement has become more mainstream over the last few years, making frequent flying less socially acceptable. One airline even tried making flying less part of its marketing strategy. In 2019, KLM ran a campaign encouraging people to consider taking a train or having a video call instead of flying. When asked if flying less would ever be part of United’s vision for flying sustainable, Riley said “I like to look at it as flying sustainably so it’s not an either or; it’s getting on an aeroplane that’s fully fueled by sustainable aviation fuel and perhaps it’s a zero-carbon flight. That’s what we’re working towards.” But Hewitt dismisses the idea of delivering zero emissions commercial flight any time soon. “Given how far we are from knowing how to decarbonize flying, we really need to be downsizing aviation demand,” she said. This article was amended on 30 December 2021. The 19 DAC plants globally remove 10,000 tons of CO2 annually, not 100,000 as an earlier version said.The Guardian benefited from hundreds of thousands of acts of support from digital readers in 2021 – almost one for every minute of the year. Here we look at the articles from 2021 that had a big hand in convincing readers to support our open, independent journalism. Kremlin papers appear to show Putin’s plot to put Trump in White House – Luke Harding, Julian Borger and Dan Sabbagh Exclusive leak reveals Moscow’s deliberations on how it might help Donald Trump win 2016 US presidential race ‘We are witnessing a crime against humanity’ – Arundhati Roy The author and activist plumbs the depths of India’s Covid catastrophe and finds much to reproach the prime minister, Narendra Modi, for ‘I’m facing a prison sentence’: US Capitol rioters plead with Trump for pardons – Oliver Milman The past very quickly catches up with those who ransacked the seat of US democracy Climate crisis: Scientists spot warning signs of Gulf Stream collapse – Damian Carrington A shutdown of the Atlantic current circulation system would have catastrophic consequences around the world An Afghan woman in Kabul: ‘Now I have to burn everything I achieved’ – A Kabul resident As the Taliban take the Afghan capital, one woman describes being “a victim of a war that men started”. Plummeting sperm counts, shrinking penises: toxic chemicals threaten humanity – Erin Brockovich A warning from the environmental advocate and author about the damage being wrought by toxic chemicals Pandora papers: biggest ever leak of offshore data exposes financial secrets of rich and powerful – Guardian investigations team Millions of documents reveal deals and assets of more than 100 billionaires, 30 world leaders and 300 public officials The Hill We Climb: the poem that stole the inauguration show – Amanda Gorman She spoke, and millions listened, at Joe Biden’s inauguration Rates of Parkinson’s disease are exploding. A common chemical may be to blame – Adrienne Matei Is an epidemic on the horizon? And is an unpronounceable chemical compound to blame? Capitalism is killing the planet – it’s time to stop buying into our own destruction – George Monbiot The Guardian columnist at his most incandescent ‘Take it easy, nothing matters in the end’: William Shatner at 90, on love, loss and Leonard Nimoy – Hadley Freeman The actor discusses longevity, tragedy, friendship, success and his Star Trek co-star ‘Our biggest challenge? Lack of imagination’: the scientists turning the desert green – Steve Rose In China, scientists have turned vast swathes of arid land into a lush oasis. Now a team of maverick engineers want to do the same to the Sinai Off-road, off-grid: the modern nomads wandering America’s back country – Stevie Trujillo Across US public lands thousands of people are taking to van life The greatest danger for the US isn’t China. It’s much closer to home – Robert Reich The columnist and former secretary of labour warns of enemies within The rice of the sea: how a tiny grain could change the way humanity eats – Ashifa Kassam Celebrated chef discovered something in the seagrass that could transform our understanding of the sea itself – as a vast garden Revealed: leak uncovers global abuse of cyber-surveillance weapon – Guardian staff The Guardian teams up with 16 media organisations around the world to investigate hacking software sold by the Israeli surveillance company NSO Group Beware: Gaia may destroy humans before we destroy the Earth – James Lovelock Legendary environmentalist argues that Covid-19 may well have been one attempt by the planet to protect itself, and that next time it may try harder with something even nastier The Rosenbergs were executed for spying in 1953. Can their sons reveal the truth? – Hadley Freeman Ethel and Julius Rosenberg were sent to the electric chair for being Soviet spies, but their sons have spent decades trying to clear their mother’s name. Are they close to a breakthrough? Out of thin air: the mystery of the man who fell from the sky – Sirin Kale Who was the stowaway who fell from the wheel well of a Boeing plane into a south London garden in the summer of 2019? The life and tragic death of John Eyers – a fitness fanatic who refused the vaccine – Sirin Kale The 42-year-old did triathlons, bodybuilding and mountain climbing and became sceptical of the Covid jab. Then he contracted the virus If these pieces move you to support our independent journalism into 2022, you can do so here: Make a contribution from just £1 Become a digital subscriber and get something in return for your money Join as a Patron to fund us at a higher levelFour years ago, I caught the flu – and I am still stuck in bed, struggling to breathe. A bit like those with long Covid now, I developed postviral fatigue after a short illness. You could say I was into viruses before their mainstream second album. Born with a muscle weakness, I was already familiar with the fragility of the human body. But the overnight change, post‑flu complications, hit me like a truck. In the early days, stuck on a ventilator and barely able to move, my brain was so traumatised that I thought my bedroom curtains were on fire. I didn’t even have curtains. Fatigue is hard to understand until you have it. It is not tiredness or burnout. It is all-consuming, an oppressive cocoon that weighs down your body. For me, an energetic day used to be getting the train to work and drinking with friends until 1am. Suddenly, it was cleaning the back of my teeth. When you are a child, you think doctors are meant to make it all better. When you become chronically ill, you realise you are lucky if you are believed, let alone treated. There is an odd privilege in having a “pre‑existing condition” before you get ill – a genetic disorder is hard to doubt – but it brings its own problems, not least the assumption that your disability is to blame. Finding a health professional who accepts and understands post-viral illness is akin to tracking down a unicorn with a medical degree. Ask someone with a chronic illness how they are and they will probably play down this reality. No one likes a moaner. Besides, when society thinks being disabled is a life of pitiable suffering, you don’t want to reinforce the prejudice. It is like how most of us are happy to make endless jokes about our home town, but see red the minute a stranger suggests the big Asda isn’t actually a social venue. The truth is, being ill every day is the hardest thing I have ever done – and I grew up in Grantham without becoming a Tory. It is not simply a case of coping with the symptoms, but also what they do to your life as you knew it – stealing nights out, careers and the ability to put on a bra with ease. This series is called “How I returned from rock bottom”, but the thing about chronic illness is, well, it is chronic. Yes, some people recover. But for most of us it is about learning to live long-term with a very different body – one that can get a bit better, then a lot worse, then whatever it feels like that month. I have not “overcome” anything, but I am happy and hopeful. I am also absolutely knackered. This is not the narrative society is used to. They don’t make Hallmark movies about someone never learning to walk again. But I think it is a much more important story. It is easy to be celebratory when you have made it to the top of the mountain; much harder when you are stuck halfway, freezing your arse off. Chronic illness is sometimes described as a form of grief, as if you are grieving for your former life. I prefer to think of it as beginning the next stage. Sure, things are not like they were. You are probably a lot more horizontal. But life does not tend to stay the same for long. The pandemic has taught us that. It is not healthy – no pun intended – to force yourself to be OK. It is completely normal to miss how things used to be. There are days I want to be in the pub with friends so much that the only thing to do is cry. So, cry. Have a snotty sobfest. But you will smile in the end, too. Lots. Not because the pain has stopped, but because, eventually, you will realise that the pain won’t stop you being you. It is easy to chastise your body for “failing”, but I try to feel pride in its victories. Mine copes with more most days than other young people’s do in a decade. I reward it accordingly, usually with codeine wrapped in a chocolate roll. I am also teaching myself to stand up to medics, when necessary, and turn to the online chronic illness community for advice. I find the things I can do and I squeeze the joy out of them – every drop. Maybe all of this sounds familiar. Maybe your own curtains have just caught fire. I am not going to patronise you by saying this can be easy, but I would wager that it will not beat you, either. The human capacity for resilience and renewal is greater than most of us imagine. Once you have survived illness, living – and living well – comes step by step.Boris Johnson has urged people to get their booster vaccine as he said up to 90% of those in intensive care had not had their third Covid jabs. On a visit to a vaccine centre in Milton Keynes, the prime minister said people should enjoy their new year celebrations while taking extra precautions such as ventilation and testing, and he urged people to take up the offer of a third dose. “I’m sorry to say this but the overwhelming majority of people who are currently ending up in intensive care in our hospitals are people who are not boosted,” he said. “I’ve talked to doctors who say the numbers are running up to 90% of people in intensive care.” He added: “If you’re not vaccinated, you’re eight times more likely to get into hospital altogether. So it’s a great thing to do. It’s very, very important. Get boosted for yourself, and enjoy new year sensibly and cautiously.” The NHS has called on people to have a “jabby new year”, highlighting research from the Intensive Care National Audit and Research Centre (ICNARC) that found that at the start of last month about three out of five patients in London’s intensive care units (ICU) had not received a jab, a figure that it said was rising. With new cases of Covid hitting 129,471 in England and Wales on Tuesday, the prime minister said Omicron continued to “cause real problems” even though it was “obviously milder than the Delta variant”. There were 18 new deaths within 28 days of a positive test in Tuesday’s figures. Johnson, who spent the Christmas break at Chequers with his family, suggested people should take tests before heading out for new year events, but the system has been dogged by shortages. Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary, said the situation was “a total shambles”. “People are trying to do the right thing, follow the government’s own advice and test themselves regularly, but are prevented by the Conservative government’s incompetence,” he said. “They need to get a grip and provide enough tests so people can keep themselves and everyone else safe.” Daisy Cooper, the Liberal Democrats health spokesperson, said it was “now or never to get Covid tests to frontline workers. If the government doesn’t get its act together today then vaccine centres could soon grind to a halt, and patient safety could be at risk from further NHS and care staff absences.” Almost 90% of the population aged 12 and over have received a first dose of a Covid vaccine but only 56.9% have had a booster. The government texted everyone urging them to “get boosted now” and highlighted available vaccine slots over the festive period. However, it has stopped short of bringing in vaccine passports in England, instead introducing Covid passes that give people the option of showing proof of vaccination or a recent lateral flow test to enter some large indoor venues.When Jana Horn wrote her song Jordan, she didn’t know what it was about. She had spent two days at her brother’s house following a breakup, ruminating over two chords, when a line came to her: “They called me to Jordan.” She followed the thread. “I had no idea what I was doing, but it felt really important, like I had to finish the story,” she says, calling from the last day of class in Charlottesville, Virginia, where she is a postgrad fiction-writing student and teacher. It became a five-minute narrative about someone who heeds that call and embarks on the long, trying journey by foot. On arrival, he is instructed to bomb the city where his family lives, but chooses death instead. Horn delivers this potent tale over those two colourless acoustic chords, her affectless, curious delivery evocative of Phil Elverum, or a twilit Laura Marling. This stunning, spooked song scared her. “It felt long and strange and blasphemous,” she says. “Like – what have I done?” She almost left it off her debut album but, thankfully, Jordan is now the foundation stone of Optimism, a record of enigmatic songwriting about broken communication and what it means to be known; her skeletal band evokes Yo La Tengo, desaturated girl-group classics and the softest of country shuffles. She realised Jordan unnerved her because it isn’t the traditional biblical narrative she was used to. For Horn, 28, faith is inextricable from life and writing. She grew up in Glen Rose, a Texas city of 2,500 or so people, a nuclear plant, a creationism museum, dinosaur footprints and the state’s largest outdoor production of the crucifixion. She didn’t find much freedom there. “There’s no separation of church and state. I was pretty contrarian but I was still also part of everything that town was.” She participated in “Bible drills” (speed verse-finding contests), played in the marching band and saw screamo (a subgenre of emo) shows in Dallas. “I loved growing up there and I love it even more now, on the other side of the coin and seeing the total strangeness of where I came from.” But leaving for college “challenged so much of what I thought about”, she says. “I came to understand things about myself that I had never been taught.” Studying in Austin, she yearned to join bands, although playing with “seasoned” musicians made her underestimate herself. “I felt like a minor character in a play I had written.” She came to appreciate “ugliness and imperfection” in music, which led her to abandon one solo album because “it didn’t reflect me very much – instead it just sounded really good”. After that, Optimism arrived “seamlessly”. Horn self-released it last spring and was happy enough that her family and “40 listeners on Spotify” liked it. Then the Philadelphia label No Quarter (Joan Shelley, Chris Forsyth) offered to do a proper release. The album reflects a time when Horn was “always on the move”, a form of impermanence she craves. “It’s very on-brand for things in my life not to be working, but I just live with them. My phone’s insides are exposed. My car gas gauge doesn’t work. I would live in darkness if someone didn’t change the lightbulbs.” She’s never thought about why. “I guess my interests are immaterial, and I’ve never been interested in making myself comfortable.” It’s the weird epiphanies that she thrives on (reading Marguerite Duras’ The Lover, Horn was astonished to discover sentences that she had previously written in her own fiction). And she considers those first lyrics that come out of the blue to be gifts. “You don’t know why you said it. But you follow it to its end.” • Optimism is released by No Quarter on 21 JanuaryVery soon we will mark the first anniversary of 6 January 2021 – a day when American democracy died a little. Just hours after the “Stop the Steal” attack on the Capitol, more than 100 congressional Republicans refused to certify the results of the election. Donald Trump had lost, but he had also won – the “big lie” had firmly taken root. Since then the threats to US democracy have metastasized. Over the last few months, a new threat has emerged, one which few Americans – much less people abroad – are even aware of. It’s a story that has been under-reported and yet the future of US democracy may depend on it being told. With your help, we can tell this story in 2022. Far from signalling the end of Trump, 6 January proved he was only getting started. According to a recent Quinnipiac poll, 77% of Republicans believe there was “widespread fraud”. (Earlier this month an Associated Press investigation into the 2020 election found just 475 cases of voter fraud in six key battleground states. Joe Biden won those states by 311,257 votes.) And yet, Republicans exercised by the ex-president’s lies about electoral fraud are now systematically targeting elected offices across the US. But not any elected office – specifically positions that have oversight of elections. They are pursuing positions of high office, such as secretary of state, but also lower-ranking county-level offices across the states, from Michigan to Pennsylvania and from Texas to Georgia. This is an entirely new threat. This is not voting suppression or gerrymandering (though those remain huge democratic obstacles which we continue to report on). What is now taking shape across America is the machinery necessary to steal an election. Free and fair elections are under threat. Last week, Jocelyn Benson, the Democratic secretary of state in Michigan, said about Trumpists targeting official positions with electoral oversight: “This is a five-alarm fire. If people in general, leaders and citizens, aren’t taking this as the most important issue of our time and acting accordingly, then we may not be able to ensure democracy prevails again in 2024.” We believe it is the most consequential political story of our time. And one of the most important stories to tell in 2022. You can help us do that. This story is playing out all over the country, from gubernatorial races in Georgia (where Trump is supporting a candidate, David Perdue, who recently said he would not have certified the results of the 2020 election) to lower-ranking offices in Pennsylvania where “Stop the Steal” supporters have triumphed in races to become judges of elections in their local precincts. Yes, a “Stop the Steal” supporter will be overseeing the 2024 election. Earlier this month, the president hosted a Summit for Democracy intended to draw attention to the erosion of democratic norms around the world as global authoritarianism is on the rise. But Biden and the Democrats need to pay more attention to the threats closer to home. As a news organisation headquartered in the UK we have conversations with friends and colleagues abroad almost daily and they look on in disbelief at what is happening in the US. Many believed that Trump’s departure would signal a return to some kind of normal; instead, US democracy is in significantly greater danger than it was a year ago. This is a story that needs telling, to both a domestic and international audience. America is facing down the barrel of a ballot-box coup. As the writer and academic Lawrence Douglas wrote recently in the Guardian: “Republican state lawmakers have weaponized the lies about the 2020 election and the 6 January insurrection to gain control over the local administration of elections. By the time Congress tallies the electoral votes on 6 January 2025, the putsch could be complete.” Thanks to the generosity of our readers, we have already reached our $1.25m year-end fundraising goal. But it’s not too late to give in order to help us dedicate resources to this essential reporting. Help us sound the five-alarm fire.Electric cars have gone mainstream in Europe – they accounted for nearly a fifth of all car purchases in the UK last month. Yet one piece has been missing up to now: European batteries. That is now changing. On Tuesday night, Northvolt, a startup, produced its first lithium ion battery cell at a plant in northern Sweden. It is the first of a series of new factories that investors hope will allow Europe to carve out a big proportion of the electric vehicle market – and weaken the stranglehold built up by manufacturers in China, Japan and Korea. The Northvolt Ett site will be the first European-owned plant to produce at so-called gigafactory scale. Gigafactories are generally considered to be those capable of producing enough batteries each year to provide about 15 gigawatt hours (GWh) of cumulative storage. Only two large battery factories are operational in Europe, according to Benchmark Mineral Intelligence (BMI), a battery data company: a factory in Wrocław, Poland, run by Korea’s LG, and another owned by Korea’s Samsung near Budapest in Hungary. Yet there are 25 gigafactories planned for the continent by 2030, according to BMI, as the industry races to keep up with soaring demand for electric cars. Nine of those are owned by Asian manufacturers, which control most of the global supply. The UK is arguably further behind the rest of Europe, with plans for only two gigafactories. One will be a major expansion of a small battery plant in Sunderland by the Chinese company Envision, while the Glencore-backed startup Britishvolt is attempting to secure funding for a homegrown rival in nearby Blyth. Local authorities in Coventry are trying to find a manufacturer for a third site at the local airport, but nobody has yet stepped forward – a situation that has cast a shadow over the prospects of the UK automotive sector as it strives to replace the declining internal combustion engine industry. Simon Moores, BMI’s chief executive, hailed Northvolt’s first cell as “Europe’s first gigafactory-era lithium ion battery”. Despite its startup status, Northvolt has gained heavyweight financial backing from Volkswagen, the world’s biggest car producer, and the investment bank Goldman Sachs. Its $2.75bn (£2.1bn) funding round in June valued it at $12bn. Northvolt hopes to rapidly expand production at the plant at Skellefteå in northern Sweden to produce 60GWh a year – enough to supply batteries for a million electric cars. Commercial deliveries will start in the new year. The startup already boasts contracts worth $30bn with big European companies including the carmakers BMW, Volkswagen, Volvo Cars and Polestar, the truck manufacturer Scania, and the energy storage firm Fluence. Carmakers are belatedly ramping up electric vehicle production to meet tightening emissions targets as well as the challenge from their US rival, Tesla, which has built its own battery and car plant in Berlin. Peter Carlsson, Northvolt’s chief executive and co-founder, said the production of the lithium ion battery on Tuesday represented“a great milestone”. “Of course, this first cell is only the beginning,” he said. “Over the course of the coming years, we look forward to Northvolt Ett expanding its production capacity greatly to enable the European transition to clean energy.”Dominic Thiem, beaten men’s singles finalist in 2020, is out of next month’s Australian Open after failing to recover from a long-standing wrist injury. The 28-year-old Austrian, who has not played since suffering the injury at the Mallorca Open in June, was unable to defend his US Open title this year. Thiem soared to No 3 in the world until the injury halted his progress and relegated him to his current ranking of 15. Thiem was beaten in the fourth round of the 2021 Open in three straights by Grigor Dimitrov, while the year before he was beaten in five sets in the final at Melbourne Park by Novak Djokovic. He will begin his 2022 season on his preferred surface of clay at the Cordoba Open in Argentina at the end of January. “I will miss the Australian fans, but I will be back (there) in 2023,” he said on Twitter. “We believe this is the right decision in order to have a good return to competition. “For the moment I will remain in Austria for a few more days and then head to practise outdoors and get ready for my first event of the season.” Not for the first time in recent years, the Australian Open will be missing a number of top players, with more arriving short of match practice and fitness. World No 1 Novak Djokovic pulled out of the ATP Cup in Sydney, which is due to start on 1 January, on Wednesday as uncertainty over his participation in the grand slam goes on. Djokovic has won at Melbourne Park on nine occasions but has repeatedly refused to say whether he has been vaccinated against coronavirus having previously expressed hesitancy over being jabbed. All players competing are required either to be vaccinated or to provide proof of medical exemption, but that will not be made public. Speaking to media in Melbourne last week, tournament director Craig Tiley said: “If Novak shows up at the Australian Open, he’ll either be vaccinated or he’ll have a medical exemption. “[It’s] his choice on his medical condition, it’s his choice to keep [it] personal and private like all of us would do with any condition we may or may not have. We are not going to force him or ask him to disclose that.” Elsewhere on the men’s side, 20-time grand slam champion Roger Federer is still recovering from knee surgery, joining Stan Wawrinka and Milos Raonic on the sidelines. 2009 winner Rafael Nadal and Denis Shapovalov have both recently tested positive for Covid. In the women’s draw, 23-time grand slam champion Serena Williams heads the list of absentees, while Jennifer Brady, Karolína Plíšková, Karolína Muchová, and Bianca Andreescu are all set to miss out.For many people, the thin red line on a pregnancy test ushers in countless changes. You change what you eat and drink, how you exercise and socialize and sleep, and keep careful track of what medications you should and shouldn’t take. But for many Americans, there’s one choice they largely haven’t made: getting vaccinated. About 22% of pregnant people in the US have gotten the Covid shots, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), with another 18% who got vaccinated prior to pregnancy. That means three in five pregnant Americans have no protection provided by vaccination as the country faces an enormous surge in cases. “One of the most important things you can do as a pregnant person to protect yourself these days, in terms of the pandemic and generally, is to get vaccinated against Covid-19,” said Neel Shah, chief medical officer of Maven clinic and assistant professor of obstetrics at Harvard Medical School. “And yet, that’s not what we’re seeing.” In fact, studies show that pregnant people risk more severe disease with Covid-19, and the illness frequently leads to a bevy of complications – including preeclampsia and premature birth. If you have Covid-19 during pregnancy, you are two to three times more likely to have premature birth, fetal growth restrictions, and hemorrhaging, according to a new study published on Monday in the Journal of Infectious Diseases. A Covid-19 diagnosis increased the risk of having a very premature baby by 60%, according to another study. These early births are particularly alarming because they “carry the highest risks of infant mortality and adverse outcomes”, the authors wrote, and the babies tend to face longer stays in the neonatal ICU with more severe illness. People who were Covid-positive when they delivered their babies were twice as likely to have stillbirths, a study from the CDC study found. And pregnant women with Covid were 22 times more likely to die than women without the illness, according to a study in 18 countries before vaccines were available. “The maternal mortality rate in our country has gone up year after year, and it’s expected to continue to go up in part because of the pandemic,” Shah said. In New York last week, Tsion Firew, a physician and assistant professor of emergency medicine at Columbia University, cared for pregnant women with Covid-19 in the emergency room. They were unvaccinated and their fevers soared, their bodies ached and their oxygen levels dropped. None of these patients needed to be admitted to the intensive care unit, but that’s happened during previous surges. “We’ve seen many unvaccinated women ending up in the ICU, going into cardiac arrest, or having severe hypoxia and needing to be intubated,” she said. And that can cause the babies to be born early, facing their own illnesses and complications. But Firew understands why many parents-to-be are hesitant about vaccination. “They’re worried – they don’t know what might happen to their unborn baby with the vaccine,” she said. She was hesitant at first, too, when the vaccines became available a year ago. Firew was 22 weeks pregnant, and she was concerned that pregnant people weren’t included in the clinical trials. After speaking with her doctor and looking into the data, though, she saw that some people in the trial had become pregnant and carried those pregnancies safely. She got the vaccine, and she’s glad she could protect herself and her baby – including by passing antibodies from the vaccine first during pregnancy and then through breast milk, which contains helpful antibodies and T-cells. Firew’s baby, now almost a year old, cooed in the background happily as his mother spoke. The surge in cases makes it all the more urgent that everyone who is eligible get vaccinated, Firew said. “Now that we have a new variant that’s spreading like a wildfire, everyone is at higher risk compared to prior ones. When you have so many risks that are threatening you, I think it’s important to be protected by vaccination and all the other [precautions].” Yet there are many reasons why hesitations linger. Shah’s company conducted a survey of 500 people across the country on their reasons for not getting vaccinated. The biggest reason was that they didn’t realize vaccines – and now boosters – are recommended during pregnancy. “The public health messaging was really pretty muddled,” Shah said. And some respondents said their close friends and families, and even some medical providers, had recommended against the shots. “It wasn’t just that it was ambiguous information,” Shah said. “They were being told that they should not get vaccinated, and in many cases from trusted sources.” Simply encouraging pregnant patients to get vaccinated is often not enough. They need to have questions answered, especially around the safety of the vaccines. According to a poll by the Kaiser Family Foundation, six out of 10 respondents who haven’t yet gotten the vaccines worried about their safety, despite an abundance of data showing the vaccines are safe and effective. “It can’t just be like, ‘You need to do this.’ We need to provide people with a basis for why it’s safe,” Shah said. “People are sort of struggling and anxious at baseline, and then don’t have that clarity.” Boosters are also an important tool for protecting pregnant people, especially with the winter wave that is gaining force. “With Omicron in the mix in particular, it seems very, very clear that there is an enormous protective benefit to getting a third vaccine,” Shah said. “Given those stakes and given those risks, again, the most important thing they can do to protect themselves is to get vaccinated.”It is not the case that followers of Scottish football gaze enviously at the Premier League. Camera phones capturing goal celebrations and public investment funds bearing gifts mean Scots revel in their own authenticity. It may be thud and blunder but it is our thud and blunder. In recent days, though, there have been wistful glances across the border. After Nicola Sturgeon, the Scotland first minister, implemented a limit of 500 people at outdoor sporting events the Scottish Professional Football League’s board took the unusually smart decision to expedite its top-flight winter break. At what traditionally is a hectic, joyous time it was deemed better to close the gates. In a stark divergence between policy in England and Scotland, 52,178 watched Newcastle draw with Manchester United on Monday. Few face masks were seen. Leicester’s defeat of Liverpool had more than 30,000 in attendance. Presuming Burnley reach Old Trafford on Thursday, the crowds will likely top 70,000. If Celtic Park and Ibrox were open for business, 500 would be the cap. The same, that is, as East Fife’s Bayview. As a grim backdrop sits record numbers of Covid-19 cases. England, not Scotland, is the outlier given multiple European countries have reverted to closed-door football. Sturgeon was perfectly correct in pointing towards pressure on emergency services – especially with Old Firm, Edinburgh and Dundee derbies at new year – applied by football. Still, Jason Leitch, Scotland’s national clinical director, drew criticism for the implementation of a blanket figure of attendees. “Of course you have to draw the line somewhere, we’ve drawn it at a variety of points over the last little while,” he said. “It’s very difficult to choose a number, you can either choose zero, 10,000 or somewhere in between. It’s a judgment based on trying to keep the risk as low as you possibly can but the alternative is just to close them down completely.” There is little confidence that Scotland will revert to anywhere close to full grounds when the Premiership restarts on 17 January. Should England plough on, and this also looks likely, the issue will rise on the radar of politicians. It would seem odd but maybe both Westminster and Holyrood are correct in decision‑making based on their own scientific advice. The trouble is, the public cannot properly assess the respective stances. Covid spread linked to or around football matches has never been properly and consistently detailed. There also appears to have been a subtle shift in public attitudes; the shortage of empty seats at major games would suggest some fans do not consider attending matches to be as high risk now as they did previously. The notion that sport and politics must never mix was deeply flawed even before a pandemic left those in government making calls that heavily affected this particular sector. The overlap is now intriguing. Make the basic point on social media about a huge gap in strategy between England and Scotland on this matter and – trust me – the reaction from people with diametrically opposed constitutional views is epic. Devolution means public health decisions can be taken outside of Westminster. Some argue along the basic lines of Scotland being a separate country, and that means separate rules. To others, it is incongruous that St James’ Park can host more than 50,000 when 90 minutes up the east coast mainline major grounds are bolted shut. Football fans in Newcastle, Liverpool, Manchester or Sheffield surely behave no differently to those in Edinburgh, Glasgow, Dundee or Aberdeen. There is even a regularly large influx from Scotland to the major English grounds, continuing via trains and supporters’ buses. Rangers fans with a strong sense of unionism will cite crowd curbs as typical of the Scottish National Party’s tyranny. A group of Celtic fans, who already felt oppressed by police, have recently displayed banners making their disquiet towards the Scottish government perfectly plain. While this anger from generally young men may be misdirected, it is perfectly easy to comprehend. Not only was there at least an insinuation of normal life post-vaccine, crowds got back into Scottish football grounds before that privilege was snatched away again. There will inevitably be a percentage of Scottish football fans who are conflicted; as staunch supporters of Sturgeon’s party while frustrated or angry that they cannot enjoy their weekend pastime of choice. Football fans have a habit of exaggerating their sport’s importance but if disquiet in Scotland spreads in meaningful form to the electorate, Sturgeon is bound to take note. “These decisions are a fine balance but the public are slightly frustrated at the contradictory and inconsistent nature of what these rules mean,” says Ian Murray, the shadow secretary of state for Scotland. “A lot of people feel that going into a controlled circumstance, like a large outdoor event, with a negative lateral flow as part of the rules is a much safer place than crowding into houses or pubs to watch the football.” It is not at all easy to source those in high office of Scottish football who are willing to berate the present situation. Theirs is a wise position. In the early stages of last season, with stadia closed, representatives of the SPFL and Scottish FA embarked upon routine whinging about what they perceived as unfair treatment. Not only did this look callous, it angered government. Scottish football has enjoyed benefits not available to other sectors as Covid has flipped society on its head. Season tickets have been sold, television contracts remained intact and the Old Firm have continued to trade players for millions of pounds. The Scottish government gave not inconsiderable financial support to SPFL clubs. Football alone cannot play the victim this time; 70,000 watched Harlequins’ defeat of Northampton at Twickenham on Monday. Glasgow Warriors against Edinburgh the same day, postponed after a Covid outbreak in the home ranks, would have been spectator-free. The much-used argument that football grounds should remain packed simply because shopping centres are is undermined on grounds of behaviour. The masked shoppers who spend Saturday afternoons in Next or Holland &amp; Barrett are not prone to leaping all over each other in wild celebration after bursts of community singing. “A crowd of 500 at a Rangers game compared to a crowd of 50,000 which would normally be of that order makes a very, very clear significant point that we have to reduce dramatically the level of social interaction,” explained John Swinney, Scotland’s deputy first minister. The anomaly is not specific to Scotland. Close to 10,000 took in this week’s Belfast derby between Linfield and Glentoran. Fans of Cardiff City and Swansea City are locked out of their grounds but more than 20,000 have scope to attend Bristol City v Queens Park Rangers just a short hop along the M4 on Thursday evening. Berwick Rangers by geographical quirk could presumably admit as many people as they like to the New Year’s Day, Scottish Lowland League, visit of Bonnyrigg Rose. As Scotland’s top-flight clubs pray for similar opportunity, they need the latest of Boris Johnson’s high-risk games to pay off. Should it not, football supporters in England have been thrust into wholly dangerous territory. Reckless England or over cautious Scotland? Watch this space.Tackling the climate crisis must be a whole government effort or risk the Cop26 climate summit becoming “just a bunch of meaningless promises”, the cabinet minister who chaired the UN summit has said. Alok Sharma, who acted as president for Cop26 in November, made clear that all of his colleagues must bear a joint responsibility for the UK’s net zero agenda, and that the international community viewed continued UK efforts as vital. “Given that people do see that the UK has shown a great deal of international leadership when it comes to climate, it’s important we maintain that focus across the whole of the UK government,” he told the Guardian in an interview. “When it comes to domestic policy, it’s vital that every country – including the UK – focuses on delivery.” Without a focus on net zero from the government, there was a danger that the progress made in Glasgow would be undermined, said Sharma. “What people will judge us on, as they will also judge other governments on, is delivery [on climate goals],” said Sharma. “The key issue is to show that countries are delivering on [their Cop26] commitments and they are not wavering. That is what is going to give confidence to parties [to the Paris agreement], the climate vulnerable countries, to civil society, but globally as well, that we are making progress on promises – that it’s not just a bunch of meaningless promises, that there is real commitment to deliver them as well.” The UK continues to act as president of the ongoing diplomatic effort to fulfil the 2015 Paris agreement until Egypt takes over next November. Sharma is likely to hold the role until then, though he would not be drawn on rumoured proposals for him to lead a new cross-cutting government department to oversee net zero. Sharma’s impassioned intervention on net zero comes at a crucial time for the government’s commitment to the climate crisis. As Boris Johnson has been embroiled in scandal over Downing Street parties and sleaze allegations, rival camps have sought to distance themselves from Johnson’s green goals, in order to court the right wing of the Tory party, making the net zero effort a major flashpoint. When Lord Frost resigned recently, he let it be known that the net zero agenda was one of his top areas of disagreement with Johnson, alongside Brexit policy. As the Guardian has previously revealed, there is a rift between the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, and Johnson over the climate issue, while the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, pointedly omitted even to mention November’s Cop26 – the biggest diplomatic event held on British soil – in her first foreign policy speech earlier this month. But Sharma said the net zero strategy was key to the government’s future. “[The question] for every economy is how you do that [shift to a low-carbon footing], not just one or two sectors, but across the whole of the economy. The issue now is that we push on and deliver on that particular [net zero] strategy itself. That’s what we will be judged on.” Sharma, who was business secretary before Johnson ordered him to take full-time control of Cop26 last year, pointedly referred to the role of business, a core Tory constituency that has been exasperated by Brexit and other policy confusion. The CBI and other leading business voices have spoken out strongly in favour of net zero, and the business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, is said to have undergone a “conversion” from sceptical free-marketeer to green interventionist. “There has been a clear change in approach from the corporate sector,” said Sharma. “They have demonstrated their understanding that green growth is the future, and net zero is a big opportunity.” While he declined to explicitly criticise reported plans to cut 20% of Foreign Office staff, he made clear his concern. “Given that we have said we do see tackling climate change and biodiversity as a top international priority for the UK, it’s important to back that up with having the right presence in our embassies and high commissions around the world,” he said. Sharma also stressed his personal loyalty to Johnson, and his own lack of interest in any leadership contest. “I don’t think even my mother has suggested that as a credible possibility! I have always backed the prime minister.” Johnson was fully behind the net zero effort, he added. “This is an agenda that he has followed for a long period. I worked with him at the Foreign Office where I was one of his junior ministers, and this whole issue on biodiversity, on climate, this was an agenda he focused on even at that point.” Sharma said reactions to the outcomes of Cop26 had grown even more positive in the weeks since it closed. “The feedback from counterparts around the world is that they do think we got something historic over the line,” he said. His next task is to ensure that the world’s biggest emitters – including big G20 economies – return to the negotiating table next year with improved and detailed plans on cutting greenhouse gas emissions. The prospect of holding global temperature rises to 1.5C – which scientists warn is the limit of safety – was still uncertain. He said: “We’ve absolutely kept it alive but the pulse is still weak. That’s why this next year, and the following year, are going to be very much about pushing forward on the delivery of the commitments that have been made.”The arrest of Cantopop star Denise Ho in a raid on reporters and prominent figures linked to the Hong Kong media outlet StandNews has shocked her many fans in the city and around the world. The artist, who is also a Canadian citizen, was taken from her home in Hong Kong on Wednesday for allegedly conspiring with five others to publish seditious materials in her role as a former director of the independent news provider. Ho’s arrest marks the first time a pop star of global renown has been detained in Hong Kong for a political crime after Beijing imposed a national security law 18 months ago in response to months of pro-democracy protests in 2019. The artist had long been an outspoken public figure. Born in Hong Kong and raised in Canada, she is a hero to the region’s LGBT community, as one of the first local celebrities to come out almost a decade ago. She was actively involved in the city’s pro-democracy movement, testifying at the US Capitol about reports of police brutality during the protests, as well as serving as a trustee for a now defunct humanitarian fund for arrested or injured protesters. “Denise Ho has been the most vocal and popular artist in Hong Kong who dares to oppose Beijing,” Sunny Cheung, one of the activists who had travelled with Ho to the US, told the Guardian. Ho sought to comfort her fans on Facebook after her arrest. “I am feeling OK. Friends who are concerned about me, please don’t worry.” The post drew thousands of well wishes within hours. “Hang in there!” one user wrote. “This is too ridiculous! Please be ok!” wrote another. In a creative industry where access to the lucrative mainland Chinese market has swayed many Cantonese artists to refrain from angering Chinese sensitivities, Ho emerged in 2014 as a voice of defiance when she joined the Umbrella Movement and demanded wider democracy with thousands of other Hongkongers. “When I first saw the teargas fired into the peaceful crowds … I decided, regardless of all the so-called consequences, that I had to speak my mind,” she said in 2019. The consequences for Ho’s career came long before Wednesday’s arrest. In 2014, Chinese authorities banned her from performing on the mainland. In the years that followed, brands and other celebrities shunned her, while some of her concerts in Hong Kong were cancelled. There was no immediate response from Canadian authorities, but her detention may add to tensions between the two countries. It comes just a few months after the release of “the two Michaels”, Canadian citizens held in China for over 1,000 days. Critics including the Canadian government labelled their detention “hostage diplomacy”, in retaliation for the arrest of a Chinese executive on US fraud charges. Additional reporting by Emma Graham-Harrison.Most people find seeing themselves on screen distinctly squirm-inducing. Even an unintended glance in the mirror can trigger a minor identity crisis, as we glimpse the gulf between how others see us and how we imagine ourselves. But for writers whose life stories are adapted for television – their flawed personalities painstakingly recreated by actors – the experience can be even more bewildering. “Bizarre is the only way to describe it,” reflects Adam Kay, whose 2017 bestseller This Is Going to Hurt, a memoir of his hellish and hilarious years as a junior doctor, lands in 2022 on BBC One. On TV, Kay is played by Ben Whishaw, who evidently took his research seriously. “I watched an early cut with my husband,” Kay recalls, “and he said: ‘It’s amazing how he’s got all of your weird mannerisms.’ I didn’t even realise I had weird mannerisms!” Dolly Alderton, whose acclaimed account of her “roaring 20s” in London, Everything I Know About Love, also hits the BBC this year, found seeing her life reconstructed on screen disconcerting. “It was really, really trippy,” she says. “Some of the argument scenes were verbatim conversations that happened in my life 10 years ago, and watching them felt very strange.” For Alderton, the creative team’s obsessive attention to detail made visiting the set uncanny. “There were all these tiny details that were a carbon copy of the house I lived in,” she explains. “I sent the art director a picture of a drunken letter I had written my friend, promising that if she came out with me that night, I would wake her up early the next morning for work. And there was that letter, from one of the fictional housemates to the other, stuck on the fridge.” Eerie moments of deja vu notwithstanding, Kay and Alderton have both kept a tight grip on the reins of their stories by adapting the memoirs themselves. But Stephanie Land, whose book Maid spawned a hit Netflix series last year – garnering audience figures second only to the streamer’s other huge success story, Squid Game – gave control to screenwriters working under John Wells, former showrunner of ER and The West Wing. “When I learned they planned to fictionalise the characters, I felt relief,” she tells me. “It’s one thing to write a story about your kid’s life. It’s another thing to have it played out as a series.” But while Maid’s writers crafted a story that was part true and part fiction, recasting Land as a young woman called Alex and her daughter Story as Maddy, there were moments lifted straight from real life that hit close to home, particularly when it came to the scenes of abuse. “There were definitely aspects of the show that surprised me in my body’s reaction to them,” Land tells me. “A few times, when it cut to a shot of [Alex’s boyfriend] bending over to yell in her face, it made me flinch. “Those parts were a little too real, and I wasn’t prepared for them.” Like Land, Alderton’s on-screen alter ego goes by a different name – Maggie – but telling them apart is not always easy. “It would be a lie to say that I can completely depersonalise it,” she admits. “There were certainly moments in the process of hashing out stories where I realised that when I was defending Maggie, I was actually defending myself.” For Kay, the distinction between Adam the writer and Adam the character was also a tricky one. “It was always ‘him’ rather than ‘me’ when I was talking to producers,” he explains, “to give myself the necessary distance, and also so I didn’t implode during the many discussions of how dislikable he is – I am – throughout. The truth is that he started as me in every way, and as the writing continued he became his own person, albeit one who constantly says and does things that I did in my actual life.” Alderton also struggled with ambivalent feelings towards her character. “I’m much harder on Maggie than the other creatives on the show,’ she admits. “I will say, ‘I think Maggie is too unlikable here’, or ‘I don’t understand why she’s doing this.’ And it’s obviously because I recognise myself in her, and we are our harshest critics, as the cliche goes. But I also have to be truthful about how much it’s defensive self-preservation. I’m trying to make her a more palatable version of me.” Sometimes, autobiographical shows can even outlast the characters whose experiences are at their heart. Call the Midwife was adapted from the memoirs of author Jennifer Worth, but when Jessica Raine, who played the show’s lead Jenny, announced she wanted to leave the series, the character was written out but the story continued. For showrunner Heidi Thomas, who has delivered more than 80 episodes (with at least two more series confirmed), losing her star was a blessing in disguise. “I realised the drama could open up and expand,” she tells me, “because we would have more time to spend with our other characters.” Having used up the majority of the material in the books by the end of season one, Thomas had already begun supplementing Worth’s stories with accounts sent in by the show’s legions of fans from the nursing and midwifery professions. Worth herself, sadly, never got a chance to see herself on screen since she died during the show’s development period, and Thomas attended her funeral the week before filming began. “There was a lot of trust between us, there was friendship, and I have to say there was love,” she recalls. After her death, any storylines involving the character were sent to her family for approval. “They were entitled to read them and to comment,” explains Thomas, “because I loved and respected Jennifer and I didn’t want to do anything that wasn’t germane to her experience.” In fact, even after Raine left the series, Thomas kept Vanessa Redgrave on as narrator, reasoning that since Worth had stayed in touch with the nuns she had worked with right up to the end of her life, she could continue to tell their stories. In the 2014 Christmas Special she even put Redgrave on screen as old Jenny, wearing some of Worth’s jewellery supplied by her daughters. “It was a way of keeping Jennifer alive,” she tells me. For any long-running series, change is a means of survival, and in the case of shows adapted from true stories, this generally means an increasingly loose relationship to the source material. This Is Going to Hurt was a publishing phenomenon, spending a record-breaking 52 weeks in the charts and shifting more than 2.5m copies. Kay’s one-man show based on the book had sell-out runs throughout the UK. Does he expect the TV show to run and run as well? The answer, surprisingly, appears to be a resolute no. “I wrote it as a self-contained series, with a beginning, middle and end,” he tells me. “Never say never, but at the same time, probably never.” • Call the Midwife series 11 is on BBC One, Sundays at 8pm. This Is Going to Hurt and Everything I Know About Love come out this year on BBC One and iPlayer. Maid is currently streaming on Netflix.The movie Don’t Look Up is satire. But speaking as a climate scientist doing everything I can to wake people up and avoid planetary destruction, it’s also the most accurate film about society’s terrifying non-response to climate breakdown I’ve seen. The film, from director Adam McKay and writer David Sirota, tells the story of astronomy grad student Kate Dibiasky (Jennifer Lawrence) and her PhD adviser, Dr Randall Mindy (Leonardo DiCaprio), who discover a comet – a “planet killer” – that will impact the Earth in just over six months. The certainty of impact is 99.7%, as certain as just about anything in science. The scientists are essentially alone with this knowledge, ignored and gaslighted by society. The panic and desperation they feel mirror the panic and desperation that many climate scientists feel. In one scene, Mindy hyperventilates in a bathroom; in another, Dibiasky, on national TV, screams “Are we not being clear? We’re all 100% for sure gonna fucking die!” I can relate. This is what it feels like to be a climate scientist today. The two astronomers are given a 20-minute audience with the president (Meryl Streep), who is glad to hear that impact isn’t technically 100% certain. Weighing election strategy above the fate of the planet, she decides to “sit tight and assess”. Desperate, the scientists then go on a national morning show, but the TV hosts make light of their warning (which is also overshadowed by a celebrity breakup story). By now, the imminent collision with comet Dibiasky is confirmed by scientists around the world. After political winds shift, the president initiates a mission to divert the comet, but changes her mind at the last moment when urged to do so by a billionaire donor (Mark Rylance) with his own plan to guide it to a safe landing, using unproven technology, in order to claim its precious metals. A sports magazine’s cover asks, “The end is near. Will there be a Super Bowl?” But this isn’t a film about how humanity would respond to a planet-killing comet; it’s a film about how humanity is responding to planet-killing climate breakdown. We live in a society in which, despite extraordinarily clear, present, and worsening climate danger, more than half of Republican members of Congress still say climate change is a hoax and many more wish to block action, and in which the official Democratic party platform still enshrines massive subsidies to the fossil fuel industry; in which the current president ran on a promise that “nothing will fundamentally change”, and the speaker of the House dismissed even a modest climate plan as “the green dream or whatever”; in which the largest delegation to Cop26 was the fossil fuel industry, and the White House sold drilling rights to a huge tract of the Gulf of Mexico after the summit; in which world leaders say that climate is an “existential threat to humanity” while simultaneously expanding fossil fuel production; in which major newspapers still run fossil fuel ads, and climate news is routinely overshadowed by sports; in which entrepreneurs push incredibly risky tech solutions and billionaires sell the absurdist fantasy that humanity can just move to Mars. After 15 years of working to raise climate urgency, I’ve concluded that the public in general, and world leaders in particular, underestimate how rapid, serious and permanent climate and ecological breakdown will be if humanity fails to mobilize. There may only be five years left before humanity expends the remaining “carbon budget” to stay under 1.5C of global heating at today’s emissions rates – a level of heating I am not confident will be compatible with civilization as we know it. And there may only be five years before the Amazon rainforest and a large Antarctic ice sheet pass irreversible tipping points. The Earth system is breaking down now with breathtaking speed. And climate scientists have faced an even more insurmountable public communication task than the astronomers in Don’t Look Up, since climate destruction unfolds over decades – lightning fast as far as the planet is concerned, but glacially slow as far as the news cycle is concerned – and isn’t as immediate and visible as a comet in the sky. Given all this, dismissing Don’t Look Up as too obvious might say more about the critic than the film. It’s funny and terrifying because it conveys a certain cold truth that climate scientists and others who understand the full depth of the climate emergency are living every day. I hope that this movie, which comically depicts how hard it is to break through prevailing norms, actually helps break through those norms in real life. I also hope Hollywood is learning how to tell climate stories that matter. Instead of stories that create comforting distance from the grave danger we are in via unrealistic techno fixes for unrealistic disaster scenarios, humanity needs stories that highlight the many absurdities that arise from collectively knowing what’s coming while collectively failing to act. We also need stories that show humanity responding rationally to the crisis. A lack of technology isn’t what’s blocking action. Instead, humanity needs to confront the fossil fuel industry head on, accept that we need to consume less energy, and switch into full-on emergency mode. The sense of solidarity and relief we’d feel once this happens – if it happens – would be gamechanging for our species. More and better facts will not catalyze this sociocultural tipping point, but more and better stories might. Peter Kalmus is a climate scientist and author of Being the Change: Live Well and Spark a Climate RevolutionWe’re interested to hear how people are celebrating New Year’s Eve 2021, wherever they are. Are you celebrating at all, and if so, how, and with whom? What measures are you taking to avoid being infected with Covid? You can tell us how you’re ringing in the new year – and show us pictures – using the form below. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.A gunman who killed five people and injured two others in a series of shootings in Denver is believed to have targeted the victims based on previous personal and business dealings and was investigated by police twice in the last two years. Denver police said that Lyndon James McLeod, 47, who was also killed in the deadly rampage on Monday night, knew most of the victims and was “on the radar of law enforcement”. Matt Clark, the commander of Denver police’s major crimes division, said: “Based on what we know, it does appear that the offender was targeting specific people in this case. The victims were known to the offender.” He is not believed to have known the last person he shot, a hotel clerk, but police said she may have been targeted owing to a dispute with the hotel. Denver’s police chief, Paul Pazen, said McLeod had been investigated in 2020 and early 2021 but that charges had not been filed against him. These investigations “will be part of this ongoing investigation into this violent crime spree”, he said. He said it was too soon to identify a motive for the killings. The shootings, which started at about 5.30pm, took place across several locations in and around the Colorado capital. McLeod exchanged gunfire with police, injuring an officer, and was killed after he was shot by an officer in a busy shopping district in Lakewood, a Denver suburb. According to records from the Colorado secretary of state’s office, McLeod previously owned a business in Denver called Flat Black Ink Corp at an address that is now World Tattoo Studio. The first shooting was at a tattoo shop less than a mile from the address of his former business and four of the victims were shot at two tattoo shops in the Denver area. The first shootings were in central Denver on Broadway, a busy street with bars and restaurants, where he killed two women and injured a man, who, police said, is expected to survive. He then forced his way into a home, which is also a business, and chased its occupants through the building while shooting, but nobody was injured. A man was then shot and killed at a home near Cheesman Park, also in Denver. Police later chased a vehicle believed to be involved in the shootings and an officer exchanged gunfire with McLeod but he got away and went to Lakewood. Shortly before 6pm, Lakewood police received a report of shots fired at the Lucky 13 tattoo shop. Police said that a man, who they identified as Danny Schofield, 38, was killed there. After his car was spotted at the Belmar shopping area, McLeod opened fire at police and officers shot back, after which he ran away, allegedly threatened people in a restaurant, and went to the Hyatt House hotel, where he spoke briefly to a hotel clerk, who has been named as Sarah Steck, 28, and shot her. She was later pronounced dead. Approximately a minute later, a Lakewood police officer, who has not been named, saw him and ordered him to drop his weapon, and he shot her in the abdomen. The officer, who is in hospital in a stable condition, then returned fire, shooting McLeod and killing him. A victim of the first shooting was identified by family members as Alicia Cardenas, 44, the owner of Sol Tribe tattoo shop. Alfredo Cardenas told KMGH-TV that she owned her first tattoo shop when she was 19 years old and had worked in the area for 15 to 20 years. “Very gregarious, very friendly, but she was a very determined person,” he said. “She knew where she was going.” He said that she is survived by a 12-year-old child. Her fiance, Daniel Clelland, speaking outside her shop where people have placed candles and flowers, said: “I don’t know why someone would do this.” • This article was amended on 30 December 2021. The name of the tattoo shop in Lakewood is Lucky 13, not Lucy 13 as stated in an earlier version.The United States has punched through its record for daily coronavirus cases, as the Omicron variant has surpassed Delta in distribution across much of the country amid a massive surge. The seven-day average of US cases exceeded 267,000 on Tuesday, beating its January 2021 record of 251,232, according to a New York Times database. The fast-moving Omicron variant now accounts for 59% of new infections, up from 23% a week earlier. Hospitalizations, too, are rising, though not to the extent of previous surges. Around 71,000 people were being treated as of Monday, fewer than during the peak of the Delta variant, when more than 100,000 people were hospitalized. On Monday, New York had the highest number of people hospitalized with Covid-19 with 5,772 patients, followed by Ohio, Pennsylvania, Illinois, California and Texas. Deaths, too, are increasing, with the daily average of 1,243, less than third of their January 2021 peak. The surge comes as the CDC controversially cut the number of days that infected Americans should remain isolated to five days from 10, and as health authorities report a disturbing rise in pediatric hospitalizations. The CDC said that after isolation, asymptomatic people should wear a mask around others for another five days. Rochelle Walensky, director of the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said the new recommendations to reduced the isolation period, “balance what we know about the spread of the virus and the protection provided by vaccination and booster doses”. However, unlike January 2021, an estimated 62% of Americans are now vaccinated and in many cases boosted. The CDC announced Tuesday that more than 1.5m shots had been administered in the previous 24 hours. However, Omicron’s surge has caused disruptions in US economy again. The variant has worsened a labor shortage, caused thousands of flight cancelations, and caused some businesses to once again shut their doors. More pressure, too, has been placed on the stressed US healthcare system. Meanwhile, the Biden administration has placed its emphasis on greater access to testing and in promoting booster shots to the vaccinated and convincing millions of unvaccinated Americans to accept the shot. The CDC reported that as of December 14, roughly 85% of adults ages 18 and over in the United States had received at least one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine but 15% remained unvaccinated. Demand for testing has in some regions caused pharmacies to run short of self-test kits as manufacturers rush to produce and distribute any of the eight approved by the FDA. The increases, in the US and other countries, have prompted the World Health Organization to warn of a “tsunami of cases” around the world. In remarks to reporters on Wednesday, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the WHO director-general, said the higher transmissibility of the Omicron variant was adding to the existing circulation of the Delta strain. “This will continue to put immense pressure on exhausted health workers and health systems on the brink of collapse, and again disrupting lives and livelihoods,” Tedros said, on the second anniversary of the pandemic’s emergence. Despite studies that show that the Omicron variant produces less severe outcomes than previous variants, Tedros added that it would still test the world’s healthcare systems. “There is this narrative going on which is: it’s milder or less severe,” Tedros said. “But we’re undermining the other side, at the same time it could be dangerous, because the high transmissibility could increase hospitalisations and deaths.”A lack of lateral flow tests (LFTs) in UK pharmacies is a “huge” problem, providers have warned, as Covid lateral flow tests and PCR tests are unavailable to order from the government website for the second day, not even for essential workers. There are also currently no available appointments for PCR tests at walk-through or a drive-through test sites in England and Northern Ireland, and only very few in Scotland, according to the government website. We’d like to hear how this lack of available Covid tests is affecting people in the UK and the plans they may have made. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The gender pay gap reported to the government by Britain’s biggest firms is widening, Guardian analysis shows, prompting warnings that women face a bleak and worsening economic picture in 2022. Three years after a new law compelled companies to reveal the difference between male and female wages, data shows that eight out of 10 organisations with more than 250 staff still pay men more than women. The most recent set of government data shows women are being paid a median hourly rate 10.2% less than their male colleagues, nearly a percentage point higher than the 9.3% gap reported in 2018. The pay gap in the private sector grew from 8% in 2018 to 9% in 2021, while in the public sector it grew from 14.4% to 15.5% Office for National Statistics data – considered to be the gold standard – shows that the full-time gender pay gap in April was 7.9%, down from 9.0% in April 2019, although statisticians say the pandemic could have caused variations. The gender pay gap for all workers, both full- and part-timers, was 15.4% in 2021. But the government data is considered another barometer of progress – or lack thereof – and a vital tool to push companies to take action to improve pay equality. There are growing fears that long-term economic gains made by women could go into reverse if ministers do not act. “The danger we face is not only a widening of the gender pay gap but a more general widening of wealth and income between men and women,” said Sara Reis, head of research and policy at the Women’s Budget Group. “There is a real risk that all the employment gains of the last decades are being put in jeopardy if women continue to be disproportionately impacted by this pandemic.” Reis said that in the next year women across different earning demographics could be hit, with low-paid workers in hospitality and other hard-hit sectors having hours reduced and jobs cut. Women who are able to work from home could see wages stagnate if they are again forced to homeschool children or miss out on opportunities through not being in the office. “There are likely to be different impacts for different groups of women, but they are all fairly bleak – and overall there is a real risk that progress will stagnate or go backwards,” said Reis. According to research from the group, it is too soon to see what impact the end of the furlough scheme will have on women’s employment. But the over-representation of women in industries with some higher Covid job losses, including retail and accommodation, and the fact that twice as many women as men are in the bottom 10% of earners, leaves them more vulnerable in a faltering economy, it states. Gender pay gap figures collected by the government are imperfect: the median hourly pay gap does not address the gap in similar job roles, the quality of the data is patchy and, due to exemptions, some high-level executives including partners and non-employed, typically low-paid workers, are not included in the data. A Government Equality Hub spokesperson said it would put forward new measures to improve equality for women at work in 2022. It added that the national gender pay gap had fallen by about a quarter in the last decade, with 1.9 million more women in work, which it said was a result “of this government enacting legislation for the right to flexible working, shared parental leave and pay – including a new online tool to check eligibility – and doubling free childcare for eligible working parents”. But an Institute for Fiscal Studies report this month found that “the vast majority of the modest convergence in earnings of the past 25 years” could be explained by the closing gap in education levels. Britain’s gender pay gap data-gathering exercise – which was ahead of the curve globally when it launched – risks falling behind other nations, said Jemima Olchawski, the chief executive of the Fawcett Society. Research from the charity found the UK was “unique in its light-touch approach” to asking employers what actions they would take, while other countries required smaller companies to report. Olchawski called on the government to address the cost of unpaid care work, make childcare more accessible and affordable, overhaul shared parental leave and “look at who is getting access to the most powerful and influential positions” to tackle power and wealth inequality between men and women. “This is a moment of risk and a moment of potential,” she said. “The big pieces of work are still to do, but are all achievable. If we don’t address these challenges we’re damaging our productivity and profitably with our economy at a time when we can ill afford it.” A spokesperson for the Equality and Human Rights Commission, which oversees enforcement of gender pay gap reporting, said measures to improve the gender pay gap – such as hiring more women at entry-level – could also increase the gap in the short term. “Clearly we want to see women on a level playing field with men across society, not only in the workplace, but the reason this is taking time is complex,” they said. “Gender pay gap reporting is about transparency, which then drives action. And the effects of that can take time.”It is clear that the public sector pay gap reported to government remains stubbornly high, at 15.5% versus 9% in the private sector. So where within public services is this happening, and why? In 2018, the first year of compulsory gender pay gap reporting, women working in the public sector earned 86p for every £1 their male counterparts did. In 2021, that dropped to 84p. The vast majority – 88.7% – of 1,545 public sector organisations reported a median pay gap in favour of men, with 693 paying men at least 20% more than women. Of the 50 organisations with the widest gaps –private or public sector – 18 were multi-academy trusts, which run academy schools. The Learning for Life Partnership, which operates five primary schools in Cheshire East, reported a median pay gap of 77.2%, with women earning on average 23p for every £1 their male colleagues did, while the Pele Trust in Northumberland had a median gap of 72.5%. In all, 80 academies had gaps of 50% or more. The Learning for Life Partnership said the pay gap reflected its predominantly female workforce, not pay inequalities, and that staff were paid according to teaching and local authority pay scales. The health service had some of the biggest pay disparities in the public sector – and again the problem is getting worse. Queen Victoria hospital NHS foundation trust had a 32.1% gap while the clinical commissioning group (CCG) in Coventry and Rugby had the highest gap among CCGs, with a median gap of 35.8%. As a small specialist surgical hospital, Queen Victoria hospital said highly paid medical consultants formed a much higher proportion of its workforce than elsewhere in the NHS. When the figures were submitted, it had more than twice the number of male consultants than female. “This will change as more female consultants are appointed and our current female doctors progress their careers with us into more senior roles,” a spokesperson added. Despite making up three-quarters of NHS staff in England, 34 trusts and CCGs reported median pay gaps of 20% or more and 128 had gaps of 10% or more in favour of men. Only 40 NHS trusts had gaps of 5% or less in either direction. Christina McAnea, the general secretary of the public sector trade union Unison, said: “Bigger pay divides in parts of the NHS are often down to the large number of male highly paid consultants and senior medics on the staff. And senior women are more likely than their male colleagues to downsize their responsibilities and take on lower-paid roles as they approach retirement.” Among police forces, Leicestershire had the biggest gap of 31.6%; among local authorities, Tonbridge &amp; Malling’s gap of 29.5% was the widest. A spokesperson for Tonbridge &amp; Malling borough council said most of its management, including the chief executive, were women, but that “the contracting out of some services … saw many lower-paid men coming off the council payroll, which has made it harder to achieve balance at these levels”. Although 15 councils reported gaps of 20% or more, the overall picture in local government is improving, with the median gap now 3.6%, down from 5.8% in 2017-18. In the civil service, pay gaps have also narrowed, with the average median gap now 8.1%. But some departments have much higher rates, including the Treasury (16.8%), the Department for International Trade (15.9%) and the Ministry of Justice (15.6%). A government spokesperson said the national gender pay gap had fallen significantly, with 1.9 million more women in work than in 2010, and that ministers were due to publish proposals to “advance equality for women at work, increasing opportunity and tackling the issues that are holding women back”. But trade unions want the government to go further. McAnea said: “Reporting the figures shines a spotlight on what still needs to change. But only when employers are required to publish action plans for getting to gap zero will true pay equality be achieved.”For 11 days in May, Fatima Shbair hardly slept. When the most recent rounds of fighting in Gaza broke out between Israelis and Palestinians on 10 May, the 24-year-old freelance photographer said goodbye to her mother and left her home to document the stories of her neighbours in Gaza, as their lives were racked by terror. The conflict featured waves of pre-dawn Israeli air raids and rocket fire from Gazan territory. Palestinians made up the vast majority of more than 250 people killed. It took a particularly heavy toll on children. According to the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 66 Palestinian children died, as well as two on the Israeli side. Countless more were kept awake all night by explosions; others had to evacuate the buildings they lived in before they were bombed. During the day, Shbair photographed scenes of destruction and chaos. Then at night, she would stay up editing her photos and listening to the news on the radio, which dictated where she went the following day. Short naps and adrenaline kept her going. “At first my mother was calling me every day asking about me, how things were going,” says Shbair. “I asked her not to call me because I was afraid every time she did. I was afraid about [my family]. I didn’t want to hear bad news.” When Israel and Hamas announced a ceasefire on 21 May after 11 days of fighting, Shbair returned home but still ventured out to capture what was going on. On 24 May, she went to Beit Hanoun, a town on the north-east edge of the Gaza Strip. She knew entire neighbourhoods there had been destroyed, but that many residents had managed to get out in time. Shbair wanted to photograph people as they returned to their homes. “Every family was looking at what happened to their house with great sadness,” she remembers. Shbair came across a four-year-old girl, called Raghad, with her father. “She was so shy when I met her. Her dad helped me talk to her.” Together they went to visit the family’s house. “Raghad was walking with me, carrying her teddy bear. We moved from room to room in a house that only had rubble and broken walls.” They arrived in what used to be Raghad’s bedroom. “I asked her about the room she slept in,” she says. “She stood in complete silence as if she was remembering everything.” It was then that Shbair took the award-winning photo of the young girl standing amid rubble in a room with gaping holes in the wall, and looking out at other buildings in a similar state. “This picture sums up the feelings of everyone in the neighbourhood who lost their homes,” she says. Raghad and her family have since relocated to another area of Gaza and are renting a small house, says Shbair. “I went to see Raghad again. She looks like an angel. “She doesn’t speak much and her eyes are filled with sadness. She still remembers everything and misses her old house and friends from the neighbourhood.” Shbair, meanwhile, is on a break from studying journalism at Al-Azhar University in Gaza while she focuses on her photojournalism work. She taught herself photography, posting pictures on social media, where she gained an international following. In 2020, she began to receive assignments from international agencies, including Getty Images, to cover her home town. Shbair says she faces many challenges as a female photojournalist. The worst, she says, are societal views that dictate women who go to dangerous areas and take photos must be “bad”. “When you go to an event,” she says, “you find that everyone stares at you and starts making hurtful comments.” She does not let it affect her too much, though. “Everything around me deserves to be documented,” she says. “I feel a responsibility to make the voices of the people around me heard, and their images visible.” Her portfolio of photos from the 11-day conflict won her this year’s Anja Neidringhaus Courage in Photojournalism award. While the media spotlight has moved on from Gaza since May, Shbair remains and is determined to carry on sharing people’s stories of sadness and hope. “I want people to know about real life here. There is an everyday war. We have a blockade, electricity cuts, no water. “There are so many things people are suffering each day but they find a way to live,” she says. “They just continue.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:I was born on a farm in northern South Africa. My parents moved nearer to Johannesburg when I was still a baby. They have a photograph of me at maybe six months old, asleep inside my dad’s guitar case. Just picturing it in my mind makes me feel safe. I can hear my dad playing. When I feel overwhelmed, I need something I can listen to on loop. Not just for hours, but for days, sometimes weeks. I think of these tracks as an aural hood. They hold my head together. This year, I found Uwrongo by Ami Faku, the Afro-soul singer who came to prominence on the 2017 South African version of The Voice. Released in 2020, Uwrongo is actually a Prince Kaybee single, which Barack Obama included on his fabled annual playlist last Christmas and also featuring Black Motion and DJ Shimza. But for me, its staying power is all Faku, one of South Africa’s brightest lights. Uwrongo is a landscape in my mind. The opening beat that rattles like loose rings on the tines of a kalimba. The driving keyboard bassline, the syncopated drums. That splash and spray and sweep that good house DJs wield so well. The guitar that could only be South African. And Faku’s voice, this steady hand. Where you’re from, and what you are, are not always straightforward questions. As a shortcut to account for my own mixedness, I often tell people I’m half-French, half-South African. I feel more French than anything else, but we moved to France when I was 12, and for some people, I’ll probably always be a foreigner there. At the same time, being white and African, for me, means a constant unblinking reckoning with what colonialism and apartheid wrought. Those ills are in my bones just as South Africa’s many languages are in my ears. I learned (some) Afrikaans and isiZulu before I did French. Faku is Xhosa but, like most black (but far fewer white) South Africans, speaks several languages fluently. Before we speak, I want to make sure I understand what she’s singing about. I get in touch with an isiXhosa tutor I follow on Instagram who translates Uwrongo’s lyrics for me – they’re mostly in isiZulu, with some lines in isiXhosa. She gets to the few words I’d understood – uhamba and ekhaya, “go” and “home” – and laughs. “So this is a song about someone who is refusing to get broken up with,” she says. It strikes me as funny that I’ve spent 12 months of the pandemic obsessively listening to the line, “This is not working, go home”. But also, suddenly I am 14 again, in France, a teenager living in a language I’ve newly inhabited. Google tells me we’re exactly 11,884km (7,384 miles) away from “home” by way of the Trans-Sahara Highway. But we could be on the moon. I need music not to be something I have to parse for meaning (with my background and temperament, exegesis is force of habit) but something closer to night swimming. Something into which I can recede from words. “So now I know you’re singing about a breakup,” I say to Faku over Zoom. “Exactly,” she says, laughing. “You are jamming to a breakup song!” Even when listeners don’t understand her lyrics, they respond to the melody, which she qualifies as “very church”, and to the emotion. It’s because the writing comes from a true place, she says. Faku grew up singing in church. Her father, like mine, is a pastor. He and her mother have beautiful, low voices. Did that background shape her approach to music, to being quiet or being full of sound? “It took time for me to understand that there’s a connection there,” she says. She mixed in the other sounds she loved: hip-hop, R&amp;B, Caiphus Semenya’s soft melodies, Brenda Fassie’s high energy. Faku doesn’t write with images in mind. Her process is all feeling. In the studio, she’ll hear melodies in beats that other people won’t detect. She once told an interviewer that she hoped to do an international collaboration singing in isiXhosa. “In South Africa, we have a unique sound,” she says. “I want a child listening to me to be proud of whatever culture they fit in.” Does Faku have a favourite sound? “I’m not technical about it,” she says, “but I am a minimalist.” This, too, she pegs to the pared-down nature of ecclesiastic song, sung in the round. “Do you sing a lot at home?” “Well, I never sang for my family,” she says. “I don’t know. I just didn’t think that …” She trails off. “Coming from Ezinyoka, which is a small township in Port Elizabeth, being an artist or a musician isn’t in our space. It’s not a reality for us. So I’m always low key. But when I’m alone, what I do more than anything is I listen more than I sing. I listen more. I listen more.” I listen back to this part of our interview several times. The repetition is beautiful.It is safe to say that the current Ashes series will not be remembered as a classic of the genre. We follow sport for the contest, and the total lack of one is the reason there is so much consternation from wider English cricket quarters, even as the team tries to apply blinkers to get through two more Tests. There have been plenty of one-sided Ashes series, and most teams struggle away from home, but this has been another level. When the tiny trophy has been played for in England in modern times, the contests have been closer. There is 2005, of course, the gold standard, but 2009 was also a 2-1 result that came down to the fifth match. The 3-0 scoreline in 2013 looks skewed, but Australia had two wins rained off on the last day, and came close to winning two other matches. The third and fourth Tests in 2015 were wipeouts for the visitors but they did still make the scoreline 3-2. And the 2019 series was a delightfully absurd carnival ride, with Steve Smith at Edgbaston, Ben Stokes at Headingley and Jofra Archer at Lord’s. Australia’s home wins in that period have not been remotely close, but have still had something to recommend them. The 2006/07 whitewash was a champion team roaring back after being stung by defeat. In 2013/14 the thrill of Mitchell Johnson’s lightning summer made another whitewash compelling viewing. Even in 2017/18 we saw Smith operating at the peak of his considerable powers. The current series has had no champion shaping it, just an English team that has failed to compete from the first ball. So in terms of what we’ll remember in years to come, foremost will have to be that final hour of the second day in Melbourne, when Australia had finished collecting a modest lead of 82 runs, then tore England open to the tune of four wickets for 31 runs by stumps. The Melbourne Cricket Ground is a strange beast. In its vastness, it can host 100 people at a Sheffield Shield match and feel like an abandoned city of the future. It can host 20,000 people for a football match and swallow the lot, still feeling empty. The stands are so high, the seats so far back, that during a quiet day of cricket it can sound like little more than a burble. Or it can come to life, stirring like Smaug on top of his gold, and breathe fire. The data analysts at CricViz track a measure of how dangerous certain bowling is, tracking lines and lengths and swing and seam and speed to calculate the average likelihood of that ball taking a wicket. According to them, Mitchell Starc and Pat Cummins jointly bowled the most threatening opening spell since records began. Cummins has a laconic walk to his mark, legs bowed and gait rolling like has just hitched his horse outside. When he turns, he glides in, the whip of his arm and the work of his wrist angling the ball in towards a right-hander before cutting it away from the bat. The movement isn’t much, but that is his comparative strength. Some bowlers spend their careers beating the edge. Cummins takes it. In contrast, Starc bounds in like a cartoon tiger. He is all limbs and leap, even before the delivery stride. Out of this run he slings the ball down from a low release. This can make his line a lottery, his left-arm angle taking the ball either well wide of off stump or down the leg side. In this series he has spent more time close to the off stump, just wide enough to leave but close enough that players keep being drawn into reaching for it. Ten overs, two wickets, and a thick current of adrenaline buzzing through the place. Starc coming within millimetres of a hat-trick, so nearly completing it against the world’s form player in Joe Root. The noise already wild. And then comes Scott Boland, the local player on debut, first forcing England to employ a nightwatchman, then blasting him out in two balls. A player being bowled is cricket’s most visceral spectator experience. From a distant vantage, a catch behind looks no different to the ball beating the edge. A dismissal leg before wicket looks the same as one not given. When crowds cheer those moments they are cheering an extrapolation of what has happened, not what they know themselves. But when the bails fly, they know. The visual explosion mirrors the raising of voices and hands. And there is the sound, that delicious clunk that can be heard in the most distant seat. That was the moment, the way every person in the ground lit up. Jack Leach left the ball, seeing its line, trying to do the right thing. Instead his choice left him standing still with his bat raised high, front foot forward, not interfering with anyone’s view, underlining just how comprehensively he had been done in. Batting for a final hour was always going to be tough, but the hour became series-sealing drama. We may not be replete with great moments in this series, but that one deserves to last.Scotland has detected a record number of 15,900 new Covid cases, with about 80% of those believed to be the highly infectious Omicron variant, Nicola Sturgeon has told MSPs. In an emergency update to the Scottish parliament, the first minister said positive cases comprised 29% of all tests carried out on Tuesday. The previous Scottish record was reached on Sunday, when 11,030 new cases were reported. Sturgeon said the Omicron variant was so infectious it was reasonable to assume there would be further “steep increases in cases in the days and possibly weeks ahead”. She urged eligible adults to book booster vaccinations after disclosing that so far only 75% had received their booster or third doses. She hinted that the Scottish government may miss its target of getting 80% of adults boosted by Friday 31 December, a target date coinciding with Hogmanay. “Please don’t delay,” she said. “Every booster jab administered now is a step on the road back to normality.” Sturgeon indicated the slowing pace of booster vaccinations had influenced the Scottish government’s decision not to cut the self-isolation period for close contacts from 10 to seven days – a measure introduced by the UK government in England. Facing intense pressure from the Conservatives and Labour to reduce the self-isolation time to ease staffing pressures on businesses and public services, Sturgeon said a careful balance needed to be struck between helping businesses and suppressing the virus. Douglas Ross, the Scottish Conservative leader, said businesses across Scotland were struggling with high levels of staff absence and unable to plan ahead because of Sturgeon’s “dithering”. Some firms were shutting. Big Hogmanay events, including Edinburgh’s street party and fireworks, and the Loony Dook swim at Queensferry, have been cancelled, with ministers urging revellers to remain at home or attend small parties. Sturgeon said neither the Welsh nor Northern Irish governments had cut the self-isolation period, which showed there were doubts it was the best course of action. Her government was offering £375m in emergency support to businesses, including £16m for bus companies, £27m to the cultural sector and £17m to the events sector, she said. “If Covid continues to spread rapidly, the economic impact in the form of staff absences and diminished consumer confidence will be severe. We’re already seeing those impacts. So doing nothing won’t help business,” she said. “We must protect public health and the economy together – by slowing the speed at which Covid is spreading, while we complete the booster programme.” She said 679 people were in hospital, an increase of 80 on Tuesday’s total, with three deaths reported of people confirmed to have had Covid. Over the past week, the number of cases had risen by 47%.The UK steel industry is braced for an immediate slump in trade from New Year’s Day when European Union rivals will gain a 25% price advantage selling to the giant US market. The EU and the US reached a Halloween agreement to remove tariffs on a quota of steel and aluminium imported from the bloc into the US from 1 January, but tariffs will remain on all UK steel and aluminium exports after government talks failed to secure a matching breakthrough. The international trade secretary, Anne-Marie Trevelyan, earlier this month invited the US commerce secretary for further discussions in London, which are understood to be scheduled for January. However, an industry source said they were not optimistic that a deal would be reached quickly. The tariffs were first introduced by former president Donald Trump in 2018 under section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act on national security grounds. Imports supposedly undermined the US’s ability to produce its own steel. British exports to the EU could also be hit because of an unusually strict clause in the EU-US agreement that means steel originating in the UK will still attract the tariffs even if worked on and exported by EU companies. Gareth Stace, the director-general of UK Steel, said: “UK steel exports to the US have halved since President Trump introduced steel tariffs in 2018. There can be no doubt these measures have significantly harmed the UK’s interests in its second biggest steel export market. “Whilst we welcome the move by the US to start easing its tariffs, without a UK deal in very quick succession, our export position will only deteriorate further. It is essential that the government strains every sinew to secure a deal and ensure that UK steelmakers are able to sell their steel into the United States.” Harish Patel, the national officer for steel at Unite, a trade union representing many British steelworkers, said the government needed to explain why the EU had a deal but the UK did not, amid reports that the US was holding back over the UK’s threats to unilaterally change post-Brexit trading rules governing Northern Ireland. The UK negotiated the so-called Northern Ireland protocol barely a year ago as part of the Brexit trade deal with the EU, but it has repeatedly said it may unilaterally break it off. President Joe Biden has warned Boris Johnson against threatening peace on the island of Ireland. Junior international trade minister Penny Mordaunt this month denied that the failure to reach a steel deal was linked to Brexit. She told parliament: “That story might be true in terms of how some people in the United States feel, but it is a false narrative. These are two entirely separate issues.” Patel said: “It is alarming that British-produced steel is being effectively locked out of the critical steel market, as the continuing tariffs make EU steel considerably cheaper. “The government has to sort this matter out quickly. Unless the tariffs are speedily lifted, hundreds of jobs in the steel and associated industries, most of them in so-called red wall seats, are at risk.” A government spokesperson said: “We recognise the vital role the steel sector plays in our economy and our priority is to resolve this dispute to the benefit of workers and businesses on both sides of the Atlantic, removing the need for the UK to levy retaliatory tariffs on US goods. “Until that resolution is agreed, the UK will continue to apply its rebalancing measures to defend our economic interests and the rules-based international trading system.”In Britain, food writing by “minority groups” – and here I’m talking about Indians, because that’s my own background – almost always gives a central role to those “heirloom family recipes” handed down the generations from mother or grandmother. When I started writing about food 20 years ago, an editor even joked that I would have to “invent a grandmother”. It was already a cliche a generation ago, but now this problematic pursuit of “authenticity” through appeals to a mythic matriarch is simply done to death. I’m not the only one fed up with the trope. I recently tweeted about my wish to see an Indian cookbook that actually reflected the growing reality of how so many people in India and across the diaspora learn to cook: not through a storied encounter between grandmother and child, but online. It struck a chord, with Indians commenting in droves. “I feel so seen,” wrote one, while random strangers wondered if I was referring to them. This is not, of course, to say we shouldn’t write about our mothers’ and grandmothers’ recipes. There’s a great deal of value to be gleaned and deeply moving personal accounts to be enjoyed from the best of this type of writing. The restaurateur and chef Asma Khan, of London’s Darjeeling Express, has written wonderfully about her unique heritage, which combines the Mughlai cuisine of Hyderabad and Bengal with British- and Chinese-influenced street food and the cooking of Kolkata gentlemen’s clubs. She is one of many who shed light on regional or family dishes that we may otherwise not hear about. Which leads to my next point: I’m keen to read mothers’ and grandmothers’ recipes if what they cooked was unique – such as making a curry from orange peel, or pickling an unfamiliar berry from Rajasthan. But if these canonised figures are only telling me about bhindi masala or chapati that millions of Indians eat every day, and for which recipes are already abundant, they’re not saying anything new. Moreover, if you’ve been cooking your mother’s or grandmother’s recipe long enough to write about it, surely it’s now part of your own repertoire, and therefore your own recipe? But the crux is this: who are these mythical mothers and grandmothers anyway? They’re not all sari-clad women grinding masalas all day, magically producing aloo paratha and a steaming cup of masala chai out of thin air. The trope becomes a straitjacket, restricting our understanding of the rich and varied lives they have led. Mothers and grandmothers in India were sometimes adding rosemary and thyme to their curries in the 1920s due to the British influence; dancing in jazz clubs in the 1930s; graduating as lawyers and engineers or running bars in the 1940s; hosting supper clubs in their homes in the 1950s; whipping up cocktails and canapes in the 1960s; and may have offered you a slice of green-chilli-flecked pizza from their new electric oven in the 1970s. More recently, you may well catch them surreptitiously adding soy sauce to their dal to amp up the umami, or using sumac as a souring agent in chhole. If you visit a grandmother in India today, she may well prefer to order a milkshake and a curry puff from the local bakery on a delivery app than spend hours making samosas. India – and therefore its food culture – has changed significantly in the past 50 years as a result of globalisation and international influences. Indians have been tinkering with Maggi noodles in their kitchens and tucking into burgers in shopping malls for so long they’ve become part of the cuisine. A Goan Christmas cake is now likely to have been replaced by a Nigella Christmas cake. I’m not saying all traditional dishes have disappeared, just pointing to the vast gulf between the India as fantasised in diaspora cookbooks and the reality. While the disappearance of a historical cuisine makes me desperately sad, I also know that recipes are kept alive when a large number of people cook them, not when a few people record them. Young Indians – but also their mothers and grandmothers – are looking up new dishes on blogs, YouTube, TikTok and WhatsApp. They didn’t all learn to cook at a young age: they may not have been interested; or their mothers may have been terrible cooks; or perhaps they were actively discouraged from entering the kitchen and told to focus on getting good grades instead. They may have learned later in life thanks to a newfound culinary passion or for reasons of practicality, or perhaps as a way of reconnecting to a culture that they turned their back on in their youth. I know of men who attempt to recreate their late mothers’ dishes from memory; of single mothers juggling jobs and kids looking for budget-friendly ideas and short-cuts; of well-travelled young professionals concocting entirely new dishes by fusing the food of their heritage with British flavours and international ingredients and techniques. Cookery books should widen their lenses to capture the stories of all these people. So let’s liberate our mothers and grandmothers from the burden of “tradition”. Let’s change the narrative on Indian food. Sejal Sukhadwala is a London-based food writer. Her book, The Philosophy of Curry, will be published in March 2022If a guest edit by the England and Manchester City footballer Raheem Sterling was intended to cut through the surfeit of Covid-flavoured items that make up the Today programme in 2021, then the news agenda had other ideas. With panicked updates on PCR test shortages and reduced isolation times dominating, it was 40 minutes into Sterling’s special episode before we encountered any of his contributions. Once they had begun, however, it was clear what Sterling’s key themes would be: social mobility, his efforts to inspire the next generation with his charitable foundation, and the impressive feats of the England Euro 2020 squad in the face of appalling racism. From Jamaica – where the 27-year-old was born – we heard about his efforts to help young people out of deprivation. The report was light on detail, but demonstrated Sterling’s importance in the world beyond the UK. Presenter Amol Rajan then spoke to football coach Clive Ellington, an early mentor to Sterling, who highlighted the need to consider the mental health and wellbeing of children who are being primed for sporting success. During the first two hours of the programme, there was much talk of overcoming barriers in society, especially educational ones, but no deeper discussion about why these barriers exist. The story of Sterling’s mother, Nadine, who was forced to take her children to work with her as a hotel cleaner once they had moved to the UK, and bought them breakfast from a vending machine with coins they found in the course of her work, was framed by the programme as something of a tough motivational tale rather than the stark indictment of British society that it is. Chair of the education select committee and Conservative MP Robert Halfon appeared briefly to talk about injustice, speaking too about white working-class children, but it would be good to have heard some more radical brainstorming about what it might take to bridge the entrenched divides in our society, which affect the working classes en masse. It was in the third hour, however, that Sterling’s takeover began to feel like just that, not least when he and England manager Gareth Southgate discussed building a relationship with the fans, and the importance of incorporating the diverse backgrounds of the players into the team itself. Sterling spoke confidently on subjects that felt relevant both to high-end athletes and ordinary folk: building mental resilience; not wishing your life away on social media; avoiding overthinking or becoming mired in negative comments. Southgate, meanwhile, described how he revisited his painful penalty miss at Euro 96 to create a supportive environment for the team he manages. A discussion about their love of football eased into a conversation about society at large, and the value of footballers having their own projects and interests off the pitch. Next, Nick Robinson’s interview with Usain Bolt was occasionally fawning, but once again underscored the links between Sterling and Jamaica, and the importance of sportspeople being allowed to engage with the world at large: “We are humans … why can’t we have an opinion?” asked the sprinter. “It’s unfair to know that somebody would look at sportspeople who work hard and are trying to give back and make the world a better place, and just put us in a box.” We returned to Sterling for the last word, and he spoke impressively about trying meditation; his changing relationship with the media, which vilified him early in his career by focusing on his spending and partying (he felt, he said, as though he was “being targeted”); and how football had been “a lifesaver” for him. It would have been great to have heard more on this, crammed as it was into the final part of the programme. Indeed, it was only here that we learned that Sterling did not attend a mainstream school until the end of his primary education in year six – a detail that felt important considering the discussion of education that had run throughout the previous three hours. Sterling managed to overcome the challenges in his life, he said, by staying mentally and physically fit, but clearly there is much more to the story. We can only hope that Radio 4 will let him come back and tell the rest of it – hopefully before next Christmas. • Highlights of Raheem Sterling’s Today programme may be heard on the BBC Sounds app or at BBC.co.uk/soundsA “charismatic little fish” declared extinct in the wild has been reintroduced to its native Mexico after being bred in an aquarium at Chester zoo. The tequila fish (Zoogoneticus tequila), which grows to no bigger than 70mm long, disappeared from the wild in 2003 owing to the introduction of invasive, exotic fish species and water pollution. Named after the Tequila volcano, which looms north of its native habitat, the species was discovered in 1990 in the Teuchitlán River in Jalisco, south-west Mexico. Now conservationists at Chester zoo and the Michoacana University of Mexico have teamed up to return more than 1,500 fish to the river in a project cited as an International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) case study for successful reintroductions. Recent studies have confirmed that the fish are thriving and already breeding in the Teuchitlán. Experts say it has created a blueprint for future reintroductions of other highly endangered fish species, with a rescue mission for another, the golden skiffia (Skiffia francesae), now under way. Prof Omar Dominguez, of the Michoacana University of Mexico, said: “This is the first time an extinct species of fish has ever been successfully reintroduced in Mexico and so it’s a real landmark for conservation. It’s a project which has now set an important precedent for the future conservation of the many fish species in the country that are threatened or even extinct in the wild but which rarely take our attention.” In 1998, at the outset of the project, the university’s aquatic biology unit received five pairs of fish from Chester zoo. These 10 fish founded a new colony in the university’s laboratory, which experts maintained and expanded over the next 15 years. In preparation for the reintroduction, 40 males and 40 females from the colony were released into large, artificial ponds at the university. This exposed them to a semi-natural environment where they would encounter fluctuating resources, potential competitors, parasites, and predators such as birds, turtles and snakes. After four years, this population was estimated to have increased to 10,000 individuals and became the source for the reintroduction to the wild. A long-term monitoring programme was established involving local people trained to assess water and habitat quality. Dr Gerardo Garcia, Chester zoo’s curator of lower vertebrates and invertebrates, said the successful reintroduction was an important moment in the battle for species conservation. “It is a real privilege to have helped save this charismatic little fish and it just goes to show that with the skill and expertise of conservationists, and with local communities fully invested in a reintroduction project, species can make a comeback from environments where they were once lost,” he said. “With nature declining globally at rates unprecedented in human history – and the rate of extinction accelerating – this is a rare success story. We now have a blueprint for what works in terms of recovering these delicate fish species in Mexico and already we’re on to the next one – a new rescue mission for the golden skiffia is already well under way.”A Russian court has ordered the closure of the Memorial Human Rights Centre (MHRC), a day after the supreme court revoked the legal status of its sister organisation, Memorial International. Moscow city court authorised the dissolution of the group – one of Russia’s most venerated human rights institutions – for the “justification of extremism and terrorism” by religious groups including Jehovah’s Witnesses officially considered “extremist” in Russia. MHRC has said it plans to appeal against the decision in the European court of human rights. On Wednesday evening, Memorial International published a letter from the European court ordering Russia to suspend its decision to dissolve MHRC and Memorial International, pending a legal review of Russia’s “foreign agent” legislation. Russia’s response to the decision, which it is treaty-bound to enforce, is not yet clear. The head of MHRC, Alexander Cherkasov, said he believed the decision to liquidate it was politically motivated and that the Russian government was acting to suppress civil rights. The group had also named Alexei Navalny, an opposition leader, as a political prisoner. His nationwide organisation was declared extremist earlier this year. On Tuesday, Russia’s supreme court dissolved Memorial International, founded by dissidents in the 1980s to research the Stalin-era repressions of millions of Soviet citizens. The court orders conclude a year in which there has been an unprecedented assault on civil liberties in Russia, as opposition activists have been jailed or driven into exile, while dozens of media outlets and NGOs have been declared foreign agents or liquidated outright. Memorial International said in a statement it would “find legal ways to continue our work”, which include researching and popularising information about Soviet atrocities. “Memorial is not just an organisation, nor just a social movement,” the statement said. “Memorial is the demand of Russian citizens for the truth of its tragic past, about the fates of many millions of people. And this demand cannot be ‘liquidated’ by anyone.” The Council of Europe commissioner for human rights, Dunja Mijatović, called the ruling a “deplorable move that will have significant negative consequences for human rights protection in Russia”. She also criticised Russia’s “foreign agents” law for having a “repressive character”. European governments have also criticised Russia’s attempt to close down its oldest human rights organisations. The UK foreign secretary, Liz Truss, said Memorial’s closure was “another chilling blow to freedom of expression in Russia” and that she was “deeply concerned”. A spokesperson for the UN human rights office told AFP that Memorial’s forced closure and the actions of the court “further weaken the country’s dwindling human rights community”.An alleged police culture of impunity helped an officer who took selfies while on duty at a murder scene commit a litany of disciplinary offences on an “industrial scale” for six years, it has been claimed. PC Ryan Connolly, 37, from the Merseyside force, resigned after his taking and sharing of photos of the vulnerable came to light, as well as his sharing of racist and offensive images. The Guardian revealed that between 2014 and 2020 Connolly took photos on his mobile phone of people in mental health crises, in hospitals, and had photos and graphics on his mobile phone that were grossly racist, including an image of a Ku Klux Klan member. Merseyside police and court officials confirmed that Connolly was also convicted in November of three counts of possessing extreme pornography. He will be sentenced next month at Manchester crown court. Connolly faced a discipline tribunal last month, and Vinny Tomlinson, former chair of Merseyside’s Black Police Association, attended. Tomlinson said: “In all of my time working at Merseyside police, Connolly’s conduct is the worst example of one person’s misconduct of this type I can recall. He transgressed on an almost industrial scale, over a number of years, most of which was carried out whilst he was on duty.” Connolly’s case was referred to prosecutors for the photos he took while on duty over the material found on his phone relating to vulnerable people; sometimes it related those who had gone to the police for help, and sometimes suspects. The case was investigated by police, who consulted lawyers from the Crown Prosecution Service, sources confirm. Connolly’s case echoes that of the two Metropolitan police officers who used their mobile phones to take pictures at the scene where two sisters lay murdered. The pair were convicted in court after admitting misconduct in public office. Tomlinson said more answers were needed about the case: “Why has Connolly not faced criminal charges for misconduct in a public office and data protection breaches? Have all of the individuals abused by Connolly been contacted by Merseyside police and aware? Have the family of the murder victim been informed of Connolly’s behaviour at the scene of their son’s murder? “Why has Merseyside police still not published the outcome of Connolly’s hearing within 28 days as it is required to do?” Merseyside police said: “The allegations constituted breaches of force policy, and a gross misconduct hearing was deemed the most suitable means of dealing with the matters.” Details about Connolly come after a horrendous year for policing. In addition to the two Met officers were jailed for their taking of photos of a murder scene, one officer was jailed for a whole-life term after using police equipment to kidnap and murder Sarah Everard after plucking her off a London street in March 2021. In the West Mercia force an officer became the first in over 30 years to be convicted of manslaughter for using violence during the course of his duties. Former PC Benjamin Monk fired an electric stun gun for over 30 seconds at former premiership footballer Dalian Atkinson, and kicked him twice in the head, which contributed to his death in August 2016. Liz Fekete, of the Institute of Race Relations, said: “The increasing number of police officers found to have shared racist, sexist, homophobic and frankly depraved content via private WhatsApp groups suggests police leadership has lost control of the rank and file. “No doubt they will spin these cases as examples of effective internal mechanisms to rid the force of rogue elements or rotten apples, but cases such as these, often undetected for years, are proliferating because these officers believe they are above scrutiny due to a culture of denying racism and silencing whistleblowers within the force.” Andy George, president of the National Black Police Association, said: “Racism and the canteen culture of the past appears to have moved to online platforms where people feel comfortable to speak openly about things they know are wrong in today’s modern police service. WhatsApp groups have been a particular area of concern … “Senior leaders need to admit the systemic issues which allow individuals to thrive and racism to continue which erodes trust and confidence in our diverse communities.” The discipline tribunal found Connolly guilty of gross misconduct. He had resigned before the November hearing, and after the tribunal he was formally sacked by Merseyside police. Connolly had also had an association with a known criminal without informing his bosses. He took photos in 2018 of himself at a murder scene where he had been assigned to guard the cordon after a teenager had been stabbed to death. Merseyside police’s deputy chief constable, Ian Critchley, said: “The behaviour of this officer is deplorable and serves to undermine the public’s confidence and trust in the police. “His actions are an insult to the uniform and the police service, which consistently strives to protect our communities and provide a professional and inclusive service to the people of Merseyside.”A federal judge has refused to dismiss an indictment charging four alleged Proud Boys leaders with conspiracy and obstructing an official proceeding during the 6 January attack on the US Capitol – a development that could have potential implications for Donald Trump. On Tuesday, the US district judge Timothy Kelly rejected arguments by defence lawyers that Ethan Nordean, Joseph Biggs, Zachary Rehl and Charles Donohoe are charged with conduct that is protected by the first amendment right to free speech. He said they had multiple nonviolent options to express their opinions about the 2020 presidential election, in which former president Trump lost to Joe Biden. “Defendants are not, as they argue, charged with anything like burning flags, wearing black armbands, or participating in mere sit-ins or protests,” he wrote in a 43-page ruling. “Moreover, even if the charged conduct had some expressive aspect, it lost whatever first amendment protection it may have had.” As reported by the Guardian last week, expectation is growing that Trump may face charges for trying to obstruct Congress from certifying Biden’s election this year as a House panel is collecting more evidence into the attack. Evidence against the former president could include his involvement in the “Stop the Steal” rally near the White House where he called on supporters to march to the Capitol and “fight like hell [or] you’re not going to have a country any more”. Federal prosecutors have so far cited the obstruction statute in about 200 cases involving rioters charged by the Department of Justice for their involvement in the attack, supported by recent rulings by Trump-appointed district court judges. Nordean, Biggs, Rehl and Donohoe, who are jailed while they await a trial scheduled for May, were indicted in March on charges including conspiracy and obstructing an official proceeding. Nordean, from Auburn, Washington, was a Proud Boys chapter president and member of its national “elders council”. Biggs, from Ormond Beach, Florida, is a self-described Proud Boys organiser. Rehl was president of the group’s chapter in Philadelphia and Donohoe, from Kernersville, North Carolina, was president of his local chapter, according to the indictment. Defence lawyers also argued the obstruction charge was not applicable to their clients’ cases because they claimed the certification of the electoral college by Congress was not an “official proceeding”, but Kelly disagreed. Earlier this month another judge in the District of Columbia’s federal court upheld prosecutors’ use of the same obstruction charge in a separate case against riot defenders. To date more than 700 people have been charged with federal crimes related to the Capitol riot and at least 165 of them have pleaded guilty.An email from Tennis Australia, offering television networks footage of defending champion Naomi Osaka’s arrival in Melbourne, arrived midway through Tuesday. Even for a country renowned for celebrating the arrival of any international celebrity with a chorus of publicity, the sight of the Japanese superstar on the tarmac was a welcome relief. The recent Covid-19 spike has added insult and uncertainty to the injuries that have already ruled legends Serena Williams and Roger Federer out of the Australian Open. If this year’s grand slam was unprecedented, next month’s edition is shaping as another tournament of great apprehension given the pandemic is heating up yet again. Former finalist and US Open champion Dominic Thiem withdrew Wednesday with a wrist problem. Three of this year’s women’s semi-finalists, led by Williams, are out injured. Karolína Plíšková, who played a ripper of a Wimbledon final against Ash Barty, will miss, as will former US Open finalist Kei Nishikori, the high-profile compatriot of Osaka. Rafael Nadal is in Spain recovering from a Covid-19 infection contracted at an exhibition in Abu Dhabi last week that has now seen five positives among a small group of players, including Russian contender Andrey Rublev. It is not yet clear whether Nadal, the 2009 Australian Open champion, will be at Melbourne Park, but local officials are quietly confident the 20-time major winner will travel. Five-time Australian Open finalist Andy Murray, who attended the UAE exhibition, arrived on Wednesday after receiving a wildcard into next month’s grand slam. As for Novak Djokovic, the undisputed king of Melbourne Park, there is no certainty at all regarding his presence at the Australian Open. Late on Wednesday he pulled out of the ATP Cup, due to begin in Sydney on New Year’s Day. For every breathless report about the Serbian, there is no clarity as to whether the nine-time Australian Open champion is vaccinated or not. Little wonder then at the excitement and relief surrounding the arrival of the four-time major champion Osaka, whose return after a mental health break provides a boost of star power. Tournament organisers pulled off tennis’s version of a miracle in February, with players chartered into the country and quarantined before being unleashed on the courts of Melbourne Park. Successfully negotiating the threat posed by the Omicron variant for the summer of 2022 is providing challenges that are no less complex and stressful. While questions abound about the participation of some big names, there is ample evidence to state those who actually get to the baseline possess more than enough punch to ensure another quality edition of the Happy Slam. The US Open proved a clear illustration, with the success of Emma Raducanu, and her final against Leylah Fernandez, prompting stunning television ratings in America and abroad. Daniil Medvedev, the US Open champion and a finalist in Melbourne in February, is clearly a leading title threat after dismantling Djokovic in New York. Alexander Zverev peaked at the ATP Finals when defeating Medvedev and seems certain to break his duck at a major sooner rather than later. The interest and expectation surrounding Barty in her bid to break an Australian Open drought by locals dating back to the success of Chris O’Neil in 1978 is enough to ensure a high-level of patriotic interest. The world No.1 practised on Rod Laver Arena with Billie Jean King Cup teammate Sam Stosur on Wednesday and will head to Adelaide for a tournament next week. She carries star billing for a WTA Tour event in Sydney in the week prior to the year’s first major. Clips of players practising against mattresses laid up against the wall of their hotel rooms heralded an unusual and enormously expensive Australia Open in 2021. The conditions will be less onerous this year, with an extended stint in quarantine reserved solely for those who test positive. But it is certain some will be hindered. The threat posed by Omicron has the potential to wreak havoc on draws over the next month in Sydney, Adelaide and Melbourne. Already Canadian star Denis Shapovalov is serving a 10-day stint in Sydney. Frenchman Benoit Paire announced he is positive again on Wednesday. Others are certain to follow suit. Officials are trying to minimise risk. So, too, star players. Some will stay in homes, with an agent of a leading player telling Guardian Australia that contact with the star will be restricted to a small handful of people over the next month. The majority of players will stay in what Tennis Australia has dubbed a “minimised risk environment” at Crown Hotels, though they will be free to move about Melbourne. Unlike last February, entire plane loads of players will not have to serve strict quarantine should a person aboard a flight to Australia test positive. But it was somewhat surprising to see photos of players on a flight from South America mixing freely and mask-free over a card game given what is at stake. The majority of the 17 flights bringing stars to Australia have now arrived. Another few are scheduled to arrive from late next week for those who are not playing in the events on offer in suburban and regional Australia. For all the optimism, perhaps the only sure thing about the month ahead is the lack of certainty.On a sunny Melbourne afternoon, the perfect temperature for repeatedly but cheerfully embarrassing oneself on a surfboard, I hop into the car and head in the opposite direction to the ocean. Following signs to Melbourne airport, I eventually arrive at Urbnsurf Melbourne, a turquoise pool that generates pristine artificial waves. The lagoon is an impressive two hectares in total, about the size of the MCG playing field. It’s an unusual location for a surf: located in Tullamarine, the facility is only a few minutes down the road from planes and runways. The pools of peeling waves – one breaking left, the other right – are divided by a central barrier. There are six of us here for a “cruiser” lesson, where we will surf green, or unbroken, waves. Our instructor, Julian Goyma, is a musician and music teacher by trade, but also an avid surfer and instructor on the side. The lesson, which costs $99 on weekdays and $109 on weekends, includes board and wetsuit hire. On land, we stretch and practise our pop-ups, and Goyma gives pointers on timing and technique, which I promptly forget about as soon as we are in the water. Our hour-long session in the lagoon promises us at least 10 to 12 waves each. In the ocean, where conditions are not so consistent, Goyma says it might take three hours to catch as many good waves. I am nervous: I have previously surfed a few times in Queensland, but only on tiny waves. On the cruiser setting, the waves have a face height of one metre. We paddle out, single file, to “The Point”, where the waves are generated – in sets of six at the beginning of our session, and later in sets of 10. An underlying rip that pulls towards The Point makes the paddling process far easier than it normally feels in the ocean. The rule at Urbnsurf is one surfer per wave, which on the upside means that there is no competitive jostling, but also creates the effect of spectacle, where the audience are all excellent surfers. I should be able to do this, I think, waiting in the line-up. I’m relatively active! I’m half-decent on a snowboard! I’m … falling face first into a wall of chlorinated water. Surfing is meditative, Goyma tells me later. When he has a lot on his mind he will sometimes get to work early and surf for a few hours before his shift starts. “It’s a really good release.” It isn’t exactly cheap, though. Purchasing your own surfing gear secondhand can lower the costs, Goyma says. “You can kit yourself out for probably $500, but you could spend up to $1,500 or $2,000 for a top-of-the-line board and a top-of-the-line wetsuit.” The adjective I would use to describe my session is exhausting – mainly because I lack what surfing websites call “paddle fitness”. “You look tired already,” Goyma says, about a third of the way into the session. I pant in the affirmative, miffed that my extensive preparations for this activity – a single 1km swim in a lap pool and some sporadic push ups – have been to no avail. We happen to be surfing at the same time as Damon Tudor, Urbnsurf’s chief executive, and his young son, whose skill level is already unattainably impressive. Tudor, who lives in Sydney, grew up surfing in the ocean but sees Urbnsurf as a way to introduce the sport “to people that are maybe not as confident in the ocean as they would be in a controlled environment like this”. Urbnsurf’s progressive lesson pathway caters for all skill levels, he says. Learn-to-surf and beginner sessions – which start around $69 to $79 – are held in the shallower part of the lagoon, while sessions with wave heights up to two metres cater to advanced surfers. The clientele is a mix of both one-off visitors and regulars. “Some people come in once a fortnight, some people come in twice a week,” Goyma says. Like with any skill, how fast you progress (that is, how quickly you stop embarrassing yourself) depends on the amount of time spent. “We had someone who’d never surfed before – it’s actually one of the staff – and they were surfing in the advanced session after six weeks,” Goyma says. “I prefer surfing in the ocean for the [overall] experience, being in nature,” he says. But he’s partial to the wave pool for advancing in ability or working on specific skills. “Because it’s so predictable.” Despite countless wipeouts, I am in good spirits at the end of the lesson. My arms feel heavy but my mind is clear – perhaps it was meditative after all. This piece was supported by Visit Victoria and Urbnsurf Melbourne.Halfway between the Big Merino, which stands like a sentinel on the Hume highway, and a supermax prison is a place known only by a few. Here, less than a kilometre to the east of Goulburn’s main street, is the music of birds twittering in trees, the splash of ducks diving, the ponk-ponk-ponk of frogs in conversation, and the heady smell of eucalyptus. If a healthy landscape is one where birdsong is often heard, then the Goulburn wetlands must be one healthy landscape indeed, which is remarkable considering it is only 10 years old – and not long ago this part of New South Wales was facing a water crisis. It was formed out of clay pits once used by brickworks that closed just after the second world war. For much of the most recent drought, the wetlands were just a hole in the ground. But heavy rain last year and again this spring and summer brought an abundance of water. The regeneration plantings are thriving to the point that banks of wattles and eucalyptus are up to eight metres high. For local people in the know, this is the place to walk your dog in the evening, catch another glorious pink-and-orange sunset, and, of course, see birds paddling about in search of a meal. Friends and Residents of Goulburn Swamplands (Frogs) is a small, volunteer-run organisation that cares for and maintains the wetlands on a weekly basis. They have counted 130 different bird species. Birdwatcher Frank Antram says the list of birds includes the blue-billed duck, which is noted as a vulnerable species, and the ruddy turnstone, which visits from the NSW south coast. It even includes the Latham’s snipe, which flies all the way from eastern Russia and the Japanese islands, and is protected by the Japan-Australia Migratory Bird Agreement. Human visitors can enjoy three timber-and-iron bird hides as kangaroos laze on the nearby grasslands and snakes lurk among the groundcover. President of Frogs, Heather West, also a retired primary school teacher, says people have been drawn to the wetlands during the Covid-19 pandemic – and had more time to get in touch with nature. “People have been out walking, whereas before [lockdown] they were busy driving here and there to do various activities,” West says. “They’ve discovered that there are some really nice things to see.” The link between wetlands and human health is well established. A global report by the Ramsar convention on wetlands in 2018 said they were critical to human and plant life. More than a billion people depend on wetlands for a living and 40% of the world’s species live and breed in wetlands, the global wetland outlook said. Wetlands also mitigate floods, provide food and resources, protect coastlines and play an important role in cultural and spiritual wellbeing. But the value of these ecosystems remains largely unrecognised by policymakers around the world, secretary general of the Ramsar convention, Martha Rojas Urrego, said in the outlook. “The result is that 35% of wetlands, where data is available, have been lost since 1970, at a rate three times greater than that of forests.” The Australian government acknowledges the vulnerability of wetlands to climate change and Australia is a party to the Ramsar treaty for the conservation of wetlands, but some say more needs to be done to protect them. Water crisis sparks idea Bill Wilkes has been a member of Frogs since its early days. As is the way in regional areas, he is involved in other community organisations, including the Goulburn Group, whose members believe urgent action on climate change is needed. Wilkes says the idea for the Goulburn wetlands arose from various community discussions, most of which focused on water. It’s not surprising, considering the town almost ran out of water in 2005 during the millennium drought. Since then, the project has received funding from a variety of sources, including local, state, and federal governments, as well as organisations such as Rotary. But mostly it is a result of hard, physical work. The masterplan, which aimed to recreate a sample of habitats that are thought to have once existed in the region, was also key to the success of the Goulburn wetlands. Seeds from the surrounding area are collected for the wetlands under a partnership with the Australian Plants Society’s local branch. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter “Because we use plants that have local provenance, we have a 90% success rate,” West says. “When we first started planting, we over-planted because we thought we’d lose 50% of them over summer. These days, we water them when they go in, and we never water them again.” ‘A very different world’ Another key to the wetlands’ success has been maintaining a network of like-minded groups, including ornithologists, the local branch of the Field Naturalists Society, the local council and a nearby bushfire brigade, which helped to burn the site before regeneration could take place. The mayor of Goulburn Mulwaree, Bob Kirk, speaks enthusiastically about the wetlands, saying “it changes the focus” of the community. “We have high levels of sporting participation, but kids are growing up in a very different world to what their parents did, and what I did. With facilities like the wetlands around to interest them, to educate them, they will pass that on to others.” Goulburn MP Wendy Tuckerman says she would “love to see even more investment in the wetlands” to support the “fantastic biodiversity and conservation efforts” already undertaken by Frogs. So what does West see in the wetlands’ future? She says the aim is to get the wetlands to “manage itself”. “We know the gum trees are going to fall into the ponds and the wattles are going to die after 15 years. Some gums will be bigger than others and new ones will come up. And the grasses will reseed. So it should just keep on keeping on.” West is interrupted by two women walking a dog. They ask if she and her band of volunteers are responsible for the wetlands. West confirms that is the case. “Thank you,” beam the dog walkers. “We appreciate it so very much.” Nigel Featherstone is an author and freelance writer based in the southern tablelands of NSW. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communitySocceroos Best case scenario: A packed AAMI Park lifts Australia’s men to a thumping win over Vietnam in January and kick-starts a run that, combined with Japan collapsing, and an already-qualified Saudi Arabia putting their cue in the rack, culminates in automatic qualification for the Qatar 2022 World Cup. At that tournament, a favourable draw allows a unit led by a new generation of stars in Daniel Arzani, Harry Souttar, Ajdin Hrustic, Denis Genreau, Riley McGree, and Nathaniel Atkinson to win their first World Cup game since 2010 and remain in the mix to progress to the knockout stages heading into the final minutes of group action. Worst case scenario: The Socceroos’ lean run of form continues and disastrous defeats to Oman, Japan and Saudi Arabia in World Cup qualification see them fall to fourth in their qualification group and miss out on the biggest stage for the first time since 2002. Peter Cklamovski, Mark Rudan, and Hervé Renard all reject Football Australia’s offer to replace Graham Arnold, leading the desperate federation to appoint Ole Gunnar Solskjær as the new coach. and neglect to perform a full review of the national team programs. What will probably happen: Japan hold on to second place in Group B, forcing Australia into a playoff with the third-place finisher in Group A and then a one-game intercontinental playoff against fifth-placed CONMEBOL finisher Chile. Graham Arnold’s legacy as Socceroos boss becomes intrinsically tied to that result. Matildas Best case scenario: Tony Gustavsson’s experimentation bears fruit as the Matildas romp to an Asian Cup win in January. Combined with an influx of standout ALW players, Australia show demonstrable signs of growth in subsequent friendlies against some of the world’s best. The Matildas are now a major contender to lift the World Cup on home soil in 2023, Gustavsson feels comfortable enough with his depth to rest key contributors such as Sam Kerr and Ellie Carpenter. Worst case scenario: The Matildas are stunned by South Korea in the quarterfinals of the Asian Cup and their defensive and midfield issues show little sign of improvement in friendlies against the world’s best throughout the rest of the year. Frustrated, Gustavsson resigns from his post and again takes up a position as an assistant with the United States Women’s National Team, with Football Australia pursuing Phil Neville as his replacement. What will probably happen: Flashes of a soft underbelly remain stubbornly persistent despite the Matildas setting up a heavyweight meeting with Japan in the Asian Cup final and riding an emotional wave to one of their trademark big-game performances. The team shows some signs of improvement in later friendlies as the standouts from Gustavsson’s early experimentation establish themselves and senior figures are welcomed back to the side. But vexing questions still remain heading into 2023. A-League Men Best case scenario: Battling player absences due to Covid, ALM coaches are forced to rely on younger players, and their exuberance inspires the league to shake off its conservatism and embrace an entertaining brand of football. Off the pitch, Western United commences construction of its stadium, Macarthur FC works with stakeholders to lower ticket prices and get more fans through the gate, Western Sydney Wanderers finally start playing like the big team they say they are, and Daniel Sturridge turns out for a full 90 minutes for Perth Glory. Worst case scenario: Rising Covid cases force the league into a two-week hiatus that promptly becomes a one-month, then a two-month, and then ultimately a three-month suspension in play. When play does resume, a significant number of the higher profile names have fled overseas and coaches, as a result, adopt even more pragmatic tactics. The games themselves are poorly attended, lacking in spectacle, and lost in a sea of AFL and NRL coverage. Elsewhere, Western United announce plans to play out of Gippsland in 2022-23, Macarthur FC reveal a new ultra-mega platinum ticket package, Western Sydney Wanderers appoint Paolo Di Canio as coach only for him to quit after two weeks, and Daniel Sturridge drops a diss track on the A-Leagues after returning to Britain. What will probably happen: ALM continues to battle onward in the face of rising Covid cases, with the gulf widening between the better resourced clubs and the rest. With the exception of the Newcastle Jets, teams continue to remain pragmatic in approach in the face of these challenges but ratings-hungry league officials are buoyed when City and Victory set up a grand final Melbourne derby for the first time since South Melbourne faced Carlton in the NSL. A-League Women Best case scenario: Buoyed by the Matildas lifting the Asian Cup with a number of its stars playing key roles, and excitement building over the 2023 Women’s World Cup, ALW continues to establish itself in the public consciousness and increasingly challenges for the mantle of the highest quality women’s league in Australian sport. Caught up in this anticipation, and the prospect of winning the first ever Club Championship, fans of ALM sides increasingly flock to watch their club’s women’s team compete and several set attendance records by the end of the season. Encouraged by these signs of progress and bolstered by their investment from Silver Lake, the Australian Professional Leagues reveal a roadmap to a full home and away season and year-round professionalism on the eve of the Grand Final, as well as plans for each club to create comprehensive youth development programs. Worst case scenario: With Covid showing no signs of abating, ALW is forced into a long hiatus that, due to its players not being full-time professionals, results in a number stepping away from the game in order to support themselves and their families. When the league does resume, Western Australia’s continuing border restrictions result in Perth Glory withdrawing for the remainder of the campaign. The league announces that in the wake of this uncertainty that Western United and Central Coast Mariners entry into the competition will be delayed, which weeks later is followed by the news that the Brisbane Lions have convinced Mary Fowler to switch codes and play AFLW. What will probably happen: ALW soldiers on and is able to complete the season in the face of Omicron-shaped headwinds, even if the pandemic prevents the league from experiencing the growth that would have been hoped heading into the season. Nonetheless, in the form of players such as City’s Holly McNamara, new young stars continue to emerge on the road to 2023. Sydney FC finally get the monkey off their back, defeating City in the Grand Final to become champions. National Second Division Best case scenario: Football Australia announces the launch of a ten-team, fully home-and-away national second division in 2023 that will expand to 16 teams in the following years by promoting the best-performing sides in the National Premier Leagues that meet strict financial and infrastructural requirements. Full promotion and relegation with the tiers below are revealed to be commencing when the 16 team mark is reached. Worst case scenario: Football Australia announces the launch of a conference-based national second division in 2023 which will feature NPL champions from each state, new franchises and a minimum number of ALM youth sides in a Champions League format – eliminating the possibility of promotion and relegation with the lower NPL tiers. Disgusted, a number of NPL clubs break away from Football Australia and attempt to establish their own rebel competition but, without the logistical support of the national federation, it quickly collapses – taking a number of Australia’s most historic clubs with it. What will probably happen: Football Australia announces a national second division will launch in 2023. Everyone agrees that it’s an important step forward for the Australian game but nobody is left happy because, depending on who you talk to, it has gone too far and will inevitably collapse / hasn’t gone far enough and will inevitably collapse. Women’s World Cup 2023 Best case scenario: In the wake of the Matildas becoming champions of Asia once again, the 2023 Women’s World Cup becomes an unlikely vote-winner in the 2022 federal election with both sides of politics making commitments to pour significant money into the growth and support of elite and grassroots football across Australia. Riding a wave of momentum, excitement for the coming World Cup leads to a surge in participation from both girls and boys across the nation with tickets for all the tournament’s games becoming some of the most eagerly sought after in Australian sporting history. Worst case scenario: Taking advantage of the Matildas’ continued sputtering form and an undermanned Football Australia, rival sporting codes successfully move to suck the oxygen out of the room, marginalise the build-up to 2023 and lobby for government funding to be disproportionately directed towards supporting their own causes. A new variant of Covid emerges, casting doubts on the ability of Australia and New Zealand to welcome fans from all around the world to celebrate the marquee event without onerous quarantine requirements. What will probably happen: At least three Matildas friendlies against high-profile opposition are played to record crowds across Australia. Grassroots, community, and NPL competitions get a full season in after two disrupted years. And the successful addition of Western and Central Coast to the ALW continues to give the women’s game in Australia some level of momentum. This, combined with favourable coverage from mainstream media (in spite of any wobbles in the Matildas’ form) leads to steady growth in hype for 2023, with ticket sales anticipated to be very strong when they go on sale.For climate change in Australia, 2021 was the year of the bullshit absolution narrative. The wide grin of a promise of good, with a bag of sinister held behind the back. This was 2021’s grubby climate through-line. The first tactic deployed to protect the fossil fuel industry, organised denial of the science proving the link between greenhouse gas emissions and global heating, was terribly impactful. Though we’ve stamped that out, the space has been filled by a more effective and insidious problem: climate delay. This refers to a suite of spurious arguments used to justify not reducing emissions at all, or reducing them at as slow a rate as possible. You’ve heard these before – they include pleas to wait for better technology, redirecting responsibility to others or emphasising the downsides of action. In Australia, in 2021, governments, corporations, lobbyists, media companies and marketing firms engaged in a weird kind of convergent rhyme. They each realised that a deeply concerned citizenry must be distracted, and the people power that emerged in the 2019 climate marches defused. So, they poured their efforts into figuring out how to best lie about acting on climate (instead of the easier and cheaper option of actually acting on climate). The most obvious example is the conservative Coalition government in Australia. They’ve used the old approach of hollow techno-optimism to mask the total absence of real-world emissions reductions, repackaged this year within the loophole-ridden “net zero” marketing framework. The target of a 26% reduction by 2030 is an international embarrassment. Official government projections show that without any effort at all, emissions will fall by around 30%, due mostly to the growth of renewables (in a grim moment, this was rebranded as an escalation in ambition, and tricks were used to tweak the figure to 35%). The federal government has explicitly incentivised new fossil fuel projects – funding gas power plants, and helping coal and gas mines get off the ground. But in parallel, Australia’s diplomatic forces overseas ran an organised campaign of greenwashing, twisting emissions data to falsely present the country’s past performance and future targets as ambitious, culminating in the Cop26 conference in Glasgow. The government’s insincerity isn’t well obscured. Scott Morrison danced with literal joy when a gas field with unlocked emissions equivalent to 15 coal plants cleared a major hurdle. Less obvious and far less acknowledged is how pervasive the tactics of climate delay have sunk within other players in Australia’s climate debate. The Labor party announced that they were revising down their previous 2030 target of 45% (which they took to the 2019 election) to 43%. That prior target was itself sourced from a report published in 2015, which recommended between 40% and 60%. While the renewable energy parts of Labor’s plan are respectable, the industry sector elements leave a wide range of questions open enough for high emitters to exploit to their advantage. Their trajectory to 2030 relies just as heavily as the Coalition’s 2050 net zero plan on the purchase of offsets instead of emissions reductions. Both major parties fail to include any controls to ensure that companies aren’t just buying up cheap, dodgy offsets instead of reducing their greenhouse gas emissions. Labor also plans to adopt and reform the Coalition’s loophole-ridden “safeguard mechanism” policy, with little clarity on exactly how that reform will take place. Major emitters and fossil lobby groups cautiously welcomed Labor’s plan while laying down the language to frame any real emissions reductions as dangerous or destructive. Labor’s policy was sold as a bottom-up, realist approach. In reality, it leaned heavily on the Business Council of Australia’s policy suggestions, leaving gaps and loopholes that could easily be widened into major climate failure by motivated high-emitters. Running defence for the political delayers and Australia’s worst corporate emitters was News Corp, who wrapped their verifiably awful record on climate in a veil of revisionist greenwashing. Mirroring both major parties, articles like “What polluters are doing to help” serve as the public relations engine of this wider narrative of fabricated action. Rarely acknowledged is the group of marketing and public relations firms getting paid eye-watering sums to churn out climate delay, exposed jointly by CommsDeclare and Clean Creatives. I know we were broken down by an exhausting decade of climate denial. But that exhaustion has created a hopeful credulity. A vulnerability to under-interrogating these glossy stories of reformation. Stop fighting, we asked. Please, end the “climate wars”. Well, they did. Both major parties and industry are in peaceful agreement to fail badly on domestic emissions while extracting planet-wrecking quantities of carbon so it can be burned overseas. The future can only lie in kicking big, destructive holes in the wall of false reassurances and disinformation used to delay climate action. It was easy to spot wide-eyed climate deniers. Can you spot a net zero target packed with backloading and offsets? You need to. I know that Australia’s politicians and fossil fuel executives watched the gut-wrenching black summer bushfire crisis, the same as I and much of the world did. They watched the deep-red skies in the shaky smartphone footage, and the exhausted firefighters collapsing on the streets. Maybe their hearts dropped in their chests when they briefly came face to face with the consequences of unbridled emissions and a heating planet. Two years on, we know for sure that their only real, lingering response was to scramble to figure out new ways to lie about the damage they’re doing. In 2022, we need to reignite the climate wars and fight back against the deadly cult of delay. • Ketan Joshi is a freelance writer and communications consultant specialising in climate and energy who has worked for private and government clean-energy organisations in Australia. He is the author of Windfall: Unlocking a fossil-free futureOfficially the new year parties in Australia’s largest cities will go ahead as planned, despite Covid case numbers exploding around the country. But the night seems set to be much quieter than usual, as individuals dampen their plans, rethinking trips to the usual hotspots in Sydney and Melbourne, and cancelling larger parties or putting caps on numbers, amid warnings from epidemiologists that the night could become a super-spreader event. There were 11,201 positive cases reported in New South Wales on Wednesday and 3,767 in Victoria, with South Australia and Queensland also both well over 1,000. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, has urged people to head out and enjoy the party and large crowds are expected to watch the famous fireworks in Sydney. The City of Sydney said it could not predict how many people would turn out, but five of the six locations it manages were sold out, with about 17,000 tickets booked. Tickets were still on sale on Wednesday for 25 other locations, with capacity for almost 87,000 people. But many private businesses are shutting up shop. One of Sydney’s biggest dance parties, Mad Racket, has cancelled its New Year’s Day event, which was originally set to draw a crowd of 400. “I already had a lot of people I was giving refunds to because people are becoming uncomfortable,” co-founder Simon Caldwell said. “The general vibe was safer to [shut down] than not do it. For people to wear masks indoors when they’re dancing, it’s not the vibe.” He said the suppliers and venue had lost money, but that it was a safer option. “It’s not about shaming anyone who is going ahead, everyone had to make their own call – which sort of made it more difficult in a way because it wasn’t clearcut.” Neesha Chockalingam, 21, had planned to go dancing in Sydney for New Year’s Eve, but one person in her friendship group caught Covid last week, so now they were winding it back to a small party in the park. “We made the decision last week when one of us got Covid,” Chockalingam said. “It ruined our plans because we’re a close friend group, we didn’t want to do it without him. “There’ll be probably not more than five to 10 people. It’ll be small scale.” Melbourne revellers are also weighing up their options. Many are expected to flock to Flagstaff Gardens, Treasury Gardens, and Docklands to watch the fireworks, but some have had second thoughts. . Savannah Benson lives in Canberra but had planned to spend New Year’s Eve with a friend in Melbourne. They made a pact – if Victoria’s case numbers hit 2,000 a day they would cancel the trip. “It was less a concern about actually catching Covid because we both live in Canberra so the risk is there anyway, but more so uncertainty over what would happen if we caught it or became a close contact,” she said. Elliot, who did not want his last name to be used, lives in Tamworth, NSW, with his young family. They had planned to have a large party with extended family and friends, but cut it to an intimate gathering after seeing the case numbers rise. “Now we are down to the micro-bubble of immediate family,” he said. “If it had not been this ridiculousness it would have been a much bigger family and friends party.” He said it was hard to act in your own health interests when there was so much Covid in the state. “I wish our commonwealth and state government would prioritise the health outcomes of its citizens rather than the economic outlook of the state.” Prof Mary-Louise McLaws, an epidemiologist and adviser to the World Health Organization, said it would be “disappointing” if the two governments let their public celebrations go ahead. “I would have expected the authorities to do leadership during hard times and that leadership means trying to save people from infection,” she said. “They’ve had months to understand Australia has a super-spreader event this time of year. The same thing happened last year. “If there is a circulating virus the same thing will happen next year. This is part of outbreak management. I am shocked at the lack of planning to slow down the outbreak.” McLaws said there should also be caps on home visits. “There need to be home capacity limits and, in fact, everyone going to a home should certainly be using a [rapid antigen test] if they all haven’t recently had a booster shot.” She said parties should be moved outside and those attending should wear masks at all times. “And if you can’t risk staying at home because you’re too unwell [in the coming weeks] to go to work, then maybe think about enjoying a celebration from home with your household. Think about it very carefully.”Australia could see daily Covid case numbers of more than 100,000 within weeks – lasting for about a month – before new mask and density rules flatten the curve. The prediction, made by Dr Michael Lydeamore, a Monash University infectious diseases modeller who is part of the Doherty Institute modelling consortium that advises Australia’s national cabinet, came as states and territories reported more than 18,000 cases on Wednesday – a pandemic record. “A month of six figure cases is certainly not outside the realms of possibility across Australia,” Lydeamore said, stressing that modelling is based on “broad and crude assumptions”. He said we could have a month of six-figure infection rates before the outbreak peaks, most likely just after February. Recent models had predicted Covid cases would peak in just over a month’s time. A preliminary University of New South Wales model mentioned by the NSW health minister Brad Hazzard on 15 December predicted up to 25,000 cases a day in that state alone by the end of January. Last Tuesday, there were reports that the Doherty Institute was predicting Australia could have 200,000 new Covid cases a day by late January or early February under a “worst-case scenario”, if no health settings were tightened. However the reintroduction of indoor mask mandates and density limits in various states in recent days means that worst-case scenario models for daily cases are less likely to be reached, Lydeamore said. Instead, infections will be spread further throughout the year with the peak delayed and less severe. “The numbers we are seeing, such as the 11,201 in NSW today, are not in the realm of very high. It can feel very high compared with what we’re used to but it’s a far cry from what it could be soon,” Lydeamore said. He also noted “the restriction levels really mess that up”. “The more restrictions that come in, the later and flatter the curve will be. If absolutely nothing had been done, you would have been thinking January or February as the peak, but we know some restrictions have already come.” Lydeamore said the speed that cases will reach the peak is unclear, but that the fewer restrictions in place, the more that the rate of case decrease after the peak will mirror the rate of increase. “We’re not going to get back down to single digit cases for a very long time. The endemic level of cases will probably be lower than the current level of daily cases we’re seeing now.” Lydeamore also said it was difficult for modellers to factor in how Australians’ attitude to gathering could become more cautious as case numbers surge. Additionally, the speed of the booster rollout and uptake and the effects of natural immunity on reinfection, are variables that could dramatically shape the speed and intensity that the current wave of Covid spreads through the community. On Wednesday, as NSW Dominic Perrottet defended his management of Covid restrictions and health minister Brad Hazzard reiterated that “we’ll all get” Covid, the state’s chief health officer, Kerry Chant, warned the local spread of Omicron could be different to other countries’. “What we know from South Africa is that it’s been quite a massive uptick and then a drop down but there is some science behind that because when you get a certain proportion of the population exposed, you actually boost their immunity and then it almost acts as if you’re boosted with a vaccine through that natural protection. It’s always difficult to draw direct comparisons,” Chant said. Lydeamore also warned that the overwhelmed state of testing systems meant that daily numbers reported this week are likely to be just 80% of actual infections. “The actual number of daily infections in NSW [on Wednesday] is probably closer to 14,000 or 15,000.” “As the testing is stressed, that fraction of cases we detected is likely to drop down, as we just won’t be able to keep testing everyone when you’ve got thousands upon thousands of cases. It’s expensive and time consuming, and you can miss a few hundred and things won’t change much.” Lydeamore said that as cases grow, the number of undetected cases increases, and Covid becomes endemic, modelling in Australia “will pivot to the short term and to situation awareness ”, similar to the way weather forecasts are only made for coming days before accuracy deteriorates and predictions become less useful. Mary-Louise McLaws, a professor of epidemiology at the University of NSW and adviser to the World Health Organization, said she believes the prediction of a peak of six figure case numbers every day for a month could hinge on how governments deal with testing, detection and isolation of Covid from now on. “Factoring in testing times, and if rapid antigen tests are given out for free, could change how you get to the six figure a day for a month prediction,” she said. She noted Lydeamore’s prediction was broad and an estimate, but said that while most modelling provides a worst-case scenario, some predictions can also be the best case because some inputs for the model can change.Business groups have called on state governments to continue dismantling Covid restrictions even as case numbers soar amid staff shortages caused by the highly contagious Omicron variant. The groups renewed their demands for the increased use of rapid antigen testing to enable staff who come into contact with coronavirus cases to return to work quickly if they are free of the virus instead of having to wait at least a day for the results of a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test. Covid numbers rocketed on Wednesday, with the number of new cases in the nation’s most infected state, New South Wales, nearly doubling overnight, from 6,062 to 11,201. Numbers in Victoria, which has the second highest number of cases, also jumped, rising from 2,738 to 3,767. However, business groups said the economic havoc wreaked by the new variant was mostly due to the responses to it by governments rather than being the direct effect of people getting sick. Innes Willox, the chief executive of employer association AI Group, said Australian business was “now suffering from state-induced chaos”. “The biggest danger to improving business conditions is not Omicron but the response to it especially by states who continue to act in muddle-headed, self-centred ways by imposing overly-onerous and ever-changing conditions on business, their employees and customers,” he said. “For our recovery to maintain its momentum business needs certainty and continuity from the states who can properly balance risks and not needlessly promote fear.” He said the state and federal governments needed to “make and stick to agreements on border openings, workable testing requirements, the increased use of rapid testing, isolation and distancing rules”. “They have had nearly two years to work this out and so far have failed miserably to work together,” he said. Andrew McKellar, the chief executive of the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, said the Omicron outbreak had triggered “a degree of disruption”, some of it caused by the “over caution and overreaction” seen in some states. He singled out Queensland’s “very stringent PCR testing requirements and the strain that that’s put on resources”. “We’re still seeing from business that they are confident [and] they do expect that in the months ahead, we should be able to undergo a very strong period of economic activity,” McKellar said. “The main thing will be to avoid the imposition of very severe restrictions and lockdowns, and I think the signals from all jurisdictions has been that they understand that that has to be an absolute last resort,” he said. “There’s no appetite to go back into that space.” McKellar said business groups had been calling since September for the provision of rapid antigen testing “as an important part of the armoury” against Covid-19, having watched developments overseas. It should be an issue for Australia-wide coordination through the national cabinet, he said. “The federal government has to have a leading role in this in sourcing these supplies and making them freely and widely available in the community to business,” McKellar said. “Here’s another golden opportunity for our political leaders to work in a unified way.” Jessica Wilson, a policy director at the Business Council of Australia, which represents the country’s biggest companies, said that to continue its economic recovery from the Covid recession the nation needed to “tear down remnants of fortress Australia” and “stay the course on reopening”. “That means using every tool we can to keep businesses operating, borders open and supply chains working, including using rapid antigen testing,” she said. “Every time a pub has to shut because of Covid it’s not just impacting the licensee but also staff, security, food providers and live music performers – all of who lose pay during this peak season.” Hospitality and retail businesses have so far borne the brunt of the Omicron wave, with many complaining they have been forced to close due to a lack of rapid testing. “This is the peak period for hospitality so to have another year ruined is devastating for businesses reeling after 20 months of restrictions,” John Green, the director of liquor and policing at the NSW branch of the Australian Hotels Association, said. Margy Osmond, the chief executive of the Tourism and Transport Forum, said staff who were forced to isolate after coming into contact with a Covid-positive person were leaving employers “high and dry”. “The announcements today that the Queensland government will accept a negative rapid antigen test from 1 January and that NSW will relax isolation requirements will be widely welcomed, and is a much more commonsense approach to managing the impacts of the latest outbreak ensuring that people who need to most can get a PCR test and those with holiday plans can make it to their destination,” she said. Alan Oster, the NAB Group chief economist, said the market was already bracing for a negative retail sales figure for December compared with the previous month but more because of the growing popularity of Black Friday online sales rather than a demand dent from Omicron. “I would have thought confidence might have had a bit of a hit,” Oster said. “[As for] actual conditions, their sales, their profits, their employment, I suspect less so. “It will be soft, and people will say it was Omicron but it won’t be – it’ll be the change when people buy from Black Friday rather than Boxing Day sales,” he said. NAB’s last economic report for 2021, released on 17 December, predicted Australia’s economy would rebound sharply from the 1.9% contraction in the September quarter. The bank is predicting a 4% expansion for Australia’s economy, less than the Reserve Bank of Australia’s 5.5% forecast. “I’m not sure [Omicron’s] going to change the outcome that much but I would not want to be defending a 5.5 to 6% growth rate in 2022,” Oster said. “We always assumed that international travel wouldn’t really start at least until the middle of next year,” he said, adding NAB’s other key assumption remains that governments don’t lock down borders. Anecdotally, Oster also cited evidence of uncertainty in the hospitality sector as households hesitate to make firm bookings because of the risks of sudden pandemic-triggered changes. His family, for instance, was able to book a table at “Sorrento’s best restaurant” for New Year’s Eve just two days in advance, when normally the place would have been filled long before.As the Omicron variant causes Covid case numbers to surge across Australia, state governments have made a number of changes to rules for interstate travel. While many states relaxed their border restrictions after achieving high levels of vaccination, some have reintroduced certain rules in the wake of the Omicron outbreak and the rapid rise in case numbers. Others have announced domestic travellers will be allowed to use rapid antigen test results before travelling instead of strictly requiring PCR tests. The changes have come as testing sites have been overwhelmed, with drive-in queues stretching around blocks and wait times ballooning across much of the country. Here’s a rundown of each state’s current domestic travel requirements. Victoria Domestic travellers to Victoria are no longer required to quarantine or have a permit to enter, regardless of vaccination status. New South Wales Interstate travellers entering NSW do not need to apply for permits. There are, however, some requirements for people who are close or casual contacts after visiting “places of high concern” in the 14 days before travelling. Unvaccinated close contacts may not enter NSW; if they are identified as a close contact and have already travelled to NSW, they will need to complete 14 days of self-isolation. Fully vaccinated visitors who have been identified as close contacts interstate in the 14 days before arrival can enter NSW, but will need to self-isolate for seven days from the date of exposure. Close contacts who are already in NSW will also need to self-isolate for seven days from exposure. Casual contacts may enter if they have received a negative Covid test, and will need to complete an entry declaration form. Returning NSW residents who are close contacts interstate can come back to NSW to self-isolate. Queensland From 1 January, those travelling into Queensland from declared Covid hotspots will be able to cross the border with a negative rapid antigen test instead of a PCR test. Declared hotspots include all of NSW, ACT and Victoria, as well as all of greater Adelaide in SA and Katherine and Robinson River in the NT. Authorities have recommended that travellers complete a test on the same day they are due to travel, but will accept results up to 72 hours prior to arrival. “What that means is someone today who wants to come to Queensland, because it is within the 72 hours [before] 1 January, you can go and get a rapid antigen test and that will be the valid test for you to come into Queensland from today,” said police minister Mark Ryan in a press conference on Wednesday. From 28 December, Queensland will also no longer require hotspot travellers to get tested on day five after arrival. Chief health officer John Gerrard said he recommended the change after only 0.6% of interstate travellers returned positive tests on day five. All travellers, including those from non-hotspot areas, will still need an entry pass. People who have been required to isolate as close, casual or secondary contacts of a confirmed Covid case or interstate exposure site in the past 14 days cannot enter Queensland. ACT Restrictions for travel into the ACT have been removed entirely, except for close contacts, who are required to complete an exemption form before travelling regardless of vaccination status. Once granted, the exemption will detail quarantine and testing requirements. There is no requirement for people who are not close contacts to provide proof of a negative Covid test. Returning ACT residents who are identified as close contacts may seek an exemption and, depending on vaccination status, complete their required seven or 14 days of isolation in the territory. Those who are notified of close contact status while already in the ACT will need to complete a declaration form. South Australia Fully vaccinated travellers from any state or territory can enter SA and will need to complete an application through EntryCheck SA. As of 26 December, arrivals from NSW, the ACT or Victoria no longer need to be tested after entry or on day six, but will need to have completed a negative PCR or rapid antigen test in the three days before travelling. Unvaccinated travellers will need to apply for an exemption. Western Australia WA’s border remains under tight travel restrictions, with visitors from every other state or territory barred from entry unless they belong to a narrow set of approved travellers. Under current rules, travellers from jurisdictions deemed medium, high or extreme risk are not permitted into the state. All seven other states and territories fall into one of these risk categories. The ACT, NT and Tasmania are classified as medium risk; Queensland and SA are classified as high risk; and NSW and Victoria are classified as extreme risk. Approved travellers from medium and high risk jurisdictions will need to complete 14 days of self-quarantine upon arrival and undergo PCR testing on days two and 12. Those coming from extreme risk jurisdictions will need to quarantine for 14 days in government-approved quarantine facilities, with testing on days one, five and 13. The hard border also applies to residents of WA looking to return, although residents returning from medium risk jurisdictions may be eligible for an exemption on compassionate grounds. All travellers to WA must have a G2G pass, proof of double-dose vaccination and proof of a negative PCR test in the 72 hours before arrival. Plans to ease border restrictions on 5 February are still in place. Northern Territory Fully vaccinated travellers are able to enter the NT provided they fill out a border entry form, have proof of vaccination and have completed a negative PCR test in the three days prior to arriving. If an interstate visitor does not have proof of a negative PCR test, it is required that they complete one within 24 hours of arriving. Travellers will also be given two rapid antigen tests when they arrive in the NT; the first is to be administered within three days and the second on day six. Unvaccinated visitors may not enter the territory. Unvaccinated NT residents or those with an exemption can enter, but will need to complete 14 days of supervised quarantine at their own cost Tasmania Travel is allowed from all other states and territories for those who are fully vaccinated. All travellers to Tasmania are required to complete registration and have proof of vaccination. If coming from an area deemed high risk, fully vaccinated travellers must have a negative PCR test in the 72 hours leading up to arrival. This rule also applies to Tasmanian residents who have spent more than seven days in a high risk area. Tasmanians who have spent less than seven days in a high risk area will need to be tested within 72 hours of returning. Tasmanian premier, Peter Gutwein, has indicated that there will be an update on the possibility of allowing rapid antigen tests for travellers alongside PCR tests after Thursday’s national cabinet meeting. Unvaccinated travellers are currently not allowed to enter Tasmania unless approved; they will need to quarantine for up to 14 days after entry, but may leave quarantine after five days if tests completed on days one and five are negative.La Niña will likely dampen the summer plans of Australians across the eastern and northern parts of the country, meaning families may become even more reliant on their broadband connections to keep themselves entertained. But what if our online requirements and internet connections don’t stack up? The Bureau of Meteorology is predicting it will be a very wet summer, so if your household’s plans to go to the beach are replaced with Netflix, Switch and PlayStation, how do you make sure your internet connection is up to the task? Do you need faster internet? The easiest thing you can do is run a speed test. That will give you an indication of what you’re working with, noting that it’s probably best to test in peak hours – like the evening – to see the worst-case-scenario speeds. The streaming services, for example, will accomodate slower connections and adjust accordingly, but if you are wanting to stream Netflix or Apple TV in high definition, that will be around 5Mbps of speed needed per stream. If you’re wanting to stream in 4K, then it’s 25Mbps per stream. HD will likely be enough for most, but if you factor in multiple people using the internet at once in a household, then it adds up pretty quickly, and you might need to go to a higher plan. Check what plan you’re on If you’re connected to the internet using the National Broadband Network, the first thing you should do is check with your internet service provider what speed plan you’re on, and what your download limit is per month. If you’re on a basic 12Mbps or 25Mbps plan, you may want to see if you can upgrade to something a bit faster, such as 50Mbps or 100Mbps. The higher the speed plan, the more likely your internet will be able to cope with more people streaming and gaming and doing all other online activities at once. Check if you can change your plan You might not be able to actually change your plan, depending on the technology you use to connect to the NBN. Your internet service provider will be able to tell you the highest possible speed you’ll be able to achieve on your current connection, and the corresponding plan the company can then offer to you. See if you can upgrade If you are on a technology like fibre-to-the-node for the NBN and can’t get the higher speeds, NBN Co may be able to upgrade it for you, if you agree to be locked into a higher speed plan for a set period of time, or you agree to fund the fibre extension yourself. This is a much more expensive option, and will run into the thousands of dollars at a minimum, so it’s unlikely many people will choose this just to beat the wet summer blues. The other catch is, it probably won’t be done when you need it. NBN Co was initially starting to take orders from November this year, but the company did not respond to questions from Guardian Australia about whether that had gone ahead as planned. Even if the fibre extension was available, it would still take time to construct, so while in the long term you’ll get a faster NBN, it probably won’t be done before everyone heads back to work or school. See if you have alternative choices like 5G If you live in an area where Telstra or Optus have rolled out 5G, their 5G services are incredibly easy to sign up for and set up at home, and very competitive with NBN plans. Optus’s plan is unlimited data from up to 210Mbps download speeds at $79 per month. The exit fee is just the cost of the modem. Telstra’s plan is $85 a month for 1TB of data, with average speeds of 378Mbps or up to 600Mbps. The plan is month to month, with no exit fees provided the modem is returned. Even if you can’t get 5G, if you are able to get 4G the home modem options are improving, and data rates are cheaper than they used to be. TPG offers home wireless broadband for $54 a month for up to 20Mbps, for example. In regional and remote areas of Australia that do not get good 4G or 5G coverage, your options may be more limited to what the NBN has to offer on fixed wireless or satellite (if they’ve connected you). Brave the rain If all else fails, you might have to put on the gumboots and raincoat and make the most of the summer rain.Last week Guardian Australia staff shared the things on the internet that made them laugh hardest in the past 12 months. We asked you to reciprocate by sharing your online nuggets and, judging by what you came back with, you jumped at the chance to chuckle at Covid, the climate crisis and limbless croissants. 1. If retail workers said what they really think Scott Seiss for anyone in customer service past or present. – Bobgal 2. Tom Cardy does a lot of walking The fellowship of the walk. – Subcutaneousphat 3. Oh deer The 28 June New South Wales Covid press conference about nude sunbathers frightened by deer and all translated into Australian sign language. Then the presser was interrupted by some clown calling himself “The Prime Creator of this Earth” trying to serve a summons on the police commissioner ... Best. Birthday. Present. Ever. – NucMed 4. The brains behind bird names Are ornithologists OK? – ejjnstn 5. Honest Government Ads All the satirical videos from the Juice Media on YouTube. Every one is comedy gold but perhaps not safe for work – at least without headphones. – finnfather 6. Scotty from Marketing The hilarious parody Twitter account Scott Morrison PM of Australia (parody) – Siameez 7. ‘I got vaccinated … I can tell it’s working already’ This has been one of the funniest videos I have watched repeatedly this year. – Ephabee 7. Scary Snowman strikes again The funniest thing has got to be the annual outing for the Scary Snowman. While this year’s might not be considered the best, it’s still pretty funny, especially the little jig carried out by many of the victims. – nadreck 8. An unenthused Scottish parliament tour guide One of my 2021 favourites has been Eleanor Morton’s “Craig the Scottish tour guide” – including this one which has been directly responsible for my overuse of the verb “boke”. – Aironicus 9. Don’t try this at home I only ask, can you chug a can of sparkling water and not burp? – mparker 10. The Kraków croissant ‘creature’ The story and photo of the croissant wedged in a small tree outside a Kraków apartment cracked me up. A woman thought it was an iguana waiting to pounce. Apparently she waited two days before calling for help. – KatrianahWhat’s your ingredient of the year? An ingredient you ate for the first time, rediscovered, cooked a lot over the year, or learnt about this year? Incredibly, I never heard the same answer twice. If anyone is curious, mine is tamarind. I tried to mix up my use of acid this year (there’s more than just lemon and vinegar, I kept telling myself) and tamarind was what I landed on. This is what everyone said. Nagesh Seethiah: yoghurt It’s been around my whole life – I really haven’t given it enough credit. My mum uses yoghurt as the base marinade in her biryani, and my favourite drink growing up in Mauritius was almond dahi, a lassi-style drinking yoghurt. Yoplait should make this available around the world, especially in Melbourne during summer. This year I’ve taken to making yoghurt weekly with Schulz Organic Dairy full cream milk, the most incredible, rich milk we can find. Our yoghurt culture has developed over the past few months into a fabulous being, with a beautiful subtle acidity and richness. Our yoghurt now contributes to a lot at our restaurant: cheeky breakfasts during prep mornings; the base for our kalia sauce, mixed with fresh herbs and masala; while the whey is used to season other dishes or kickstart ferments with a unique lactic note. Nagesh Seethiah is the owner and chef at Manze, a Mauritian wine bar and restaurant in Melbourne John Susman: coral trout The collapse of the Chinese market for live coral trout has resulted in the domestic Australian market having unprecedented access to this truly delicious fish. Most of the coral trout fleet in north Queensland have built quality standards of catching and handling, commensurate with the demands of the live trade, and while most of the domestic demand is for dead fish, the quality is outstandingly good. John Susman runs Fishtales and is the co-author of Australian Fish and Seafood Cookbook Khanh Nguyen: gochugaru My ingredient of year the has to be Korean chilli flakes, also known as gochugaru. The flakes are traditionally made from sun-dried chilli without the seeds. It’s quite mild in terms of heat, with a slightly sweet, fruity and smokey flavour. The flakes have a noticeably vibrant, red colour to them. We season our dishes with it and also make a chilli oil, which turns deeply red. Khanh Nguyen is the co-owner of Sunda and Aru, two Melbourne restaurants Nathan Lyons: chicken thighs It has to be chicken. Such a versatile meat: bake it, fry it, stir-fry it. It absorbs flavour, it’s one of my favourite ingredients to work with. I use the thighs in curries. I’m a curry enthusiast and there’s a lot of varieties of curry – Thai, Japanese, Australian made with Keen’s – I make. The thighs have more flavour than the breast, they’re fattier and they cook better in curry sauce. The breasts can be good for baking and stir-frying, but chicken thighs are in a league of their own when it comes to curry. Nathan Lyons is a western Sydney cook who runs the affordability and accessibility focused TikTok cooking channel Kooking with a Koori Yvonne C Lam: Knorr liquid seasoning “A few drops of Knorr liquid seasoning will complete your dishes with extra richness” – so goes the typeset promise on the sauce bottle. And what a promise. Drizzle it on hot white rice, dot it on just-cracked eggs while they’re sizzling in the pan, and – the ultimate “mod Oz” culinary litmus test – it works wonders with avo on toast. The condiment takes prime place in the hallowed halls of savoury brown-coloured foodstuffs, the likes of which includes soy sauce, fish sauce, Worcestershire sauce; the crusty bits of a steak; the glorious thickness of a good masoor dal. It helps too that the bottle comes in two novelty sizes – a petite 205ml for picnics and novices, and a gigantor 835ml for those who are serious about enveloping their world in raindrops of this savoury saviour. Yvonne C Lam is the digital editor (on maternity leave) at Gourmet Traveller Adam James: hakurei Hakurei are a most delicious variety of Japanese turnip. They are white, around the size of a golf ball and have the most delectable crunch. I love to quarter them and throw them in a wok or wood-fired oven with good olive oil. Both the root and leaves are edible. With the leaves I often make “gundruk” – a Nepalese ferment where you lacto-ferment for a week or two, then sun-dry until they resemble tea leaves. They’re great sprinkled on salads. My favourite application for the roots is in a “perennial pickle bed” where they’re pureed with turmeric and garlic. This becomes rich in lactobacillus and, in time, you can simply submerge whole vegetables (in the paste) only to pluck them out weeks or months later when they’ve transformed into delicious, crunchy and acidic pickles. Adam James is a pickle and ferment enthusiast who makes and sells under the alias Rough Rice Rosheen Kaul: fermented tofu This is a lovely, soft tofu preserved in salt and rice wine, then stored in either oil or vinegar. I personally love the version stored in Sichuan chilli oil, similar to miso in its delicious texture and saltiness. It’s used in braises, marinades, and I love it as a creamy, umami punch in sauces, or sneaking a little spoon straight from the bottle. Rosheen Kaul is the head chef at Etta, Melbourne Paul van Reyk: mushrooms My first taste of mushroom in Australia were grey-brown slimy slices, in a grey-brown gravy tipped on to toast. Colour and texture notwithstanding, I was hooked on the earthy flavour. I’ve progressed since then, and these lockdown years I’ve been comforted by Japanese varieties – shiitake, enoki, cloud ear fungus and shimeji – added to a bowl of two-year fermented brown rice miso soup, umami-ed to the max. Paul van Reyk is food writer, historian and the author of True to the Land, A History of Food in Australia Fides Santos-Arguelles: calamansi lime These fruit are undervalued in their abundance in the Philippines, but so revered in their scarcity by the Filipino diaspora. Like Philippine cuisine, calamansi is relatively unknown, and not commercially available at scale, yet. But if the success of yuzu is anything to go by, there’s hope. For now, you will find calamansi trees in backyards of Filipino households or, very rarely, at Asian grocers. Fides Santos-Arguelles is the cofounder of Entree.Pinays, an organisation on a mission to promote Philippine culture and cuisine Lina Jebeile: za’atar I keep this beautiful spice and herb condiment within arm’s reach of my stovetop, I use it so often in my cooking. From za’atar man’ooshe (a flatbread with a za’atar and olive oil spread all over before baking), to a rub for roast chicken, or sprinkling it on hummus, labneh, eggs or avo on toast, I just love it. Beyond the spice mix, I can’t go without mentioning fresh za’atar. I’ve been on a mission this year to get people familiar with this herb, that’s often confused with oregano. They do look similar and are from the same family but za’atar has a distinct smell and flavour. It is this herb, dried, that is the main ingredient in the mix. I now have a large pot growing in my garden which I often use to make a traditional za’atar salad – which is simply the fresh leaves, sliced red onion and an olive oil, lemon juice and sumac dressing. Lina Jebeile is the owner and creator of The Lebanese Plate Radha La Bia: besan flour This year I’ve rediscovered a simple ingredient: besan flour. Also known as chickpea flour, it’s used a lot in Indian cooking to make pakoras, bhajis and dosas. I’ve been using chickpea flour, in my attempt to avoid gluten, and have found it to add crispness far better than wheat flour. I’ve also started adding it to my banana breads and cookie doughs, for that extra flakiness. My favourite thing to make with it is celeriac fritters: a bit of carom seeds, thinly sliced curry leaves, salt, pepper and a little bit of water to bind it all; then shallow-fry them and serve with a ginger-tamarind pickle. Delicious. Radha La Bia is the alias of Shahmen Suku, a performance artist and cook based in Sydney Kevin Cheng: cornstarch How do Hong Kong and Chinese restaurants achieve that silky egg (wat dan) texture? And why is the protein in your takeaway Chinese always so tender and velvety? And how can deep-fried tofu be so crispy? Cornstarch – or cornflour – is one of the MVPs of Chinese cooking. To call it a shortcut would be an insult to its ingenuity. I’ll never be able to recreate those classic dishes such as wat dan hor (rice noodles in silky egg gravy), or to perfectly marinate cheap cuts of beef in my beef and broccoli dish so that it tastes like a pricey cut. But cornstarch has been a revelation, taking my lockdown cooking damn close to the real thing. That’s the beauty of using such an ingredient, and the elegance and cleverness in Chinese cooking. Kevin Cheng is a journalist and cofounder of non-profit group Soul of Chinatown Gunjan Aylawadi: black chickpeas Living in Australia, I’d almost forgotten how we added protein and iron in our mostly plant-based diets back home. As much as I love my tofu and mushrooms, the idea of them, meal after meal, gets a bit depressing. Black chickpeas have saved the day multiple times a week for me, I cook them once and the batch keeps on giving. High in protein and fibre, they’re a magic ingredient to add to salads and wraps. I use the cooking water (black aquafaba) as stock for dals and rice, and one sip of this iron-rich liquid gold takes me back home to where my mother used to squeeze a lime into a cup of hot, salty aquafaba for a quick soup before dinner. Gunjan Aylawadi is a chef and owner of Flyover Fritterie, an Indian street food bar in Sydney Hisham Al-Bakri: kantan (torch ginger) This herbaceous flower is an ingredient we use in Malaysia a lot. Native to Malaysia and Indonesia, you’d find it in the forest where it grows really tall. It’s bright pink. It looks almost like a Waratah. We only use the bud – it’s very aromatic. I use it in kantan spiced chicken, where I slice the flower very thinly, mix it with other aromatics and stir-fry it, then I coat deep-fried chicken in the sauce. It’s got a piquant flavour; it’s a bit peppery. It’s my ingredient of the year because not many people know it, but whenever I describe it, my customers fall in love with it. Hisham Al-Bakri is the chef and owner at Kantan, a northern Malaysian restaurant in Melbourne Kym Masters: yuzu Usually I’d pick cheese – it’s the ingredient of the year every year, isn’t it? But my secondary ingredient is yuzu. We’ve now got some great growers in Australia, and it’s becoming much more accessible and used in more and more interesting ways. I had a delicious kingfish ceviche at the beginning of the year which had a yuzu dressing, at Maxwell Wine. You see some sake and gins that have got yuzu, and I’ve also had a yuzu cheesecake that was off the charts. I use it to make citrus dressings at home. I balance it with lemon, because it’s such a strong flavour. Kym Masters is the director and head cheese maker at South Australia’s Section 28 Juan Carlo: maiz (corn) We opened our restaurant this year and we’re trying to showcase Mexican food, so my ingredient is a fairly obvious one – corn. It’s such a foundational ingredient. We use a heap of corn: local Australian sweet corn and heirloom varieties we have to import from America. In Mexico, we have so many varieties that are all used for different purposes, some just for soup, some fresh, some for making tortillas, some for popcorn. I would love to see some heirloom varieties grown in Australia. Having conversations with farmers is next on the list, but as you know, nature has its own ideas. It might be a slow process. Juan Carlo is the head chef and co-owner of Maiz Mexican Street Food in Sydney Palisa Anderson: honey What does the world need to survive, and hasn’t changed, hasn’t been doctored, in millions of years? Pollination. My ingredient of the year is honey. There are so many controversies around honey these days, because of the problems within our agricultural methods and the way we cotton on to certain fads in our diets. This came into the public consciousness around 10 years ago when the US and Europe were talking about bee death, and that came to Australia. We had this fad of nut milks and nuts – it’s a monoculture providing that produce. Bees don’t naturally occur in that environment; they have to bring them in. Then they sell their honeys as single-flower honeys, another fad they can market. The way we farm, we let all the natural grasses grow out and flower. Because of all that natural flowering, the honey takes on a really interesting flavour. It’s just such a joy to watch the bees too. Last year was the first year we brought on European bee boxes. We got 120kg of honey, and I’ve been lathering it on everything. This season’s honey tastes like citrus flowers, and the tea tree that was flowering at the time, at the farm across the road. It’s like liquid gold, more valuable than anything because it means my bees are thriving – and if they’re thriving, it means we’re not breaking the landscape. Palisa Anderson runs Boon Luck Farm, an organic farm in the Byron Bay area, as well as Chat Thai restaurants around Sydney Gayle Quarmby: saltbush Saltbush can be used in so many varied ways; it’s great in stir-fries – we learnt that from our friend Kylie Kwong. Because of the texture, it holds its bite. It doesn’t disappear like western spinach does. It’s also got great colour; I’m an artist and I love the contrast of the colour in a dish. And it can be tempura-ed to be a little crunchy thing to have with beer. It’s a terrific bar snack. I also make bread for my grandchildren and always put saltbush in – just for a little boost of vitamins. It also connects us to country and place. It’s about social consciousness around our First Nations communities and their food. To bring their food to our table is really relevant in this time. Saltbush is a pioneer plant, a great regenerator of the land. When you have land that has been overused, it can be salt that is the problem for using that land for agriculture. Saltbush will scavenge salt out of the ground and change it into a very useful mineral for people’s diet. Gayle and Mike Quarmby used to run the native ingredient businesses Outback Pride and Outback Fresh before retiring Suci and Santhi Ida Bagus: bird’s eye chilli A bringer of joy and serotonin, we use it in everything from our sambals to our marinades to chopped up and added to our home-cooked pasta during family dinners, tears streaming down our faces as we offer each other more chilli! “It’s hot,” I’d say; “Oath it is,” my sister would reply … “More?” “Ef yes.” It’s been a hot year here in Melbourne, and by hot I mean volatile and full of heated emotions. Sometimes I felt like my belly was full of chilli as heat and anger rose in me. What best to do? Cook something and add some chilli. Therapeutic and delicious. Eggs for brekkie while home schooling my teen and nephew? Sure thing! Side of chilli? Awww, go on then … Suci and Santhi Ida Bagus run Warung Agus, a Balinese restaurant in West Melbourne What has been your most indispensable ingredient, must-use or best rediscovery of 2021? Let us know in the comments and we may publish a selection of readers’ favouritesIt has been years since football surged past cricket to become England’s favourite sport. Even so, more than a century after cricket’s “golden age”, an Ashes Test series between England and Australia remains one of the most resonant contests in the sporting calendar. This week, after the latest ignominious England defeat in Australia, it seems sensible to ask two questions. How come? And for how much longer? For some of us, cricket is still the most wonderful of all sports, uniquely balancing individual skill, collective effort and the need for time and strategy. But why are England now playing it so badly? The Ashes contest is uniquely deep-rooted in national legend. The Bradmans and Bothams cast long shadows. But why has this inspired Australians to heroic feats, while reducing England to nervous wrecks? It was predictable that the latest humiliating defeat of Joe Root and his team would trigger a bout of cricket soul-searching. The finger of blame has been pointed at inadequate preparation, defective batting technique, dropped catches, poor spin bowling, and lacklustre coaching and captaincy. All these are relevant. But they don’t get at a deeper underlying “why?” The BBC’s Jonathan Agnew is among those who cast the net more widely. He points to enduring structural defects within English cricket itself. These include the marginalisation of the long form of cricket, of which Test matches are the pinnacle, in favour of the limited over “white ball” short forms that TV companies, advertisers and many supporters prefer. Not that this clash of codes seems to have troubled the Australians much. Few have yet tried to take a larger view. One who has is my Guardian colleague Jonathan Liew. He identifies a basic cultural difference between the Australian and English approaches. “To play Test cricket for Australia in 2021 still essentially means something,” Liew wrote this week, citing the match-winning performance of Scott Boland, only the second cricketer of Indigenous Australian heritage to wear the trademark baggy green cap. By contrast, Liew points out, “the very point of the England Test team has become somehow blunted, dissolved, obscured”. Again, one asks – why? The question would have been grist to the mill of arguably the 20th century’s most original writer on English cricket. It is half a century now since Rowland Bowen wrote what is still, for all its flaws and quirkiness, the single best cricket book of its era. But Cricket: A History of its Growth and Development Throughout the World, published in 1970, stands the test of time. On the face of it, Bowen was a character out of English cricket central casting. A retired Indian army officer and perhaps a former spy, he was one of that tribe of white, private school, upper-middle-class men whose fanaticism about cricket still forms a significant stratum of the English game’s support. To call him an eccentric would be an understatement. This was a man who, believe it or not, amputated his own right leg in his bathroom in 1968 to prove it could be done. His book, though, was another matter. Its central argument was that cricket’s rise reflected the flourishing of the industrial and imperial ages, and that English cricket was becoming unsustainable as industrial and imperial Britain came to an end. Bowen also thought cricket’s decline was intertwined with English racism – he pointedly chose the great Caribbean cricket writer and Marxist CLR James to write the introduction to his book – and he believed that most of the agonies of English cricket were caused by the wishes of those who controlled the game to preserve something that was historically doomed. As misguided determinists do, Bowen sometimes let his vision of epochal decline get the better of him. Fifty years on, cricket has not been reduced to “rough and ready” status, metal bats have not replaced wooden ones, Wisden still comes out each year and the counties continue to provide the basis of the English game. Cricket’s adaptability has been greater and more successful than Bowen expected. The shift in power over world cricket from England to India was not something he foresaw either. Even so, Bowen would have had a pretty clear understanding of why England get beaten in the Ashes so often. He would have put cricket’s problems in a larger social context. He would have said the pathways to cricket’s renewal and growth have been cut off, closed and neglected, making the game increasingly unsustainable at the grassroots, especially in state schools which have either had to sell their playing fields or never had them in the first place. He would have said cricket suffers because it is no longer even visible, either in the flesh or on terrestrial TV. He would have said this is because the game has become overprofessionalised, existing too exclusively for the benefit of those who play, administer, promote and make money out of cricket for a living rather than being encouraged to grow more organically and in new ways within English society as it is now. He would have looked to the popularity of cricket in the subcontinent as a striking alternative model. And he would have said cricket has not come to terms with its own racism. English cricket has a long, bad record on race, embodied by its support for apartheid-era South Africa. You know something is structurally wrong by comparing Gareth Southgate’s England football team, which often has five or more minority ethnic players and which is comfortable in its diversity, with Root’s side, which had just one player of non-European heritage this week. England footballers take the knee. Its cricketers do not. As Michael Holding powerfully says, cricket is simply not serious enough. By far the most important thing that happened in English cricket this year was not the Ashes defeat but the exposure of the game’s institutionalised racism. A third of recreational cricket players in England are of south Asian heritage; that dwindles to just 4% at the elite county level. The complaints made by the former Yorkshire player Azeem Rafiq have at last blown a hole in the culpable complacency of his former county. But Yorkshire – of which I am a member – is not the only club that needs to start again from scratch. It requires particularly powerful blinkers not to see links between these factors and England’s Ashes defeats. England cricket – and its overindulged Barmy Army of supporters – is too complacent, not very good and spends too much time in a bubble of Anglosphere exceptionalism. It is at risk of becoming a metaphor for Brexit, deluded about its abilities and achievements, promoting itself as the envy of the world when it is not, and resentful of its critics. The world has moved on. Perhaps cricket lovers should do so too. Martin Kettle is a Guardian associate editor and columnistSharjah left it late at Leopardstown on Wednesday but the most reliable Christmas bet of recent seasons eventually delivered for his backers, edging a neck in front of Zanahiyr to win the Grade One Matheson Hurdle for the fourth time and emulate Istabraq and Hurricane Fly, two of jumping’s all-time greats, as he did so. Sharjah was favourite for two-mile contest for the first time in his career, having started at 6-1, 9-2 and 11-2 for his three previous successes, but he was only fourth turning for home and needed some encouragement from Patrick Mullins to launch his challenge. The final hurdle was bypassed due to the low sun and while Zanahiyr fought gamely to cling on to the lead, Sharjah responded to claim the win with a couple of strides to spare. “That was not good for the heart,” Willie Mullins, the winner’s trainer, said. “Patrick said he wasn’t as sharp as other years and then with the last hurdle missing, he got pushed out on to yesterday’s ground and that just blunted his speed in the last furlong. “He managed to do it anyhow and it was a terrific race. He’s been a spectacular horse, fantastic for Patrick and Rich and Susannah [Ricci, Sharjah’s owners].” Sharjah has made four trips to the Cheltenham Festival in his career without success, although he has finished second in the last two renewals of the Champion Hurdle and was brought down at the third flight in 2019. He has also been below his best in the last two runnings of the Irish Champion Hurdle in February and Willie Mullins may send him straight to Cheltenham this time around. “It might be the thing to do,” the trainer said, “as [the Irish Champion] doesn’t seem to work for him.” Sharjah remains third-favourite for the Champion Hurdle at around 10-1, in a market headed by the unbeaten Honeysuckle, last year’s winner, at a top price of 4-5. At Newbury, Stage Star extended his unbeaten record over hurdles to three races with a convincing six-and-a-half length defeat of West Balboa in the Grade One Challow Novice Hurdle. Paul Nicholls’s five-year-old was cut to around 8-1 for the Ballymore Novice Hurdle at Cheltenham in March, a race in which his stable companion, Bravemansgame, finished third last season after landing the Challow. “We might follow the same route that Bravemansgame did last year,” Nicholls said. “He is straightforward and that was a really taking performance. “I can’t believe how much speed he has got [and] that is by far and away the best performance he has given. All in all a great performance from a horse who is going to be a lovely chaser in time.” Stage Star is now one of three horses at single-figure odds for the Ballymore, along with Henry de Bromhead’s Journey With Me, who readily defeated Kilcruit, one of last season’s best bumper horses, in a maiden hurdle at Leopardstown on Wednesday. Journey With Me and Sir Gerhard, last year’s Champion Bumper winner, are marginal favourites at a top price of 7-1.The Christmas attack on Hong Kong website Stand News was no great surprise in a city where all forms of political opposition are being dismantled wholesale, but the scale, speed and nature of the operation to shutter this pro-democracy website were still shocking. Over 200 police officers swept into the newsroom, and others fanned out over the city making arrests under a harsh sedition law from the days of British colonial rule that had been gathering dust for decades. Activists warned that the legal charges used against the website could effectively make any critical journalism illegal in Hong Kong, after a senior police officer said they were based in part on publication of news reports that “incited hatred towards the Hong Kong government”. “They are making it illegal to do honest reporting,” said Nathan Law, exiled pro-democracy activist. “If you ‘incite hatred’ to the government by reporting truthful news, you are also subject to this law, which means you can only talk about the positive side of the government now. This is the signal they are trying to send.” Establishment links and foreign passports are no protection; those detained include former board members and pop star Denise Ho, who is a Canadian citizen, and Christine Fang, who spent years at the heart of the Hong Kong elite including serving on multiple government committees. The fact that both had stepped down from their positions months earlier, when Stand News also took down much of the political commentary on its site, was also ominous. It suggested that even those who have tried to accommodate the new political order may face punishment for past work. “It means that being a respected establishment figure or having a foreign passport won’t spare you. They had already stepped down. Short of renouncing their previous involvement, what more could they have done?” said Yuen Chan, a senior lecturer in journalism at City, University of London. Stand News was the most prominent and influential pro-democracy site left in Hong Kong after authorities forced popular tabloid Apple Daily to shut this summer, raiding its newsroom, freezing its assets and detaining key members of staff. While that closure took days, Stand News was out of operation within hours, with Hong Kong authorities more confident and experienced after months of using new legal powers to shutter groups from civil society to major media outlets, dismantling the political opposition. Among tributes to Stand News, many reporters and readers shared a list the outlet created of organisations disbanded over the last year. There were over 50, even before Stand News was added. The erasure of dissent has extended to the city’s physical landscape, with the pre-Christmas removal of memorials commemorating Beijing’s deadly 1989 crackdown on Tiananmen Square democracy protesters. Just months earlier the shuttered website had been held up by pro-Beijing lawmaker Regina Ip as an example of press freedom still surviving in Hong Kong, amid widespread international condemnation of the closure of Apple Daily. Now journalists are wondering who, in a city with a fast-diminishing number of independent reporters and outlets, will be next. “The arrests of six people associated with Stand News amounts to an open assault on Hong Kong’s already tattered press freedom, as China steps up direct control over the former colony,” said Steven Butler, Asia program coordinator at the Committee to Protect Journalists. “Authorities must release the six and drop all charges against them immediately if Hong Kong is to retain any semblance of the freedoms that its residents enjoyed only a few years ago.”Time to wrap up.. after a day in which UK blue-chip shares finally clawed back all the losses from the 2020 crash, but omicron concerns weighed on other markets. Here’s today’s main stories: We’ll be back tomorrow. Goodnight. GW The gender pay gap reported to the government by Britain’s biggest firms is widening, Guardian analysis shows, prompting warnings that women face a bleak and worsening economic picture in 2022. Three years after a new law compelled companies to reveal the difference between male and female wages, data shows that eight out of 10 organisations with more than 250 staff still pay men more than women. The most recent set of government data shows women are being paid a median hourly rate 10.2% less than their male colleagues, nearly a percentage point higher than the 9.3% gap reported in 2018. The pay gap in the private sector grew from 8% in 2018 to 9% in 2021, while in the public sector it grew from 14.4% to 15.5% Ikea has increased the price of its flat-pack furniture by up to 50%, blaming supply chain costs caused by Covid-19, in a move that will further stoke growing concern about the rising cost of living. After customers complained that prices appeared to have risen sharply after Christmas, the retailer said it was no longer able to absorb increased costs and was passing them on to consumers. An Ikea spokesperson tweeted: “Unfortunately, there has been a significant increase in costs across the supply chain, including in raw materials, transport and logistics. As this is still ongoing it is necessary to increase prices across many of our products.” Archived versions of Ikea’s website from as recently as October showed significant price increases, including a Malm desk that has gone up from £99 to £150, a jump of more than 50%. More here: London’s benchmark stock index has finally returned to the level it stood at in February 2020 before the Covid-19 crisis sent global markets into one of the biggest panics ever seen. The FTSE 100 gained more than 1% on Wednesday morning after a two-day Christmas break, moving 50 points beyond the mark it was at just before the pandemic crash 22 months ago. It hit a high of 7,457.14 points, before closing at 7420.69 points tonight. The landmark came amid growing evidence that the Omicron coronavirus variant of concern may cause less severe symptoms – although record daily UK case numbers mean Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland introduced new restrictions on Boxing Day. The FTSE 100 closed on Friday 21 February 2020 at 7,403.92. When it opened again on Monday 24 February it slumped, the first day of an unfolding market panic that had few precedents. The severity of the coronavirus outbreak was already clear by then in China but investors – not to mention politicians – had not yet appreciated the depth of the changes it would wreak on the global economy. The World Health Organization that day said the outbreak was not yet a “pandemic”. Yet Italy had just reported its seventh death from Covid-19, and lockdowns were in place in its northern regions, a sign of the wave of infections that was about to sweep through Europe and the rest of the world’s richest economies. China had already announced its first lockdown a month earlier, on 23 January. From that day until its low three weeks later, the FTSE lost more than a third of its value, or 2,500 points. It was the biggest quarterly contraction in London-listed share values since the aftermath of Black Monday in October 1987. It was also the fastest fall into a bear market – 20% below the previous high – ever seen on Wall Street. Yet from that low point markets surged back, thanks to a combination of extraordinary monetary stimulus from central banks such as the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of England combined with a huge bout of government spending. Other European stock markets had a weaker day, weighed down by Omicron concerns. The pan-European Stoxx 600 dropped back from yesterday’s five-week highs, finishing 0.2% lower. Germany’s DAX (-0.7%) and France’s CAC (-0.27%) lost ground, having rallied yesterday (when the City of London was still on holiday). The record surge in French Covid cases, with over 200,000 reported in the last 24-hours, highlighted the dizzying speed at which the Omicron variant is spreading. Britain’s blue-chip share index has ended at its highest close since February 2020. After a day in which it finally regained its levels before the Covid crash 22 months ago, the FTSE 100 index has ended the day nearly 49 points higher at almost 7421 points, up 0.66%. It earlier hit an intraday high of 7457.14, as hopes that omicron will be less severe than Delta lifted shares as traders returned to their desks after a four-day holiday. UK steam engineering firm Spirax-Sarco (+3.5%) topped the FTSE 100 risers, followed by electronics distributor Electrocomponents (+3%), postal operator Royal Mail (+2.8%) and consumer credit reporting company Experian (+2.6%). But travel and hospitality firms were among the fallers, with airline operator IAG down 2.1% and hotel group Whitbread losing 1%, as Omicron cases continue to rise globally. Among smaller companies, holiday group TUI shed 6%. The US housing market lost some momentum last month. Contracts for home sales dropped by 2.2% in November, weaker than expected, according to the National Association of Realtors’ (NAR) Pending Home Sales Index. Limited housing stocks, high prices, and worries about the pandemic may all have weighed on the market. Lawrence Yun, NAR’s chief economist, said: “There was less pending home sales action this time around, which I would ascribe to low housing supply, but also to buyers being hesitant about home prices. While I expect neither a price reduction, nor another year of record-pace price gains, the market will see more inventory in 2022 and that will help some consumers with affordability.” Financial markets are poised for a bumpy ride in 2022 in the face of soaring inflationary pressure, rising interest rates and ongoing disruption to international supply chains caused by the Omicron variant of coronavirus, experts have said. Analysts and financial investors said Omicron’s emergence had raised the prospect of a stagflationary start to the new year, with weaker levels of economic growth despite intensifying price pressures in already stretched supply chains. The winter energy crisis will also weigh on Europe’s economies.... although many pundits suggest stocks could still be higher in a year’s time..... What should investors be watching out for next year? Possible risks include a possible Covid-19 ‘super-variant’, surging inflation, and a financial market crash as central bankers withdraw stimulus. More here: The UK steel industry is braced for an immediate slump in trade from New Year’s Day when European Union rivals will gain a 25% price advantage selling to the giant US market. The EU and the US reached a Halloween agreement to remove tariffs on a quota of steel and aluminium imported from the bloc into the US from 1 January, but tariffs will remain on all UK steel and aluminium exports after government talks failed to secure a matching breakthrough. The international trade secretary, Anne-Marie Trevelyan, earlier this month invited the US commerce secretary for further discussions in London, which are understood to be scheduled for January. However, an industry source said they were not optimistic that a deal would be reached quickly. The tariffs were first introduced by former president Donald Trump in 2018 under section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act on national security grounds. Imports supposedly undermined the US’s ability to produce its own steel. British exports to the EU could also be hit because of an unusually strict clause in the EU-US agreement that means steel originating in the UK will still attract the tariffs even if worked on and exported by EU companies. Gareth Stace, the director-general of UK Steel, said: “UK steel exports to the US have halved since President Trump introduced steel tariffs in 2018. There can be no doubt these measures have significantly harmed the UK’s interests in its second biggest steel export market. “Whilst we welcome the move by the US to start easing its tariffs, without a UK deal in very quick succession, our export position will only deteriorate further. It is essential that the government strains every sinew to secure a deal and ensure that UK steelmakers are able to sell their steel into the United States.” UK travel stocks are dropping further into the red, as global omicron cases continue to hit record levels. IAG, which owns British Airways, are now down 2% while holiday operator TUI has dropped 5%, with cruise liner group Carnival off 4.6%. Omicron infections continue to rise very sharply in many countries. France, for example, has reported a daily record of over 200,000 new Covid-19 cases. Reuters has the details: France is seeing a “tsunami” of Covid-19 infections, with 208,000 cases reported over the past 24 hours, a new national and European record, Health Minister Olivier Véran told lawmakers on Wednesday. France has been breaking infection records repeatedly over the past few days, with Tuesday’s 180,000 cases already the highest for a country in Europe, according to data on Covidtracker.fr. “This means that 24 hours a day, day and night, every second in our country, two French people are diagnosed positive,” Veran said. “We have never experienced such a situation,” he said, describing the increase in cases as “dizzying”. Global COVID-19 infections have hit record highs over the past seven days, Reuters data showed on Wednesday, as the new Omicron variant spread rapidly, keeping many workers at home and overwhelming testing centres. Véran added that the situation in hospitals was worrying because of the Delta variant, with Omicron yet to have an impact. The flu will further complicate things for hospitals, he said. Our Covid-19 liveblog has more details: Wall Street is heading lower, with the tech-focused Nasdaq Composite down 92 points, or 0.6%, at 15,691. UK housebuilders, a gauge of economic optimism, are in demand today with Persimmon and Berkeley Homes both gaining 2%. Royal Mail are also in the top risers, up 2.8%, behind engineering company Spirax-Sarco which is up 3.5%. The pound has risen to its highest level against the US dollar in almost six weeks. Sterling has gained half a cent to $1.348, the highest since 19th November. Optimism that Omicron will be less severe then Delta are helping the pound, says Jeffrey Halley of OANDA: “Sterling looks to be catching an omicron tailwind as cases remain high, but hospitalisations low,” Wall Street has made a quiet start to trading - having already rallied earlier this week. There’s some caution after US Covid infections hit record levels, while trading volumes are still modest due to the post-Christmas lull. The Dow Jones Industrial Average of 30 major US companies has gained 60 points, or 0.15%, to 36,458.22. The broader S&amp;P 500 index has gained nearly 8 points to 4,794, towards the record high set on Tuesday before stocks slipped back. America’s trade deficit in goods has widened to a record high, as the US economy continues to suck in imports, just as export demand weakens. The US goods trade deficit widened last month by 17.5% to $97.8bn, up from $83.2bn in October, the Commerce Department says. That breaks the previous record deficit set in September of $97bn. It keeps the U.S. on track in 2021 to post its biggest annual shortfall on record, Marketwatch points out. Imports were boosted by businesses seeking to stock up for the holiday shopping season. Consumer demand for goods has been strong this year - as the US economy has kept growing, and stimulus cheques and record low interest rates have supported household spending. Bitcoin is not having a happy December. The largest cryptocurrency is on track for its worst month since May (when it took a sharp tumble.) It’s dropped to around $47,000 today, from $57,148 at the start of the month. That’s some way off its record high of over $68,000 this year, but still up around 60% this year (outpacing the FTSE 100’s 15% gains). Adrian Kenny, senior sales trader at the UK based digital asset broker GlobalBlock, says there is anxiety over options contracts which expire at the end of the year, possibly creating volatility: Bitcoin failed to hold $52,000 after a short-term breakthrough on Monday and continued to slip below $49,500 Tuesday in a move that seemed to pull the broader market to a lower low. Whilst Bitcoin’s overall trading volumes were consistent, a total of 129,800 option contracts (with value of just over $6 billion) are set to expire on the 31st December which is believed to be fuelling overall wary sentiment for the short term. This is also indicated by the Fear and Greed index showing a sentiment of 27, a widely monitored indicator within the crypto space. Electric cars have gone mainstream in Europe – they accounted for nearly a fifth of all car purchases in the UK last month. Yet one piece has been missing up to now: European batteries. That is now changing. On Tuesday night, Northvolt, a startup, produced its first lithium ion battery cell at a plant in northern Sweden. It is the first of a series of new factories that investors hope will allow Europe to carve out a big proportion of the electric vehicle market – and weaken the stranglehold built up by manufacturers in China, Japan and Korea. The Northvolt Ett site will be the first European-owned plant to produce at so-called gigafactory scale. Gigafactories are generally considered to be those capable of producing enough batteries each year to provide about 15 gigawatt hours (GWh) of cumulative storage. Here’s the full story: Pubs, bars and restaurants missed out on more than £10,000 each in the week leading up to Christmas, figures show, as concern about the Omicron variant and government guidance to work from home ruined the crucial festive period for the second year in a row. Sales were down by as much as 60% compared with the same period in 2019, according to the trade body UKHospitality. Trading had been close to pre-pandemic levels before the emergence of Omicron but plummeted as consumer confidence collapsed, it said. Work from home guidance meant city centre venues were particularly hard hit, while takings at the average venue were down £10,335 compared with 2019 levels on a nationwide basis. 2021 has been the busiest year for stock market floats in London since the financial crisis, although some have performed better than others. 122 companies listed on the London Stock Exchange (LSE) this year, raising over £16.8bn. LSE has raised more capital for IPOs than any year since 2007, and more (they report) than Amsterdam and Paris put together. London’s underperformance in the last couple of years, compared to the US, is partly because there are much fewer tech companies listed here. But this year, 39% of all IPO capital in London was raised by tech or consumer internet companies, with a combined market capitalisation of £31bn at IPO. This has included Oxford Nanopore (which has rallied from 425p to 715p), and Wise (which has dipped from 800p to 762p). Less successful IPOs included Deliveroo, which slumped by a quarter on its debut and is now at record lows (at 212p, having floated at 390p). Julia Hoggett, CEO of LSE plc says: “2021 has demonstrated the strength of the UK capital markets with our most active year since 2007. It has also highlighted the vital role LSEG’s capital markets play in supporting innovation, growth and the transition to a low-carbon economy.” The Telegraph has calculated that more than one in three stock market debuts are trading below their listing price. 2021 was also a blockbuster year for capital markets across the globe, with companies raising over $12tn altogther through selling shares and bonds or taking out loans, the FT reports. The FTSE 100 is firmly on track for its best month in over a year. The blue-chip index has gained 5.3% in December, as it bouunced back from a late-November tumble when Omicron fears rocked markets. That would be its best month since November 2020, when it surged 12% - lifted by the US election, then successful vaccine results from Pfizer (closely followed by Moderna and then AstraZeneca) which sparked a global rally. Gas prices are continuing to fall back from the alarming record levels seen earlier this month. The day-ahead cost of UK wholesale gas has tumbled by over 11% this morning to 203p per therm, the lowest since mid-November That’s down from over 450p per therm last week, but still relatively high -- it was below 60p/therm at the start of the year. Europe’s energy crunch may be easing, due to rising temperatures and the news that several tankers of liquified natural gas initially heading from the US to Asia have diverted to the continent. The UK wholesale gas contract for January delivery has dropped by 7.6% today to 254p per therm. European prices are also sliding, as Bloomberg explains: European gas prices slumped for a sixth day, the longest losing streak in more than a year, as cargoes of the liquefied fuel head to the continent just as industrial shutdowns and warm weather curb demand. Futures fell as much as 9.7% on Wednesday as a flotilla of U.S. LNG cargoes is headed to the region, while several vessels that were sailing to Asia have now diverted to Europe. More supplies come after record prices earlier this month forced factories to halt or slow output, curbing demand just as the continent faces unseasonably warm temperatures. Data watch: Loans to households and businesses in the euro area picked up last month, despite the rise in Covid-19 cases this winter Reuters has the details: Lending to euro zone companies accelerated for the third straight month in November, reversing in part a steady decline in the early part of the year, European Central Bank data showed on Wednesday. Lending to euro zone businesses expanded by 2.9% last month, a pick-up from 2.5% in October but well below the 7% recorded a year earlier. Household lending growth rose to 4.2% from 4.1%, holding broadly steady over the past six months. The annual growth rate of the M3 measure of money supply, mostly a reflection of the ECB’s copious bond purchases, dropped to 7.3% from 7.7%, below market expectations for 7.6% growth. Oil is trading at its highest levels since the omicron variant emerged a month ago. Brent crude rose to $79 per barrel yesterday, as concerns that energy demand would be significantly hurt by the latest wave of Covid-19 faded. That’s its highest level since 26th November (the day after the UK announced travel restrictions on six Southern African countries), and up from $66/barrel early this month. US crude (WTI, or West Texas Intermediate) is also at a one-month high, around $76/barrel. A drop in US oil stocks has suggested that demand is holding up, as Ole Hansen, Head of Commodity Strategy at Saxo Bank, explains: Crude oil trades near a one-month high after API’s weekly stock report showed a 3.1 million barrels drop in US crude inventories with smaller declines also seen in gasoline and distillates. The underlying low liquidity momentum driven rally this month has taken the price of WTI and Brent well above the range lows (approximately 77 for Brent and 75 for WTI) seen prior to the late November Omicron sell off. With the market currently betting the Omicron virus, despite a global surge, will not derail robust global demand, the mentioned hold has opened the door for a return to the cycle highs from October. Although London has rallied to 22-month highs, Asia-Pacific markets dipped today as Omicron fears still lingered. South Korea’s KOSPI fell 1.1%, while China’s CSI 300 lost almost 1.5%. Traders are wondering what impact Omicron will have in Asia once it starts to escalate there as well - as factory closures or disruption at ports will knock global supply chains. Raffi Boyadjian of XM explains: Vaccination rates vary greatly across Asia and even those countries with a very high uptake level have yet to get started with booster jabs. Hence, there’s a fair bit of uncertainty hanging over the growth picture in the first few months of 2022. These jitters, combined with ongoing concerns about China’s regulatory crackdown on its tech sector are weighing slightly on Asian markets today. Shares in Hong Kong, China and South Korea fell the most. Europe also succumbed to some profit-taking, though London’s FTSE 100 jumped about 1% as it played catchup after a two-day bank holiday. US stock futures were positive too, indicating sentiment is more likely to improve than not during the course of the day. While stock market investors can toast some solid gains this year, 2022 is going to be painful for households, particularly the less wealthy, due to a tightening cost of living squeeze. My colleague Hilary Osborne explains, 2022 could be the ‘year of the squeeze’: UK households face a hit of £1,200 next year as stalling wages and rising tax and energy bills cause a “cost of living catastrophe” in the spring, a leading thinktank has warned. Government measures, including the new social care levy on national insurance and the freezing of the personal income tax allowance, will combine with high inflation to make 2022 the “year of the squeeze”, the Resolution Foundation said. It warned that in April the introduction of tax changes, with a new price cap on energy bills, will cost families £1,200 overnight. “The months ahead will not be easy for households who see their wages fall back as energy bills and taxes rise,” the report said. “As Omicron hopefully fades in the early months of 2022, we will come to realise the scale of the challenge posed to household finances.” Here’s the full story: After an hour’s trading, London’s index of top shares is holding its gains. The FTSE 100 has now hit 7457 points, up 1.1% or 85 points, a new 22-month high -- as it recovers all its pandemic losses since the February 2020 crash. After a four-day break, City traders (and bloggers) are catching up with gains in the US and Europe earlier this week. Analysts at Saxo Bank say there’s been a “blistering rally in equity markets”: The Omicron variant continues to rage and fails to register on this market, even as global cases topped a million for the second day running. Forecasts that the UK economy will outperform G7 rivals next year could also be lifting the mood today. Economists expect Britain’s GDP to grow faster than major rivals in 2022, as The Times explained yesterday: UK GDP in 2022 could hit 4.6%, slowing from 6.9% this year, but fast enough to bring the UK back to its level before the outbreak of the pandemic in March 2020, according to economists at S&amp;P Global. Economists at Goldman Sachs predict the UK will grow by 4.8% in 2022, while HSBC expects 4.7% expansion in the UK. In contrast, predictions for other G7 countries range from 2.2% for Japan to 4.3% for Italy. Goldman expects the US to grow by 3.5%. The International Monetary Fund also expects Britain to grow faster than the rest of the G7 club, with a GDP prediction of 5% for 2022. More here: Britain to recover the fastest of G7 countries However, the UK did also suffer a rather sharper plunge in 2020 than G7 rivals (UK GDP shrank over 9%, the worst in a century), meaning it has further to climb back. The US, in contrast, has already reached its pre-pandemic size. Air travel in and out of the UK slumped by 71% in 2021 as the second year of the Covid-19 crisis took its toll on international flying, according to a report. Just over 406,000 international flights operated from the UK this year compared with almost 1.4m in 2019 before the pandemic struck and travel restrictions were imposed, said the aviation analytics firm Cirium in research reported by the BBC. UK domestic flights were found to have declined by almost 60%. The budget carrier Ryanair remained the largest airline in the UK, Cirium said, operating more than 100,000 UK flights in 2021, followed by easyJet, with more than 82,000 flights in total. The busiest international route was between London’s Heathrow and New York’s JFK, even though the US only reopened its borders to UK travellers in November. Travellers from the US had been able to fly to the UK since 28 July. Short-haul flights were the most popular, though, with eight out of the 10 busiest routes to mainland Europe. They included London Heathrow to Amsterdam, Paris Charles de Gaulle and Frankfurt. More here: Travel stocks are missing out on today’s rally in London. British Airways parent company IAG (-1%) is the top faller on the FTSE 100. Among smaller firms, holiday operator TUI (2.9%), and cruise operator Carnival (-2%) are also weaker, reflecting worries that the pandemic will continue to hurt travel. Despite pushing global markets to around record levels this week, investors are still monitoring Omicron closely. While there’s optimism that the restrictions in force in some countries won’t last for very long, any further disruption to supply chains could hurt economic growth Naeem Aslam of Think Markets says: Investors should note that in the coming months, how nations respond to the ever rising number of coronavirus cases is likely to be the main driver for volatility in stock markets. The United States has reported more than 4.1 million COVID-19 cases in December, which is much higher than last month’s 2.54 million cases. The cases reported over the last seven days have amounted to 231,888 [the seven-day average], which is thrice the average seen on November 27. Despite the surge in cases, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) has cut down its recommended isolation period from 10 days to 5 days for patients who do not seem to be exhibiting Covid-19 symptoms. Moreover, another development on this front is that research from South Africa shows that infections from the new strain can actually improve immunity of patients against the delta variant. Most stocks on the FTSE 100 have opened higher, as trading resumes after the City’s Christmas break. Retail companies are among the risers in London, with JD Sports up 2.8%, Next gaining 2.6%, and DIY chain Kingfisher up 1.9%. Engineering group Rolls-Royce, which makes and services jet engines, has gained 2.9%. Gambling group Entain has picked up 2.8%. Only nine of the hundred stocks on the FTSE 100 are lower, with some mining stocks dipping. Britain’s blue-chip share index has finally recovered all its losses since the pandemic crash of February and March 2020. The FTSE 100 inded has jumped to 7445 points at the start of trading, up 73 points or almost 1% this morning. That’s its highest level since February 20th 2020, just before the pandemic caused stock markets around the globe to tumble. Hopes that Omicron will be less severe than Delta are lifting stocks, even though the UK saw another record rise in cases yesterday. Yesterday Sir John Bell, regius professor of medicine at Oxford University and the government’s life sciences adviser, said that although hospital admissions had increased in recent weeks as Omicron spreads through the population, the disease “appears to be less severe and many people spend a relatively short time in hospital”. Fewer patients were needing high-flow oxygen and the average length of stay was down to three days, he said. This morning’s rally means the FTSE 100 index of leading UK-listed companies has now gained 15% this year, as economic optimism lifted global markets to records. But the Footsie is still below its record high (7903, set in 2018) unlike the US and European markets which hit a series of new peaks in 2021. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Stock markets are ending the year on a positive note. The seasonal Santa Claus rally is lifting shares, as investors shrug off concerns over Omicron-driven disruptions to travel, hospitality and retail. America’s S&amp;P 500 index hit its 69th record high of the year on Monday, and European markets reached five-week highs yesterday, on signs that the latest variant may be less severe than Delta. And in London, the FTSE 100 index could hit a new 22-month high when it reopens this morning after the festive break, after a brief rally on Christmas Eve: Kyle Rodda of IG says there seems to be a very upbeat backdrop for global markets, although trading volumes are light due to the Christmas holidays. A benchmark of global stocks also ascended to fresh record highs; while European shares also posted solid gains. The big theme circulating in the market right now is Omicron, as infections surge across the globe and now make up 59% of cases in the US, Rodda adds: The bulls and the bears – the former are certainly winning the argument if price action is any guide -- are divided down the line of what Omicron might mean for economic fundamentals. The bull case is that Omicron is so mild that hospitalisations and deaths won’t creep up and lead to economically damaging lockdowns. The bear case is markets are complacent, and Omicron is so infectious that even a smaller hospitalisation rate will overwhelm healthcare systems. The agenda 9am GMT: Eurozone loans to companies and households in November Noon GMT: US weekly mortgage applications 1.30pm GMT: US goods balance in November 3pm GMT: US pending home sales in NovemberThe Centers of Disease Control and Prevention is investigating or observing 86 cruise ships with reported Covid outbreaks on board as the pandemic is reaching a new peak in the United States with record numbers of infections. In addition to having already investigated 48 vessels, the agency has started investigating 38 ships, which according to its update, remain “under observation”. Cruises leaving ports across the US resumed in June after being halted for over a year due to the pandemic. The agency regards cruise ships as hubs of contagion, especially as the more contagious Omicron variant spreads. “Cruise ships involve the movement of large numbers of people in settings where they are likely to have close contact with one another,” it said. “Cruise ships may also be a means by which infected persons travel between geographic locations,” it added. The CDC investigates a ship if the cases onboard are reported in 0.10% or more of passengers on restricted voyages, which typically have thousands of passengers and usually sail for five to 10 days. If a ship is carrying 6,500 passengers, it would require at least seven passenger-cases during the previous seven days to meet the agency’s investigation threshold. The CDC also investigates a crew-only ship if cases are reported in less than 1% of crew. The majority of the 86 cruise ships being investigated or monitored by the CDC belong to the largest three cruise operators: 32 of the ships are owned by Carnival, including its Holland America and Princess Cruises brands. Royal Caribbean owns 25 and Norwegian Cruise Line owns 15. In a tweet on Tuesday, Senator Richard Blumenthal criticized the resumption of cruises, saying: “Our warnings have proved sadly prescient &amp; continuously compelling. Time for CDC &amp; cruise lines to protect consumers &amp; again pause – docking their ships. Cruises are repeating recent history as petri dishes of Covid infection.” Anne Madison, a spokesperson for the Cruise Lines International Association, reiterated the cruise industry’s cooperation with the CDC. “The Cruise Lines International Association (CLIA) and our members … continue to have very productive dialogue and are working together with the CDC in the interest of public health and safety,” she said. “Many of our members have announced additional measures in response to the Omicron variant, including strengthening testing, masking and other requirements, as well as encouraging booster vaccine doses for those eligible – and some cruise lines are requiring an additional test at embarkation,” she added. The 86 cruise ships continue to sail, despite the investigation.For more than two decades, Unexport has shipped millions of kilograms of produce annually from farms in the southern Spanish region of Murcia to clients in the UK. Brexit has transformed the relatively straightforward process into a bureaucratic nightmare, yielding border waiting times of up to 10 hours for lorries laden with lemons and lettuce, said Domingo Llamas, its president. Given the damage already inflicted by the UK’s exit from the bloc, plus the coronavirus pandemic, he sees the final implementation of thrice-delayed checks as just “one other thing” to manage. “The lorry that doesn’t have the document will be caught in the queue and those in behind will have to wait for them to move aside,” Llamas says. “At the end of the day, it might mean more time in the queue. “There’s just more and more bureaucracy. You need this document, this document isn’t completed properly, now go back to the queue and so on. Covid isn’t helping either.” Even when lorries arrive at the border with all the necessary documents, they risk being held up by less prepared hauliers. “If those in front of you don’t have their paperwork in order, everyone suffers the consequences as nobody can advance.” The constant threat of delays has left many drivers in Spain reluctant to take on UK-bound deliveries, pushing up the cost of the route and ultimately translating into higher prices for consumers, he said. “And any driver who isn’t very comfortable in English, they’ll have more problems. So there are many who have told their bosses that they don’t want to go to England, that they can be sent to other places but not England.” EU wine and beer exporters have already had to adapt to the checks, which the UK brought in for alcohol on 1 January 2021. However, further changes mean the sector still faces extra paperwork from the start of 2022. For many French winemakers, the UK is such an important market – in terms of size and prestige – that they have been preparing meticulously. “We anticipated this and have been preparing for a long time,” said Audrey Dokie, the logistics and sales administration manager at the Louis Moreau estate in Burgundy. The historic, family-run vineyard exports chablis around the world, but the UK is its biggest market. “We do know that next year it’s going to get much more difficult in terms of the extra details that will be required on each label,” said Dokie. “It’s going to be a more complex logistics operation and it won’t be easy, but we’ll go ahead and manage it. “Because we export worldwide, we’re used to adapting to rules, we have a flexibility. For much smaller winemakers it might be harder,” said Dokie. Jean-Claude Mas, the founder of Les Domaines Paul Mas vineyards in the Languedoc region, said: “Winemakers are generally well-versed in administrative constraints, so we’ll get through this and continue exporting. That said, there will be increased costs and the consumer might end up paying more.”There has been another record rise in the number of daily Covid cases in the UK, with 183,037 reported on Wednesday. It is the first time since 24 December that data on daily case numbers has been made available for all four UK countries. According to data released by the Scottish government, 15,849 people been reported to have tested positive for Covid in the last 24 hours, the highest daily total since the start of the pandemic, surpassing the previous record of 11,030 on 26 December. However the data comes with a warning that the figures include a backlog from before Christmas. The daily figure for England also broke records, with 138,287 cases reported on Wednesday compared with 117,093 on Tuesday. The figures refer to the number of cases by date reported, rather than by the specimen date, and reflect infections that are picked up through testing. Experts have noted it could be several days yet before the impact of infections caught over Christmas becomes apparent in the data. Reinfections are not included in the figures. Wednesday’s total for the UK surpasses the 138,831 cases reported the day before for Scotland, Wales and England combined – itself a record even with data for Northern Ireland missing – although the figure for Wales in Tuesday’s tally represented the combined number of cases that would have been reported on 25 and 26 December. A total of 22,972 new cases were reported for Northern Ireland on Wednesday – which included a five-day backlog over Christmas – while 5,929 cases were reported for Wales. Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, said “It is reasonable to assume that we will continue to see steep increases in cases in the days and indeed possibly in the weeks ahead”.The number of patients in hospital with Covid is rising, but not all are admitted because of Covid. Chris Hopson, chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents hospitals in England, has cautioned against overinterpreting hospital admissions data. “What our guys are saying is that incidental cases are about 25% to 30% of cases arriving … They are seeing an increase in the number of hospital admissions, but it’s not going up in an exponential way,” he said. But just how many people are actually being hospitalised because of Covid, and how should the numbers be counted? What are the current figures for hospital admissions? The daily reported figure for Covid hospital admissions covers the total reported admissions to hospital and diagnoses while in hospital. According to data from NHS England, the figure is rising, at 1,374 on 26 December compared with 926 on 19 December – a 48% increase over seven days. Some reports suggest the majority of new hospital Covid patients are not “true cases”. Is that right? What is clear is that while numbers are increasing, admissions are not rising as fast as cases, even taking into account the time lags between infection and becoming severely ill. However hospital admissions data is not separated into those admitted with Covid or because of it. This means that getting a true handle on the proportion of hospital admissions because of Covid is tricky, but is it possible to gain some insights from the figures already available. The most recent available NHS England data reveals that on 26 December there were 1,338 new hospital cases. Of these 1,082 were either admitted in the previous 24 hours for the first time with Covid or were diagnosed in hospital in the previous 24 hours where the test was within seven days of admission. In other words, 256 of the reported Covid hospital admissions – about 20% – were actually due to hospital-acquired infections, meaning the patients were originally admitted for different reasons. This approach does not take into account those already infected with Covid but admitted for other reasons. Dr David Strain, senior clinical lecturer at the University of Exeter medical school, said in his experience the vast majority of Covid patients are admitted because of Covid rather than the infection being an incidental finding. And Hopson also suggested hospital bosses were reporting a figure of between 25 and 30%, so not the majority. Should we be reassured that so many people are being admitted with Covid, rather than because of it? Not really. Even those patients admitted ‘with’ rather than ‘because of’ Covid may only have required hospital care because of the disease itself. “We [have] seen many other people who have been otherwise stable [with] chronic diseases such as heart failure, ulcerative colitis etc that caught Covid and had a rapid deterioration. Although they are regarded as “incidental Covid”, this sudden deterioration in otherwise stable disease can be attributed to the virus,” said Strain, adding people who have Covid also have poorer outcomes after surgery. An alternative is to look at the total number of patients admitted, not just those with Covid, with Hopson noting some trusts have not seen an overall rise in admissions. However Strain said his experience is that overall unplanned admissions have risen. What’s more, he said, the approach has drawbacks. “The problem with looking at all admissions is, if the hospital is full, we don’t admit the surgical patients or people who we should be bringing in for elective procedures,” he said. Is there another way to look at the situation? As Hopson has noted, it is better to use numbers of Covid patients in hospital rather than new Covid admissions, as the data is more up to date. It also gives a more accurate picture of the pressures on the health service. NHS England publishes a breakdown every week of the total number of Covid patients in hospital, together with the number who are being treated primarily for Covid. The latest data gives figures up to 21 December – new figures are expected in the coming days. The data shows that of the 6,245 Covid patients in acute trusts in England on 21 December, 4,432 – or over 70% – were being treated primarily for Covid. The remaining 30% of Covid patients in hospital were primarily being treated for another issue; however that does not necessarily mean they were not receiving some care for Covid as well. Dr Julian Tang, a professor of respiratory sciences at the University of Leicester, said that the proportion of people in hospital with Covid, rather than because of it, will vary a lot between different hospitals depending on factors including the local incidence of Covid. NHS data reveals the situation varies by region, with about 22% of Covid patients in hospital on 21 December primarily being treated for another issue in the south-west, compared with 39% in the Midlands. Should patients in hospital or admitted with Covid, not because of it, be discounted from the Covid data? Some have suggested including figures for patients with Covid is misleading as they may, for example, simply be receiving treatment for a broken leg. But Covid can lead to more disease in those admitted for another reason, longer hospital stays, more frequent readmissions or outpatient visits and even – in some cases – death. Patients with Covid also need to stay in Covid wards, putting pressure on bed numbers, and meaning elective surgery is postponed or cancelled. Covid patients also pose a risk of passing the infection to others, including other patients and staff. At present the NHS is hard hit by staff sickness and isolation due to Covid. “When it comes to burden on the healthcare system, we should absolutely not discount them,” said Strain.EU exporters of cheese, car parts and other goods are facing a mountain of red tape to continue sales to Britain after 1 January once thrice-delayed post-Brexit checks and controls are finally implemented. They had been due to come into force on 1 January 2021 but were pushed back to July, then to October and finally to January 2022, with a further set of controls due six months later in the coming July. In another twist just before Christmas, the British government announced a carve out for the Republic of Ireland, saying the checks would be delayed for goods crossing the Irish Sea while talks over the Northern Ireland protocol continued. The British government is now confident there will be no further delays to the new controls on incoming goods, which will create a slew of old-school jobs in freight, customs and food standards not seen since the single market came into force in 1993. But what exactly is changing? What happens on 1 January 2022? Complicated paperwork will be required by the UK tax authorities for all imports from the EU. Traders will no longer be allowed to defer completion of customs declarations for HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC), a measure that was introduced to cope with the disruption of Brexit. How will this paperwork be submitted? Exporters will have to “pre-lodge” the paperwork with the correct authorities themselves or through an agent before their goods are loaded on to a ferry or train at Calais or other entry points. “While many UK hauliers are well prepared for this change, we suspect many EU hauliers are not,” said HMRC’s permanent secretary, Jim Harra. The carriers will be obliged to have records of the goods to allow HMRC to decide whether they will be free to go after arriving in Dover, Holyhead and other ports. The paperwork doesn’t stop there. Declarations in relation to the rules of origin must be completed to determine whether tariffs are applicable or not. EU suppliers of agri-food products into Britain will also have to pre-notify the authorities of any exports. What about 1 July 2022? The final set of controls on products of animal and plant origin will come into force on this date, with export health certificates and phytosanitary certificates required for all consignments. Physical checks will take place on arrival, although these are likely to be random or determined by intelligence about the cargo. Safety and security declarations on imports will also be required. Where will the checks take place? HMRC has had considerable difficulties organising the sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) control posts. During the summer it confirmed that it was dramatically reducing in size a planned facility close to the famous White Cliffs of Dover, with most paperwork now expected to be checked at its Ashford lorry park instead. Dover Port Health Authority announced at the beginning of December it was to move to a new facility in the nearby village of Whitfield. The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs has confirmed this is one of three potential SPS sites. Another will open at Ashford and a third site in Kent is still to be identified, a spokesperson said. Will it all go smoothly? By HMRC’s own calcuations, the number of customs declarations needing to be processed will rise from an estimated 48m a year to 250m now that they are required on goods arriving from all 27 EU states. Harra told the parliamentary public accounts committee in November that the “biggest risk” was lack of readiness among EU traders, especially small to medium sized companies. EU traders may experience the same kind of Brexit shock suffered by the Cheshire cheesemaker Simon Spurrell in January when he was left with a £250,000 hole in his export business as new requirements effectively closed down his retail sales to the continent. Harra said HMRC was writing monthly to 14,000 EU haulage firms to make sure they were ready, with information booklets on the new rules provided in multiple languages. Although the UK has been divorced from the EU for a year, the delays in applying import controls may have left some in the single market with the impression that they don’t exist. The added cost of administration could encourage some traders to quit the British market altogether. “Brexit red tape is an extreme interruption to what was otherwise a world-class logistics operation that was pin sharp,” said John McGrane, director general of the British Irish Chamber of Commerce. “Many businesses might argue the UK has had six years to prepare for this and why aren’t all these checks online?”A teenager has appeared in court charged with murdering a couple found dead in their home on Boxing Day. Denis and Mary Fell, both aged 73, were found dead at their house in Raeburn Rigg, Livingston, West Lothian, at about 11.40pm on Sunday. Tobyn Salvatore, also known as Jay Fell, appeared at Livingston sheriff court on Wednesday to face two charges of murder. Reports said that Salvatore, 19, was the couple’s grandson. Salvatore, who lives locally, made no plea. He was remanded in custody for further examination and is due to make another appearance in court within the next eight days. Neighbours of the couple, who had been married for more than 54 years, who spoke to the Daily Record described them as friendly and said they had seen Denis take care of his wife, who reportedly had mobility issues. One neighbour said: “They were a lovely older couple who really kept themselves to themselves over the last couple of years. “I’d seen him pushing her in a wheelchair a few times and they have a disabled parking spot right outside their house to make it easier for Mary to get out and about. It’s really tragic, especially at this time of year.” In a statement published on Tuesday, DCI Kevin Houliston, from Police Scotland’s major investigation team, said: “Our thoughts are with the family and friends of Mr and Mrs Fell and everyone affected by this tragic incident. “A continued presence may be seen in the area as officers continue with their inquiries but this was a contained incident and there was no risk to the wider public.”In 1968, watching the Eamonn Andrews show on Christmas Eve, I can remember asking my dad what “efficacious” meant when the Scaffold sang Lily the Pink (Our song was Christmas No 1 and we wanted to watch it on TV. So we knocked on a stranger’s door, 24 December). I don’t think I heard the word again until December 2020, when scientists started discussing the efficacy of Covid vaccines. As vaccinations continue over the festive period, I hope we can all “drink a drink” to toast our NHS workers for indeed being “the saviours of the human race”. Andrew Keeley Warrington, Cheshire • I once asked the geography professor Danny Dorling, someone who knows far more about the UK’s population than me, how many people he thought the UK could accommodate before being full. His immediate answer was 100 million. Your correspondents (Letters, 27 December) highlight the need for sufficient resources to support our population, but provision of them is a matter of politics, not land area. Mark Walford London • The anthropologist Audrey Richards was famed in Uganda in the 1950s for ejecting guests at 10pm sharp (Letters, 28 December). She wore a nightie under her clothes and simply undressed as the clock struck. Jenny Swann Beeston, Nottinghamshire • You report the Speaker’s ruling allowing MPs to bring their babies into the Commons during debates (28 December), which sounds like common sense to me. But the real breakthrough will come when a father brings his baby in with him. Rev Geoffrey Lang London • A very interesting article by Aaron Collins on masks (Some Covid masks are better than others. I know – I’m the Mask Nerd, 27 December), but the casual reference to his recommended mask costing “less than a pound” makes me wonder how a family on universal credit can have a hope in hell of providing these for its members? Mary Moore Somerton, Somerset • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I spent an hour on Wednesday driving around trying to get hold of lateral flow tests for myself and my husband as we only have four left (Covid test shortages threaten New Year’s Eve celebrations in England, 28 December). I tried the online service – nothing. I tried five pharmacies in the villages and small towns near me – nothing. We have all been told to get tested before seeing friends and family over the new year holiday. Shortly, parents will need to have tests available for their children returning to school. Why did this government not foresee this and plan for it? How many more times will they let the people down? “Herd immunity” is what I am thinking, and “let the bodies pile high”. I am beyond angry. Bridget Craig Ashurst, Hampshire • My local pharmacy has a permanent notice saying: “We have run out of LFTs. Please try again tomorrow.” Tomorrow, of course, never comes. It reminds me of the sign sometimes seen in pubs: “Free beer tomorrow!” It’s a joke there. But in a public health emergency, it’s not a joke. It’s a supply chain disaster. John Dewhurst Teddington, London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The slump in school trips to the UK described in your article does not surprise me at all (‘Almost unsaleable’: slump in school trips to UK blamed on Brexit, 26 December). I’m an English teacher at a German secondary school, and in 2022 I have to take my A-level English class on a week-long trip. In the past 12 years I’ve always taken them to England. We spent a lot of money on those trips: four nights in a hotel, meals, theatre visits, guided tours, plus the money the students would spend on food and shopping. It was always possible to go to the UK because, it being a school trip, I could take all the students, even the ones with a non-European passport. However, this has now changed. Some of our students have a non-European passport (we have students from Russia, Turkey, Morocco and Tunisia). These students would have to apply for a visa and pay the fees. Or stay at home. Neither is an option for our school. So, with a somewhat heavy heart, I booked a trip to Dublin. Karen Brandes Cologne, Germany • The challenges posed by the post-Brexit regulations for educational trips from the EU to the UK, which have led to the collapse in bookings, are obviously of economic significance for this segment of the travel industry. However, the effects are much more far-reaching, as Morag Anderson suggests in your article. As a former secondary school teacher, I organised yearly trips from Cologne to Canterbury, which encouraged students to use their language skills and to learn about British culture. The trips to the UK helped to compensate for the fact that exchanges between German and English schools were becoming more difficult to organise, as fewer UK students were learning German. Now students travel elsewhere – to Italy or Austria, for example. At university level, the Erasmus programme has been cancelled post-Brexit, and its replacement, the Turing scheme – which in any case is not focused on European exchange – has been taken out of the competent hands of the British Council. Boris Johnson often speaks of “our European friends”, but European friendship and understanding depend, among other things, on language competence and dialogue. Young people must be given this chance from an early age. Words alone are meaningless. Brigid Hoffmann Cologne, Germany • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The landless many have always had to struggle for access to land owned by the few in order to engage in their radical recreational walking and climbing. The Kinder Scout mass trespass of 1932, referred to by John Harris (Walking is a glorious, primal pastime – and far more radical than you think, 26 December), was organised by the communist-led British Workers’ Sports Federation (BWSF) as an extension of the class struggle at the time of the hunger marches and Gandhi’s Salt March. The established ramblers and other outdoor groups fiercely condemned the BWSF’s direct-action strategy of seizing the commanding heights of the open moorlands of the Peak District; they favoured a more reformist agenda of seeking upland access through parliamentary legislation. In 1949, the Labour party quietly shelved its 1945 manifesto commitment to land nationalisation, and the mandatory access provisions of the new national parks were minimal. The 2000 Countryside and Rights of Way Act was similarly limited, and the current Land Justice movement is still having to campaign and trespass for a real general right to roam, in the face of growing threats to criminalise the act of walking on land that one doesn’t own (Highland landowner faces legal challenge over right to roam, 26 December). Julian Batsleer Manchester • Like John Harris, I was introduced to walking by my late father – a foundry man who was neither bourgeois nor radical, and generally walked alone. I carried on walking alone, with my wife, then with our children, and subsequently with friends, viewing groups of walkers in open countryside as a bit too organised and maybe even undesirable. However, in the 10 years I’ve been an active member of the Ramblers I have learned new skills, been introduced to new walking routes, made many friends and discovered the pleasure of walking with and learning from people I might never meet socially in “normal clothing”, discussing everything from the natural world to social history, politics, poetry and pandemics. This year, our group produced a book of local walks contributed by a dozen members with the aim of connecting with people who do not see themselves as walkers, but had begun to explore the area during lockdowns. The initial print run of 1,000 copies is almost exhausted within nine months. We have sold through sub-post offices, community-owned businesses, and Exeter’s cathedral and museum, enabling us to reach a larger slice of the community; feedback suggests a high level of interest in volume two. Les Bright Exeter, Devon • It was a great pleasure to read John Harris’s article. As well as the barriers he identifies – “prejudice, traffic, locked gates, signs with the dread words ‘private – keep out’” – he could have added the lack of public transport, particularly in rural and county council authorities. Having recently completed the Calderdale Way and the Leeds Country Way without any problems using buses and trains, access by public transport to North Yorkshire and the Dales national park is far more restricted, and at times nonexistent. Given the urgency of protecting the environment and the welcome popularity in rambling, far more should be done to get people out of cars through a coordinated walking and public transport strategy. Mike Stein Pudsey, West Yorkshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.If asked to name a news story linked to environmental protest in 2021, chances are that most British people would, depending on where they live, mention either the demonstrations alongside November’s climate conference in Glasgow, or (especially if they are in the London area) Insulate Britain. By blocking roads including the M25 on multiple occasions between September and November, the members of this new campaign group barged into the public’s consciousness – making some people angry in the process. Last month, nine activists were sent to prison, where one of them, a scientist called Emma Smart, went on hunger strike for 26 days. Marches and rallies have been linked to protest since the middle ages. The Extinction Rebellion (XR) network, of which Insulate Britain is an offshoot, revived the tradition of getting arrested on purpose, a tactic employed by suffragettes. The idea is that by peacefully inundating the forces of law and order while attracting strong public support for a just cause, pressure can be put on the state to force change. Two and a half years ago, the first wave of occupations of London landmarks by XR resulted in parliament voting to declare a climate emergency – meeting one of the rebels’ key demands. This coincided with a groundswell of support for the school strike movement, launched the previous year by Greta Thunberg in Stockholm. Creative examples of civil disobedience and non-violent confrontation leave a lasting impression. Recalling his career in the city in the 1990s, a period of intense anti-road-building activism, Alok Sharma, president of Cop26, told delegates at the summit’s finance day that they should consider themselves “the new Swampys”. But if the tunnels and tree houses of 30 years ago are remembered fondly, attitudes to the same style of activism today are more conflicted. The month before Mr Sharma’s speech, Swampy (otherwise known as Daniel Hooper) was one of six activists acquitted by a judge of charges of aggravated trespass after they occupied a tunnel at Euston in an attempt to obstruct the HS2 rail project. Anti-protest amendments The extent to which environmental activism becomes more difficult in 2022 will depend in part on the law, the courts and public opinion. Labour has yet to announce whether it will vote against a raft of anti-protest amendments added to the government’s police bill in the House of Lords. This repressive piece of legislation is the strongest anti-activist statement yet from a government whose leader once said that he would lie down in front of the bulldozers himself to stop a third runway at Heathrow airport being built. It is for the judges to determine what the law is. In June, the supreme court quashed the conviction of four anti-arms trade activists, in a ruling with wider ramifications that said some “disruption of ordinary life” is acceptable if caused by people exercising their right to free expression. The public mood creates the context in which all sorts of decisions (by politicians, prosecutors, businesses) are made. Evidence shows that the British public is increasingly alarmed about the climate: in October, Ipsos Mori found that 80% believe it is a global emergency caused by humans. But activists are divided about how best to harness such attitudes in order to drive the kinds of emissions reductions that are so desperately needed. There have always been differences in an environmental movement that spans a huge range of interests and priorities. Previously, the most obvious dividing line was between those engaged in the kinds of civil disobedience pioneered by Greenpeace (whose first action took place 50 years ago) and those focused solely on constitutionalist methods. But as agitations have become more aggressive, divisions in the green movement have become sharper. XR deserves credit for having boosted the climate crisis to the top of the political agenda – before the pandemic interrupted. But the theory of change it adopted, that if 3.5% of a population becomes engaged in non-violent direct action then a campaign will succeed, has been criticised as simplistic. An angry, physical confrontation with rush-hour passengers in east London is widely seen as a serious mistake, and suggestive of a worrying blindness to the social injustice and inequality that are an essential dimension of progressive climate politics, domestically and internationally. Similarly, Insulate Britain has faced criticism from those who think that the tactic of deliberately creating traffic jams is counterproductive – potentially making it easier for the government to pass laws restricting the right to protest. Feasible tactics Another argument concerns who or what should be the target of protests. Given the failure of governments to rise to the challenge, both individually and collectively via the UN, some activists now believe that their efforts should be focused elsewhere. The US environmental writer and activist Bill McKibben thinks campaigners should ramp up pressure on the banks that finance fossil fuels. The question of how much emphasis to put on behaviour change in the rich western countries with the highest per capita emissions also remains contentious. The British philosopher Rupert Read, who has acted as a spokesperson for XR, argues that greater efforts within communities are a constructive way to make emissions reductions happen. Politics in the traditional sense remains vital, particularly in countries where 2022 will see important elections. Brazil’s citizens would do the world a favour by rejecting its climate-denying president. Non-violent civil disobedience erases the line between compliance and resistance to the state. In countries that abide by democratic principles, it remains a feasible tactic to challenge policies while accepting a system’s fundamentals. However, the existential nature of climate change leads to questions about the latter. Louise Lancaster, a former teacher and Insulate Britain protester, told the Guardian in November that she would be “willing to die” for the cause if she thought that it might save her three children from climate-related deaths. In his provocatively titled book How To Blow Up a Pipeline, the Swedish activist Andreas Malm makes a case for sabotaging fossil fuel infrastructure. Yet eco-sabotage could harden rather than soften climate-sceptic attitudes, making it easier for states to respond harshly. Non-violence does not seek to undermine the rule of law, only the repeal of unjust laws. Ultimately, it’s difficult to see how a just transition to net zero could be achieved by unjust means.Labour has demanded ministers explain why £330,000 of taxpayers’ money was spent on repairing a pothole-ridden road reportedly owned by a viscount who formerly sat as a Conservative in the House of Lords. Lisa Nandy, the shadow levelling-up secretary, called on the government to say “how this happened and what steps are being taken to ensure it does not happen again”. It came after the Daily Mail reported the money had been spent on improving the road on land owned by the eighth Viscount Gage. He inherited his title in 1993 and was removed from the House of Lords, alongside the majority of his fellow hereditary peers, in 1999. The lane leads to Charleston, an artists’ house and studio museum in the South Downs in East Sussex. According to the South East Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP), “the access track is currently in a poor condition due to drainage issues which have led to a broken surface with cracks and large potholes”. It added: “The poor quality of the access track discourages visitors from making repeat visits to Charleston and impacts on the ability of Charleston to grow their events and festivals programme.” Charleston received £89,293 from the government’s Getting Building Fund in November 2020, with an additional £240,542 granted the following July for a new cycle path and to resurface the entire access road. The Charleston Trust was the lead applicant, but according to a business case presented to the LEP for the second tranche of funding, the Firle Estate was also listed as a partner for “providing project coordination and advice in support of the project”. Gage manages the estate, according to its website. Nandy said she was surprised to learn about the use of taxpayers’ money in the context of Boris Johnson’s commitment to “levelling up”. She quoted Johnson stressing that the Getting Building Fund was designed to “finally tackle this country’s great unresolved challenges of the last three decades” and “mend the indefensible gap in opportunity and productivity and connectivity between the regions of the UK”. Nandy said: “Filling in potholes for a Conservative peer surely cannot have been what he meant.” She called for the release of the criteria that the decision was based on, and said that the government should demonstrate “taxpayer money was protected at all times”. In a letter to the levelling-up secretary, Michael Gove, Nandy added: “Chronic underfunding of our roads, rail and buses is a problem for millions of us. I hope you will be able to agree that government funding must be allocated fairly and opportunity spread far more widely than this egregious decision suggests.” A spokesperson for the Department for Levelling Up, Communities and Housing said the money had been allocated by the LEP, whose “independent evaluators assessed it as offering value for money”. They added: “Charleston is a charity-owned, internationally recognised site of cultural importance, with a museum and art gallery, and this work is estimated to provide a £1.6m boost to the local economy by creating jobs and increasing visitor numbers.” The Firle Estate was also contacted for comment.The most prominent pro-democracy media outlet still operating in Hong Kong, Stand News, said it will shut down after police raided its offices, froze its assets and arrested senior journalists and former board members including pop star Denise Ho. Authorities deployed an anti-sedition law in their crackdown that was drawn up under British colonial rule and had not been used for decades. A senior police officer accused the online site of “inciting hatred” against the Hong Kong government in news articles and interviews. Activists warned this approach could be used to criminalise almost any critical reporting on the Hong Kong government, and the UN and media watchdogs CPJ and RSF condemned the crackdown as an attack on press freedom. The shuttering of Stand News came just months after a similar raid and asset freeze forced the closure of popular pro-democracy tabloid Apple Daily, which was owned by now-jailed media tycoon Jimmy Lai. Afterwards, in an apparent effort to protect its future, Stand News took down most of its commentary section and halted donations. The board members also stepped down, but none of those moves were enough to stave off a legal case. In a sign of Hong Kong authorities’ confidence, those detained early on Wednesday morning include the singer Ho, who is also a Canadian citizen, prominent barrister Margaret Ng and longstanding members of the city’s elite. Police also searched the home of news editor Ronson Chan, who is head of the Hong Kong Journalists Association. He said they released him without charge, but took his phone, computer and other electronic devices. “Because of the situation, Stand News is now stopping operations,” the online publication said in a Facebook post. “Acting editor in chief, Patrick Lam, has resigned and all Stand News employees are dismissed.” Hong Kong was promised free speech in the handover agreement from British colonial rule in 1997, among other rights enshrined as part of its semi-autonomous status, and until two years ago it had a thriving media operating in both English and Cantonese. The passage of the new National Security Law for the city in June 2020 brought that era to an abrupt end, and the closure of the Apple Daily, perhaps the biggest media thorn in the pro-Beijing authorities’ side, followed within a year. There is little question that room for journalists will shrink further. The furiously nationalist Chinese tabloid Global Times said in the wake of Stand News closure that “legal experts” had warned other media outlets to curb their output. “They shall not expect any privileges or abuse the freedom of speech in endangering the national security, neither do foreign journalists,” the paper said on Twitter. In the summer, Hong Kong’s police chief called for a “fake news” law to tackle “hostility against the police”. His desire for powers to muzzle unfavourable reporting was widely seen as pointing to a possible next phase of the crackdown on free speech. Video from the scene of the raid on Stand News, whose reporters said they were barred from filming police operations themselves, showed officers taking boxes away. They later confirmed HK $61m (£6m) of Stand News assets had been frozen, the largest such amount targeted under the national security law. Police Sr Supt Steve Li said the outlet had published articles that incited hatred and made unfounded accusations, and cited its interviews with people who advocated for Hong Kong independence. He said police were also investigating whether a UK bureau set up this year represented “collusion with foreign forces”. Stand News was founded in the wake of the 2014 student-led Umbrella movement, successor to another pro-democracy website, House News, and was highly respected both in the city and beyond. It was nominated in the “independence” category at the Reporters Without Borders press freedom awards in November, and was the only Hong Kong media outlet to work with the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists to produce reports on the Pandora Papers in October 2021. Its closure was a further blow to an opposition movement already reeling from the effective end of multiparty politics in Hong Kong’s legislature, curbs on academia and even a reshaping of the city landscape to remove monuments critical of Beijing. “Outrageous. After the fall of the Apple Daily, StandNewsHK is the largest prodemocracy media that exists in HK,” pro-democracy activist in exile Sunny Cheung tweeted. “Beijing is eradicating all room of the opposition.” The crackdown is not only affecting Hong Kong’s media. A survey conducted by the city’s Foreign Correspondents’ Club last month found almost half of 100 surveyed reporters had made plans to leave or were considering an exit. RSF’s east Asia bureau chief, Cédric Alviani, told Reuters the raids and arrests aimed to “bring Hong Kong down to the level of repression and censorship that is equivalent to mainland China”. “When you arrest a team of journalists from a media outlet with a reputation for independence, no one can say it’s for another purpose other than to try and muzzle the media and try to control the narrative on the territory.”My former teacher Nigel Johnson, who has died aged 86, taught English at schools in Anglesey, Germany and Cheshire over a 30-year career in which he was unusually dedicated to trying to bring out the best in his pupils. Nigel was born in Scarborough, where his parents, Phyllis (nee Birdsall) and Cecil Johnson, owned a women’s clothes shop. After attending Scarborough high school for boys, he did his national service in the Royal Navy. He had cheated on the initial navy eye test by listening to other people’s answers as he sat in the queue outside, but was soon rumbled during a second test, and though he was admitted to the service he was never posted to sea, instead running a library at a naval base near Nuneaton. After national service he did a general arts degree at Durham University, where he was an avid rower, and followed up with a diploma in education. Graduating in 1960, he immediately married Ann Fletcher, a student teacher in Scarborough, and embarked on a career as an English teacher, beginning in Peterborough where he taught at Deacon’s school (now Thomas Deacon academy), before becoming head of English at HMS Conway, a naval boarding school in Anglesey, where he spent his free time sailing a dinghy on the Menai Straits and where he taught, among others, the future rugby coach Clive Woodward and future Conservative party leader Iain Duncan Smith. By 1967, he and Ann had three daughters. Although life in Anglesey was idyllic, Nigel soon got itchy feet and applied for a job with the British Forces Education Service. Instead of the dreamed-of Cyprus or Malta, in 1970 the Johnsons were dispatched to Cornwall school in Dortmund. For three years the family made the most of things by Volvo-ing across Germany, France and Spain on long camping trips. In 1973 Nigel moved to the independent Sandbach school in Cheshire, staying there for 10 years and producing annual school plays of a high standard: a highlight was Ibsen’s The Wild Duck, staged for the school’s 1977 tercentenary celebrations. Nigel took time to see the potential in students that others might have missed: I was one of many young people whose lives he changed for the better. In 1983 he went to Grange School in Hartford, also in Cheshire, and in 1990 he decided to take early retirement, aged 55. Nigel then moved to the Cornish coast, where he and Ann settled in Mylor Bridge near Falmouth. Inspired by John Hodgson, a former Sandbach colleague who had already retired to the area, he became a devoted sailor and spent the next 20 years messing about in boats, occasionally crossing the Channel to Brittany. Nigel and Ann divorced in 2009, and in 2010 he married Gill McNab, whom he had met in the church choir. Nigel remained active in retirement, volunteering at the National Maritime Museum, Falmouth, and compiling a volume of poems, People and Places, and a memoir, The Time of My Life. He was full of fun and curiosity and always wonderful company. Nigel is survived by Gill, Ann, his daughters, Sarah, Emma and Rachel, and eight grandchildren, Oliver, James, Joseph, Anna, Sophie, Thomas, Marianne and Christian.Boris Johnson has been accused of presiding over a “total shambles” as millions of people struggle to access Covid tests after a huge surge in demand, leaving essential staff unable to work. The prime minister had urged people to take precautionary rapid Covid tests before heading out for New Year’s Eve, while the Omicron wave has pushed up demand for both lateral flows and PCRs. There were a record 183,000 positive cases confirmed on Wednesday, although this data included some delayed results. With the huge increase in cases, the system was dogged by shortages and there were reports that key workers, including nurses and firefighters, were unable to access tests to allow them to do their jobs. As medical staff experienced delays in PCR test results and problems accessing rapid tests, NHS Providers called on No 10 to consider reserving some tests for health workers. Some Tory MPs were also demanding answers from government ministers about whether there should be a priority ranking for who should get tests first. Members of the public also complained that tests were hard to find, as pharmacies around England displayed signs that they had run out of lateral flow test (LFT) kits amid “patchy” deliveries and high demand. For the second day in a row the government’s websites showed at times that walk-in PCR tests were unavailable in parts of the country, such as Hartlepool, and in short supply in others, while by mid-afternoon ordering home deliveries of LFTs had again been halted. The overwhelming demand for tests in England follows record levels of infection since the arrival of the Omicron variant.With worries that the health service could be overwhelmed, even though Omicron is milder than Delta, the NHS said it was looking to create up to 4,000 beds in “mini-Nightingales” at existing hospital as surge capacity, with 800 across eight sites to begin with. The UK Health and Security Agency acknowledged there was unprecedented demand for tests and urged people not to order more than they needed. But the organisation said another eight million tests were being made available to pharmacists before New Year’s Eve celebrations begin. Pharmacists said demand has been driven by the government allowing vaccinated people out of self-isolation if they show repeated negative LFT results after a week, and among those stocking up on kits before New Year’s Eve events. Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary, said Johnson’s plea for people to take lateral flows when there were shortages showed “spectacular incompetence”. “Congratulations to Boris Johnson who has managed to appear on television today urging people to get tested when people are struggling to access them,” he said. “People are trying to do the right thing, follow the government’s own advice, and test themselves regularly, but are prevented by the Conservative government’s incompetence.” Daisy Cooper, Lib Dem health spokesperson, added that it was “now or never to get Covid tests to frontline workers”. “If the government doesn’t get its act together today then vaccine centres could soon grind to a halt, and patient safety could be at risk from further NHS and care staff absences,” she said. Johnson’s comments on testing have been repeated by other ministers, including the health secretary, Sajid Javid, and health minister Gillian Keegan, who advised new year’s revellers: “Do be cautious, take a lateral flow test before you go out.” There were particular concerns about a lack of tests affecting staff absences in the NHS. Chris Hopson, chief executive of NHS Providers, said it was “vital that NHS staff get prompt access to the tests they need to ensure they can return to work as quickly as possible” and suggested “looking at whether we need to reserve dedicated testing capacity for NHS staff for a period”. Dr David Wrigley, the British Medical Association’s deputy council chair, said: “In order to keep the NHS working, it is imperative that staff must be able to regularly test for Covid 19 and so supplies of lateral flow tests for key workers should be prioritised.” New London fire brigade data shows that a third of fire engines in London have been unavailable after more than 700 firefighters either tested positive or were having to self-isolate earlier this week. Staff shortages meant a 64-metre ladder appliance, bought after the Grenfell Tower disaster, was unavailable for much of Christmas Eve and Christmas Day, while more than 15% of operational firefighters were off work because of Covid on 27 December. The Pharmaceutical Services Negotiating Committee, which represents NHS community pharmacies in England, said deliveries of LFT kits to pharmacies had restarted on Wednesday after four days of no service. But many of those that did receive them reported quickly exhausting their supplies. Leyla Hannbeck, chief executive of the Association of Independent Multiple Pharmacies, said: “Pharmacies are reporting that every five minutes approximately somebody comes in to the pharmacy asking for a test. “But, unfortunately, because of the issues around supply being patchy and inconsistent, it means that those who come for the test don’t always get it, which is very stressful not just for the pharmacy team but for the patient.” In Devizes, Wiltshire, the branch of Boots had exhausted its supply of tests by 11am, with two other pharmacies in the town saying they had no kits at all. But Maria Caulfield, the government’s junior health minister, insisted there were “plenty of tests”, in a post to a WhatsApp group of Tory MPs. Caulfield said the “constant speculation that we are running out of tests is just fuelling demand”, and urged colleagues to tell constituents they should “keep trying” to book tests online. Javid is also understood to be preparing a memo for MPs confirming supplies of LFTs and PCRs were safe. However, their assurances were undermined by Tory MPs reporting first-hand problems ordering tests. Roger Gale, the MP for North Thanet, tweeted that “Kent appears to be in Lateral Flow and PCR Test gridlock”. Gale later said he had spoken with Javid and been told “there is a world shortage of Lateral Flow &amp; PCR test supplies, but we are buying all that’s available”. A former minister called the situation a “shitshow” and added Javid’s letter “probably won’t immediately match reality”. A second Tory MP said availability of tests “definitely seems to be an issue”, and a third said a relative who was an essential worker had been unable to order one. The UK Health Security Agency said tests were temporarily unavailable on the government website at points throughout the day due to “exceptionally high demand” and urged people not to order more tests before using the ones they have. A spokesperson said: “During periods of exceptional demand there may be temporary pauses in ordering or receiving tests, to ensure we manage distribution across the system.” • This article was amended on 29 December 2021 to correct the location of Devizes; it is in Wiltshire, not Devon as an early version said.A Spanish association has called for an investigation into the enduring legacy of censorship during the Franco regime after it emerged that censored versions of books and films are still circulating more than four decades after the dictator died. Emilio Silva, the president of Spain’s Association for the Recovery of Historical Memory, sounded the alarm earlier this week after he stumbled upon a different version of the 1946 film It’s a Wonderful Life on television. “All of a sudden I heard something I had never heard before,” said Silva. “It was a scene that was not in the version that I had seen 10 times before.” He swiftly realised that the Spanish TV channel where he had often watched the film still had a censored version in its catalogue. Clocking in at seven minutes shorter than the original, it omits several scenes that mention a housing co-op. He wasn’t surprised. “During the Franco era, anything that sounded like a cooperative was considered almost pro-communist,” he said. But what shocked him was that the expurgated version of the Frank Capra film was still on offer in Spain, suggesting Franco-era censorship was still alive and well in the country. “Some 45 years since the death of Franco, nobody – not even the ministry of culture – said let’s see what was censored during the regime and we’re going to fix this.” During Franco’s 36 years in power, the state’s scissors were systematic and exacting, cropping out references to the Spanish civil war and the dictatorship, along with sexually explicit material and any mention that countered the strict Catholic values promoted by the state. In Ernest Hemingway’s Across the River and Into the Trees, the use of “lesbians” was replaced with “good friends”, while references to birth control were struck from James Baldwin’s Go Tell It on the Mountain. Few works were spared, with censors taking aim at everything from musicals to magazines. This week, Silva’s organisation called on Pedro Sánchez, Spain’s Socialist prime minister, to direct the ministry of culture to undertake an investigation aimed at determining the full extent of the censorship and, following that, restoring the original versions of the censored works. The association’s demand highlights a glaring void in Spain’s transition to democracy: while the laws supporting censorship were repealed, there was no body tasked with halting the spread of censored content. Silva drew a parallel between the unabated spread of these works, some of which distort people’s perception of the civil war and its consequences, and his association’s long-running push to rid Spain of statues and other public symbols that glorify the regime. “We can say that James Baldwin, Ernest Hemingway or Frank Capra are also victims of the dictatorship, because somebody censored their works and not one democratic government in Spain has repaired this damage.” A lot of what is known about the censored works in circulation today comes from the years of research by Jordi Cornellà-Detrell, a lecturer in Hispanic studies at Glasgow University. “We are talking about one of the most long-lasting yet invisible legacies of [Franco’s] regime,” said Cornellà-Detrell. He has catalogued dozens of examples. More than 20 different Spanish-language editions of Ira Levin’s Rosemary’s Baby, including one e-book, are based on a censored version that cuts out passages deemed to glorify Satan. In the case of George Orwell’s Burmese Days and Ian Fleming’s Thunderball, censored versions continue to be published even after new translations of both works. More than 90% of the copies of William Faulkner’s Soldiers’ Pay on loan at Spain’s public libraries are censored. The reach of the censors is not limited to Spain. A publisher in Argentina last year released a censored edition of Soldiers’ Pay, hinting that works censored by Franco’s regime are also making their way to Latin America. Often the publishers are not aware that the works are censored, said Cornellà-Detrell. “There’s an ethical issue here as the words of these authors have been manipulated against their will, they don’t even know in most cases what has been done to their work.”My friend Jean Bell, who has died aged 62, was an artist and craftswoman and a much-loved founding member of the L’Arche community in south London, where 100 people with and without learning disabilities share life together. Jean was born in Lambeth, south London, to Gladys (nee McLean), a housewife, and Harold Bell, a builder. Her parents had moved to Britain from Jamaica; she was their sixth child and the first to be born in the UK, although there were to be three more girls after her. Jean lived with her family as a baby but, having Down’s syndrome, was placed in care as a young child – such was the way of things for many families in the 1950s. She lived first at the Fountain hospital in Tooting, south London, where she became friends with another little girl, Michelle Antia, who would be her companion for the rest of her life. When they were older they moved together to the hospital’s annexe, South Side in nearby Streatham. By 1977, thinking about people with learning disabilities was changing, and L’Arche in London was begun. Jean moved in, along with Michelle, and her family were very involved in the move, as they had always wanted the best for her and remained close to her throughout her life. Jean was then in her late teens, shy at first but full of exuberant, youthful energy. She learned to cook – sausages a favourite – and to take the 2B bus to the Brixton Adult Training Centre, where she did artwork and knitting, subcontracted packing work, and particularly enjoyed the Friday afternoon disco. In 1979 the L’Arche workshops were opened and Jean became a highly skilled rugmaker, stoneworker and candlemaker. Her colourful artwork was used for rug designs and greetings cards, and she had several exhibitions of her work, including at Brockwell gallery in Herne Hill and at West Norwood library. She was the best of workmates and encouraged all her colleagues, making close friendships with many of them as well as the people she lived with. When I arrived in L’Arche London in 1989, she was very welcoming; I lived there until I retired five years ago, and I remain a community member. Jean did not find change and transition easy, but she overcame these challenges and travelled widely. She visited Uganda twice, and loved being a volunteer teacher for children with learning disabilities there. In Malaysia she attended the wedding of one of her many friends, and in Malta her knitting on the beach was even mentioned on local radio. Jean continued to live in the L’Arche community until 2020. Michelle had died in 2019, and Jean’s own failing health required a move to a specialist care home in Streatham the following year. She is survived by seven siblings, Johnathan, Hurvin, Veronica, Mavis, Vicky, Mbeke and Michelle.Jurors in Ghislaine Maxwell’s sex-trafficking trial resumed deliberations on Wednesday morning with the heightened threat of coronavirus and potential trial disruptions looming over them. Jurors sent two notes to see more transcripts from trial testimony to help them with their discussions. The first note requested to see testimony from five witnesses: Shawn, who is Maxwell accuser Carolyn’s ex-boyfriend; Cimberly Espinosa, who is a former assistant to the British socialite; two FBI agents; and false memory expert Dr Elizabeth Loftus. Later in the day, jurors sent another note asking to see the transcript of testimony from Larry Visoski, Jeffrey Epstein’s former pilot. Visoski, who was the first prosecution witness, testified that Maxwell and Epstein appeared to be a couple and that she was No 2 in the late disgraced financier’s hierarchy. The jury has now deliberated more than 37 hours without reaching a verdict. On Tuesday, Judge Alison Nathan voiced deep concern that surging coronavirus infection rates across New York City – fueled by the hyper-transmissible Omicron variant – could send proceedings into a tailspin if they don’t end soon. Nathan told lawyers on the case that if jurors don’t reach a verdict Wednesday, they should be prepared to deliberate until they do so – including possible deliberations over the new year holiday weekend. “We now face a high and escalating risk that jurors and trial participants may need to quarantine,” Nathan warned, “thus disrupting trial, putting at risk our ability to complete this trial”. While the onslaught of Covid cases has been felt across the US, New York City has been hit particularly hard. The seven-day average of positive tests for city residents hit 19.97% as of Sunday, according to NBC 4 New York. “We are very simply at a different place regarding the pandemic than we were only one week ago,” Nathan remarked. “Put simply, I conclude that proceeding this way is the best chance to give the jury as much time they need and to avoid a mistrial as a result of the Omicron variant.” The jury note Wednesday morning that requested trial transcripts indicated that panelists had holiday scheduling on their minds. “Also, may we have clarification regarding our schedule going forward,” they said. “Are we required to continue our deliberations everyday including 12/31 and 1/1 … we ask in order to plan our schedules accordingly.” Nathan said that her response note to jurors would state that deliberations will continue “as needed, every day going forward … until you reach a verdict”. However, she asked jurors to indicate whether that would “present a substantial hardship for anyone because of unmovable commitments”. When Maxwell was brought into the courtroom for Nathan’s discussion of the jury note, she appeared relaxed. Maxwell draped her arm over her chair at one point, appearing to pose for the court sketch artists. Before the trial started in earnest last month, Nathan told lawyers on Maxwell’s case that she would not boot prospective jurors based on vaccination status. One potential juror – who was ultimately selected to serve on the panel – told the court that she was not currently enrolled in graduate school “because of the vaccination requirement”. Maxwell, 60, is being tried on six counts for alleged involvement in her ex-boyfriend Jeffrey Epstein’s sexual abuse of girls, some as young as 14. Maxwell has pleaded not guilty. Epstein, a convicted sex offender with powerful associates including Prince Andrew, Bill Clinton and Donald Trump, was apprehended in July 2019 for sex trafficking minor teens. He killed himself in a Manhattan federal jail about a month after his arrest.My brother Rajeve Mahandru, who has died aged 49, was a mental health worker for more than 10 years in London. He took his own life having experienced depression and mental health issues himself for more than five years. He found it difficult to take the help that was offered to him. Rajeve was born in Birmingham, to immigrant parents from the Chandigarh region of northern India, Raj ( nee Kohlei ), a former teacher, and Mohan Mahandru, a shopkeeper. Bobby was his nickname in Birmingham and for the last 20 years, living in Little Dunmow, Essex, he was known as Raj. My brother would light up the room as soon as he entered. Smiling and laughing, he was always the joker. He was educated at City Road school and George Dixon school in Birmingham. He had a happy childhood – our family worked together to run the convenience food store. It was a community shop, where we would work, eat and talk as if it was our living room. After leaving school Rajeve spent a few months on summer camps in the US, and spent time road building in the US. He recalled that time to us as one of the best of his life. I remember the time he ran out of money and rang Mum to send him some money so he could come back home – he had no worries in the world. After the US trip he moved to London to do a mental health nursing course. He fell in love with Fiona, from Co Sligo in north-west Ireland, while they were both studying at South Bank University and they married in 2001. They had two children, Rian and Ava. Rajeve worked as a community mental health nurse in Walthamstow, east London, travelling in from their home in Essex. Tragedy struck our family when our mum and dad both died in a car accident while coming back from a funeral in 2004 in Chandigarh, where they were living in semi-retirement. When his father-in-law died of a heart attack five years ago, Rajeve went further into himself with depression and mental health problems, and retired from his job. He and Fiona separated. He is survived by Fiona, Rian and Ava, and by our younger sister, Manjo, and me.Chris Silverwood is taking the positives. Chris Silverwood was expecting this. Chris Silverwood has found, squinting through his Victorian eyeglass, something to build on here. Watching Silverwood’s deeply weird performance in front of the cameras at the end of the third Ashes Test in Melbourne – batting away concerns, wincing in the sun, and wearing throughout the pitying smile of a man who knows that all of this is simply another stage in the vast, unknowable masterplan of Chris Silverwood – it was hard not to worry a little about England’s head coach; to search in vain for the line between nightmarishly bad media training and a man so embedded within the blue Lycra bubble he really has lost sight of the disaster unfolding around him. There is little to be gained from dwelling on Silverwood’s own fate at the end of this series. He is now that familiar thing, a coach who has failed to manage the details, who is clearly out of his depth, and whose dismissal will, in the classic footballing style, provide a useful straw man, patsy and general distraction from the more profound failings of those above him in the hierarchy. Still, watching Silverwood reel off his own game and biddable version of the ECB blame-avoidance handbook, it was hard not to feel a familiar sense of dissolution, of something deathly that has now found a concrete form in this southern Ashes series. The usual factors in England Ashes defeats are all reassuringly present: poor preparation, poor conditioning, the fact that Australia are demonstrably better at cricket. But there is something else here too, a quality present in so many parts of British public life, something we might call Johnsonian dissonance. Welcome, England cricket, to a place where no one is ever really accountable, where that thing you like, that difficult, unprofitable thing, is being taken away, run down and sold off right in front of your eyes by a cartel of bonus-hungry executives. Where nothing is really true, anything is possible, where Chris Silverwood really is taking the positives, and where the overwhelming reaction seems to be a kind of weary fatalism. This is the most disturbing aspect to England’s Ashes disintegration, the shared conviction that this is simply a structural inevitability, born out of irresistible macro-forces. We know the exculpatory arguments by now. The dying off of Test cricket around the world, something the England and Wales Cricket Board is apparently bound not to resist or fight against but simply to accept. The basic weirdness of a sport where you stand around doing nothing most of the time, where you can’t see the ball, an idea that frankly wouldn’t get past the first TV pitch stage these days. Not to mention the line pushed by the marketeers of the ECB that people are basically shallow and need to be given shallow things, that children can’t concentrate and only like noise and light and simple stuff. So much of this seems to have been accepted as true that England’s on-field disintegration has come to feel like a referendum on the viability of red-ball cricket itself: evidence, finally, that a death foretold for most of the past 120 years has finally come to pass. In reality the more useful reaction here is not fatalism, but resistance. Because none of this inevitable. Test cricket has always been an awkward thing, one of those objects, like poetry, or libraries, or the stubbornly over‑engineered Saab convertible, that defies the logic of the market simply by existing. It might have died after the war but for the indulgence of the state broadcaster. It might have died many times over in the decades since but for the fact people like and indeed love its difficult, unmonetised complexities. Even now, at a time when red‑ball cricket has been allowed to enter a period of managed decline, like a post‑industrial northern city in the hands of the Thatcher government, it is possible to resist this process, to make different decisions, to protect things that have value. The most immediate point is that there must be accountability or the gig is frankly up. Joe Root is a brilliant batsman and a popular presence in the cricket media. But the idea that he should remain England captain because there is no other immediate candidate capable of doing a similarly regulation job is terribly destructive. Elite sport needs sharp edges. And there are already so many points of vagueness here. Why did England talk for two years about the Ashes and yet arrive without any real coherent plan? Why did they pick weird, unbalanced teams? Just because there are systemic problems doesn’t mean it’s not possible to be a good coach. Just because the County Championship has been degraded to the extent nobody, not even the players themselves, really knows the red-ball capacities of the current generation, doesn’t mean you can’t also be a competent captain. And while we’re at it the notion of accountability must extend upwards – if not to the ECB’s chief executive Tom Harrison (which it should), then to the largely invisible Ashley Giles whose qualifications to be “managing director” of anything have not been made any clearer by his time in charge of England men’s cricket. At which point we might actually be starting to get somewhere. For all the blurring of lines, it isn’t hard to draw the arrows here. The insipid state of England Test cricket in 2021-22, the competitive death of England’s most lucrative series, the progressive strangling of the real golden goose: all of this lies at the door of the ECB. Why are England so poor at Test cricket? Because the talent pool is tiny, because this thing is essentially invisible outside of the pre-converted and those who can pay. The poverty of England’s red-ball team comes from exactly the same place as the revelations of institutional racism that drew such deeply unconvincing gasps of surprise from the chief executive once public pressure demanded some kind of response. The ECB has overseen this decline in reach, knowingly and in plain sight, registering no sense of duty to anything other than profit and loss during the quarter century of its existence. This is a governing body that has awarded its own executive a £2.1m bonus for “promoting” the sport, while simultaneously allowing the shared national treasure that is Test cricket to wither in the ground, a scandal that should on its own demand another visit to the DCMS committee. Little wonder at the end of all this we have that feeling of disintegration. This is an old England team. Root, Ben Stokes, Jimmy Anderson, Stuart Broad, Jonny Bairstow, Jack Leach, Chris Woakes, Rory Burns, Dawid Malan, Jos Buttler and Mark Wood are unlikely to come this way again. At another time this might feel like a source of excitement, the chance to renew and refresh. Given a proper domestic season, and the will to fund, resource and promote even those things that don’t bring instant profit but which are very obviously the heart of this beloved, oddly enduring old sporting culture, it could still be again.Any official crackdown on price-gouging of rapid antigen tests in Australia is unlikely, despite government suggestions it will get the consumer watchdog involved amid reports the kits have doubled in price as stock disappears from shelves. The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission has previously noted “price gouging is generally not illegal”, meaning its ability to respond is likely to be limited unless specific circumstances are involved. Speaking at a press conference on Wednesday in which he announced national cabinet would convene on Thursday, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, pushed back against calls from unions and business groups for the commonwealth to source and distribute rapid tests for free to people across the nation. He said testing was the states’ “job” and he was “glad they’re doing it”. With some Australians waiting several hours to get a free PCR test and several days to get the result, demand for rapid antigen tests has grown dramatically and prices have risen in turn. Some consumers claimed one retailer appeared to be selling the same five-test kit online for $90 on Wednesday, up from about $45 last week. Asked if was there anything to stop retailers gouging prices, Morrison appeared to suggest the consumer watchdog could address the issue. He said that was “something I know the treasurer would be pursuing with the ACCC”. “That’s their job,” Morrison said. “In the same way they do that across many other areas of critical supplies. And anyone who is doing that, they should be reporting that to the ACCC. And I would encourage them to do that. “And that’s something I know the treasurer would be moving on with the chair of the ACCC if someone was seeking to do something of that nature.” A spokesperson for the ACCC said the body could “publicly call out” suppliers caught exploiting the shortage. “The ACCC will investigate any evidence of price collusion and take appropriate action,” the spokesperson said. “The ACCC can publicly call out any suppliers which seem to be exploiting the shortage of rapid antigen tests. “Under the Competition and Consumer Act excessive pricing may, in certain circumstances, constitute unconscionable conduct. Any such case would need to be ultimately decided by a court.” At the start of the pandemic, amid price rises due to product shortages the watchdog also noted, however, that under Australian law “price gouging is generally not illegal”. Some manufacturers warned in October, a month before rapid tests became available in chemists, that Australia was likely to face price hikes due to a supply crunch. The Pharmacy Guild also said this week that limited supply and supply chain costs could lead to higher prices for consumers. Amid the consumer complaints of increased prices, some observers pointed to an obscure New South Wales law, repealed in 2019, that a former state fair trading commissioner has said could have prevented price gouging during the pandemic. The state government has previously disputed the claim. Meanwhile, Victoria became the second state pledging to distribute free rapid antigen tests. The health minister, Martin Foley, announced on Wednesday had bought 34m tests and hoped to start handing them out next week, joining NSW which has now ordered 50m and will distribute them from the end of January. Foley said Victoria would buy and provide free tests because the issue had “fallen to the states”. “We would much prefer a national approach … failing that, as per usual the states have had to step up.” Morrison said in response that the federal government’s responsibility on rapid antigen testing was limited to certain settings, such as in residential aged care. But he said the government would commit another $375m to buy further rapid tests for the national stockpile, which might be drawn on to meet gaps at the state level. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Morrison also indicated the federal government was “looking at ways” pensioners might receive concessional access to rapid tests at pharmacies, though he did not give further details. Social service and disability groups have become increasingly concerned that the cost of rapid antigen tests were prohibitive for those on low incomes, including people living with disabilities and elderly people. A pack of five tests would represent 15% of the weekly income of a person on the base rate of the jobseeker payment. President of peak body People With Disability Australia, Samantha Connor, said the federal government should step in to provide rapid tests. “The federal government must urgently provide free rapid antigen testing for people with disability, especially those at risk of severe disease and those with multiple support workers,” Connor said. “Tests and masks should be funded free of charge, have no impact on existing disability funding and available through community pick up points, via mail and from pharmacies.” Connor noted half of all people with disability in Australia lived in poverty. “For many people with disability who have large teams of support workers, it is not feasible to pay $15 a test, especially in a highly casualised workforce,” she said. Connor said there was also mass confusion about whether national disability insurance scheme participants could use their funding to buy rapid antigen tests. A spokesperson for the national disability insurance agency said people in NDIS-funded supported independent living accommodation (SIL) and their providers could claim $12.50 per rapid test. There are about 25,000 SIL participants, but nearly 500,000 people in the NDIS. Some people with disability have also been forced to turn to charities and other mutual aid organisations. The Disability Justice Network, a small grassroots group led by disabled people, said it had provided $2,000 to help people pay for rapid tests since placing a call out online a week and a half ago. “We’ve been getting requests from all over the country,” said Georgia, a Disability Justice Network member who did not want her surname used. “The standard thing we’re doing is transferring people directly $50, which we’ve found is enough to buy a five pack of tests. Some had bought tests and now couldn’t afford groceries, she said, while others could not physically stand in a line for hours for a PCR test, she said. “It’s just a new sudden cost, the prices are going up,” Georgia said. “The DSP or jobseeker payment is just so inadequate.”Confused anti-vaccine protesters entered a test-and-trace centre in Milton Keynes on Wednesday, appearing to believe it was a coronavirus vaccine centre, where they were filmed shouting abuse at staff and appearing to steal equipment. Video shared on social media showed the group of several dozen activists, led by former Ukip candidate Jeff Wyatt, walking through the facility holding signs encouraging people not to get vaccinated and criticising the BBC. Wyatt, a former deputy leader of the far-right For Britain Movement, addressed crowds at a rally held before the storming of the Covid-19 testing site, where he claimed there are “millions” of like-minded anti-vaccine activists who have “woken up”. Piers Corbyn, a prominent anti-lockdown protester and brother of the former Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, could not be seen in the footage but was pictured attending other stops during the so-called Freedom Rally including an invasion of the Milton Keynes Theatre. Protesters were filmed walking towards the NHS test-and-trace centre while a man on a loudspeaker claims that it is where the “vaccine rollout” is taking place as activists walk by a sign that reads “Testing”. Other demonstrators are heard shouting “disgrace” and “shame on you” as staff appear to run away and take shelter in offices. In several videos, a woman is seen unfurling a sign that reads “Reclaim NHS, End Jab” in one of the cabins before taking a large box containing what appears to be testing equipment and papers. She is seen unmasked and smiling at the cameras as she leaves the testing site. Thames Valley police said they were aware of an anti-vaccination protest that took place in central Milton Keynes on Wednesday afternoon. In a statement, the police said: “Where criminal offences have been disclosed, we will take swift action and bring offenders to justice. “If anyone has any information or wishes to report they can do by calling 101 or online quoting reference 604 29/12/2021.” The actions of the anti-vaccine protesters at the test-and-trace centre were described as “disgraceful” and faced widespread criticism by MPs. The local Tory MP Ben Everitt described the protesters as “dickheads” and urged anyone with information to contact police. Nick Thomas-Symonds, shadow secretary of state for international trade, described the protest as “dreadful”, at a site where “NHS staff are working over the festive season to help others”. He urged anyone with information to pass this on to Thames Valley police. Former health secretary Matt Hancock criticised the activists’ “appalling behaviour”. The Conservative MP for Rutland and Melton, Alicia Kearns, described the scenes as “shameful, self-aggrandising nonsense”. Helen Morgan, Liberal Democrat MP for North Shropshire, said the group’s actions were “totally unacceptable”. Stella Creasy, Labour MP for Walthamstow, said the scenes were “disgraceful”. “For months now we have been warning need legislation to tackle those who harass others seeking healthcare. Government promised to act weeks ago but nothing as yet. Enough. It’s not free speech when 50% of debate in fear,” she said. Matthew Barber, police and crime commissioner for Thames Valley, said it was “appalling” to see the protest “escalate into something much uglier”. He added that he had spoken to Thames Valley police officers to discuss the police response on Wednesday evening, and said that “criminal offences will be investigated and appropriate action taken”. “All of the events of today will be reviewed to help plan for future protest events and ensure that colleagues in the NHS can continue their fantastic work in delivering the vaccine rollout,” he said. Joe Harrison, CEO of Milton Keynes University hospital, said: “I am very sorry and angry to see NHS colleagues at Milton Keynes Covid testing centre harassed and intimidated at their place of work. “Our staff having to deal with increasing aggression and violence for simply doing their job. It’s abhorrent, unacceptable and we will not stand for it.”As Danny Welbeck’s beautiful header sailed beyond Édouard Mendy, it was difficult not to feel that we were witnessing the end of Chelsea’s title challenge. The gap to Manchester City stands at an imposing eight points and there was something resigned about the way Thomas Tuchel turned on his heels when Welbeck equalised for Brighton, who would have been the victims of a gross injustice had they left Stamford Bridge with nothing to show for a splendid performance. Unable to build on Romelu Lukaku’s first-half header, Chelsea could have few complaints after slumping to their third draw in their past four league games. Admittedly Tuchel tried to foster a siege mentality afterwards, raging at being forced to play on through a Covid crisis, but the truth is that his side did not do enough. The numbers favoured Brighton, who had more shots and more possession, and the only disappointment for Graham Potter was that his skilful visitors left it so late before equalising. Brighton absolutely battered Chelsea in the second half. Yves Bissouma dominated Jorginho and Mateo Kovacic in central midfield and Tuchel did not look surprised when Welbeck, introduced with 10 minutes to go, headed Marc Cucurella’s cross into the top corner. “We knew this was going to be a tough match,” Tuchel said. “I have not seen one team play a nice match against Brighton.” That was as far as the compliments went from Chelsea’s manager. Tuchel branded Mike Dean’s refusal to award Christian Pulisic a penalty in the second half “a joke” and he hit out at the referee for blowing for a foul before a shot from Mason Mount had crossed the line at 1-0. “The ball is going into the net,” Tuchel said. “We have VAR – why can we not wait? If he decides then it is a foul then decide it but why is he so sure? Does he want to keep the tension up?” On Tuchel went, complaining about the lack of player welfare when asked if Chelsea have any hope of cutting City’s lead. “How should we compete in a title race? It would be stupid. I simply don’t know what I can expect from my players. Nobody knows it.” Tuchel pointed out that Chelsea have had seven players out with Covid-19. He reported that Timo Werner is still in bad shape after testing positive a fortnight ago and the European champions will feel even more downbeat when they look at their injury list. Ben Chilwell is already a long-term absentee and they could be without Andreas Christensen, Thiago Silva and Reece James when they host Liverpool on Sunday. At least there was more confidence to Chelsea in attack after their win at Aston Villa. Fit and firing at last, Lukaku was in the mood after scoring on Boxing Day. This was the striker’s first start in the league since mid-October and Chelsea were intent on playing off him, the presence of a target man encouraging Mount to keep making dangerous runs. Tuchel has been looking for those connections in attack. The signs were promising when Mount and Lukaku linked up. One combination led to Robert Sánchez saving from Mount, who created the opener when Lukaku charged on to the midfielder’s corner and met it with an unstoppable header. The goal came at a good time for Chelsea, who had just lost James to a hamstring injury. César Azpilicueta had struck a post after Sánchez flapped at a corner, but the hosts did not have it all their own way. Their defence was nervy without Silva and Brighton were quick to target Chelsea’s wing-backs, with Pulisic unconvincing on the right and James given a torrid time by Tariq Lamptey before making way for Marcos Alonso. James, who left the ground on crutches, had not looked like an ideal stand-in for Chilwell on the left. He is right-footed and Lamptey kept darting past the England defender. Chelsea did not seem to know how to handle their former player. They were edgy as half-time approached. Mendy saved from Adam Lallana and Antonio Rüdiger was fortunate not to be sent off for a wild challenge on Lamptey. Brighton had taken control and Chelsea, whose injury problems increased when Christensen was replaced by Trevoh Chalobah, spent the second half living dangerously. There were chances for Jakub Moder, Neal Maupay and Bissouma, while Alexis Mac Allister kept wriggling into space. Chelsea had grown ragged, only restoring a semblance of order when N’Golo Kanté replaced the ineffective Callum Hudson-Odoi. Yet Brighton, who felt that Lukaku’s goal should have been disallowed for a foul on Maupay, would not be denied. The game had just gone into stoppage time when Cucurella crossed and Welbeck, rising between Chalobah and Rüdiger, sent a brilliant header past Mendy. It is City’s title to lose.Having debuted with a one-off episode between Christmas and new year 12 months ago, Britain’s Most Expensive Houses (Channel 4) is back – raising the possibility that it will become an unlikely annual festive staple, like the Royal Institution Christmas lectures or World’s Strongest Man. Come, children! Let us gather and receive an update on the luxury real estate market! God bless us, every one! The show does offer cheer, of a sort. Because if you thought selling the nation’s priciest gaffs would require a team of intimidatingly suave and capable salespeople, Britain’s Most Expensive Houses is here to reassure you. At the very top of the estate agent industry are … just more estate agents. Joining the cast this time around are broker Shereen and her enthusiastic new protege Leena. Can they find a pad for Harley Street beautician Anastasia, who wants outdoor space and a short commute? Their first thought is a quirky flat currently owned by a famous actor, in the “iconic” – as Arabella Weir’s narration insists on calling it – St Pancras Chambers. But Leena’s prep lets her down. That rainbow mural was painted by the owner’s friend, who is a … magician? Film director, Shereen gently corrects her. The wood for the kitchen units was rescued from a thunderstorm in … the 1600s? Shereen steps in again: it was 1987. Close enough. Shereen is the brains of the duo, yet even she fails to see that confidently appearing in front of a documentary camera with the words “Anastasia was blown away by the apartment … we’re definitely going to get an offer!” might not be wise. Cut straight to Anastasia explaining that this two-bedroom flat seems a bit pokey for £4.6m, so it’s a no. Meanwhile on the Llŷn peninsula near Caernarfon, Guy, managing director of UK Sotheby’s International Realty, the firm that has renewed its baffling decision to let cameras shadow its staff – is trying to convince a developer called Gary to invest in Plas Glynllifon, a 102-room, Grade I-listed mansion that needs major refurbishment. Gary, like many potential buyers during a pandemic, is unable to attend the property in person. He needs a virtual tour. Surely Sotheby’s have had a swish video filmed by top-drawer cinematic artisans? Nope, it’s Guy on his iPhone, wrestling with north Wales’s stubbornly elusive 4G signal. Halfway through his third attempt to tell Gary how big the place is – “It’s 110,000! Square feet!” – Guy loses reception. Absent buyers are also an issue for the agents selling a £30m country manor near Windsor, with its modern interior (everything’s grey or light caramel), seven-metre cantilevered kitchen island, and stables extensive enough to accommodate a moderately successful polo team. “First impressions are really quite … impressive, let’s put it that way,” says veteran salesman John, smoothly doling out more of the dazzling rhetoric we heard from him a year ago. So who will buy it? John’s colleague Mary is there on behalf of her contact, a French-Moroccan socialite named Boubakar. Mary met Boubakar in Dubai, has been cultivating the relationship for years, and knows what Boubakar wants, so she’s immediately taken by the first-floor office with its majestic Berkshire vista. “He just loves looking out at open space,” she says, clarifying that Boubakar is not one of those multimillionaires who prefers a terrace house with a view of No26’s wheelie bins. Not content with consistently presenting the Sotheby’s staff in a comically unflattering light, Britain’s Most Expensive Houses continues its insidious class warfare by not even giving them the consolation of a satisfying ending: all three stories fizzle out at the bottom of the hour. The legendary Boubakar fails to make it to Britain for a viewing and misses out on the Berkshire mansion, which means no commission for John and Mary. Guy does find a game moneybags who has the means to turn Plas Glynllifon into a seven-star hotel: it’s none other than Kam Babaee, who earlier this year welcomed Channel 5 cameras into his own Mayfair home for an episode of Sally Lindsay’s Posh Sleepover. Kam flamboyantly announces that he will make an offer but not how much it will be for, which feels like fairly crucial missing info. Shereen and Leena, meanwhile, end up selling Anastasia an off-plan flat in the desecrated shell of Battersea power station, which Weir – possibly just being sarcastic at this point – confirms is “iconic”. Anastasia’s keen on the idea of the riverside as an exclusive enclave, where the owners of multimillion-pound apartments live in expensive isolation. We don’t seem to be missing out on much.Oh, before I finally sign off, here’s the full match report. Jacob Steinberg was at Stamford Bridge. Perhaps we should leave the last word to the visitors. And, of course, it refers to tonight’s big talking point: Brighton’s away kit. Richard Webley: “As a Brightonian I am happy to inform you that the B&amp;H Albion 3rd kit is the same colour as the Railings on the Promenade on the Brighton seafront. The colour I believe is called Promenade Railings Blue. RAL code 6027.” So there you have it. Case closed. Goodnight! It seems Tuchel was referring to the incident when Pulisic went down. Mark Clattenburg isn’t having it and replays show that the Chelsea attacker had overrun the ball before colliding with Brighton defenders. Not a penalty for me, Clive. Ten minutes to go at Brentford (if you’re still reading this) and Manchester City are on the cusp of going eight points clear at the top. Now for Thomas Tuchel. This should be interesting. “Very frustrating. Very disappointing. We have enough big chances to win the match. We have a horrible decision from the referee (a penalty incident which I can’t quite recall); everything against us.” He’s clearly extremely miffed, bringing up Chelsea’s injury/Covid problems and the heavy fixture list. “We have no more wing-backs. We need to digest this and not talk about the next game,” says Tuchel when prompted to wax about the upcoming Liverpool match. Had Leeds United’s Mateusz Klich not hoofed Antonio Rudiger in the back of the leg, allowing Jorginho to net a last-minute penalty, Chelsea would have drawn their last five home Premier League games. Simply not good enough for a side with title ambitions. Man City are still 1-0 up by the way. Twenty minutes left at Brentford. Now for Brighton boss Graham Potter. He’s a happy man as you’d expect. “Really proud. I think we were brave tonight. We showed our game. The performance was really really good. It’s not easy to come here but we matched a lot of their game. I can’t speak highly enough of the boys. It’s an incredibly brave performance against a top team.” Brighton are now 10th and Potter has guided his teams to draws at both Liverpool and now Chelsea. In fact, they’ve still lost just once away in the league this season. Impressive stuff. Fun/not so fun fact depending on who you support: Welbeck’s equaliser was Brighton’s first ever goal at Stamford Bridge. Speaking now on whether the result was deserved, Welbeck says: “I think it definitely was. To get the point in the end was big for us. It’s been a while since I’ve been out on the pitch so it was nice to get back and get back among the goals.” The draw takes Chelsea into second place, a point above Liverpool, but they won’t take any solace in that. This is two more gone. Next up for the Blues... a home clash against Liverpool. That’s simply a must-win game for both with City starting to pull clear. It’s still only 1-0 for Pep’s pacesetters at Brentford as they approach the hour mark but it’s hard to imagine them not taking all three points. If you fancy more hot, MBM action, go to Rob Smyth’s live blog now. It’s all over! Chelsea drop points at home for the fourth time in five matches but they can’t complain. Brighton dominated huge chunks of this game and were easily worth a point. Graham Potter’s man can’t shake the tag of ‘draw specialists’ but this one will feel sweeter than most thanks to Welbeck’s last-gasp leveller. 90 min + 3: Andy Townsend gives the man-of-the-match award to Lukaku. Does he realise Brighton have equalised? 90 min + 2: Veltman hacks the ball clear as Brighton look to see this out. 90 min: Four added minutes. What a blow this could be for Chelsea. Drama!!! Cucurella floats a cross into the box and super-sub Welbeck leaps above Chalobah and Rudiger and heads past the flat-footed Mendy. Totally deserved!!!! 89 min: It looks like Chelsea are seeing this one out. They’ll be delighted to take a 1-0. 88 min: Chelsea threatening a clincher now as Kante’s 20-yarder is deflected for a corner. It falls to Kovacic whose effort goes over the bar via a flick from Azpilicueta. Brighton make a final change: Moder makes way for Alzate. 86 min: Almost a second for Lukaku. Kovacic feeds him in the box, he chops back inside and then is block-tackled by Burn as he tries to smash his shot past Sanchez. Tuchel screams for a corner but, nope, he’s not getting it. 85 min: Mendy taking his time with a goal-kick after a Brighton attack ends tamely. 84 min: I’m back and Brighton have a throw in the Chelsea half. 83 min: The game has just gone a little flat for Brighton. Can they gather themselves for a big last 10 minutes or so? Hopefully nothing happened just then as my eco-friendly television just turned itself off. 81 min: Dean peeps on his whistle to stop play and flashes a yellow at Mount for something off the ball with Bissouma. The Brighton man is booked too. Replays show some grappling near the touchline. 79 min: Mount shoots left-footed from the D and Cucurella throws out a leg to deflect the Chelsea man’s shot for a corner. On comes Welbeck for Mac Allister. Terrible delivery from Alonso when the corner is eventually taken. Hear those groans. 78 min: Chelsea a little quicker to the ball now, pinching possession in midfield as Brighton try and launch more forward thrusts. 76 min: Brighton are preparing to bring on Danny Welbeck as Potter looks to up the ante in attack. 75 min: Just a feeling that Chelsea have ridden out that strong middle hour from Brighton. Maybe. 73 min: Burn brings down Lukaku in a contest of Giant Haystacks v Big Daddy proportions, giving Chelsea a free-kick. Rudiger is free at the back post but his header is back across goal and Brighton do just about enough. Cucurella then has to act sharpish to clear for a corner. Chelsea can’t profit from that although their best moments seem to have come from set-pieces. 71 min: Terrible touch from Alonso allows Mwepu - on for Lamptey - to break but Chelsea have enough cover. 69 min: Dean speaks to Lukaku after the striker pushes his marker on the edge of the box, conceding a free-kick. A shame for Chelsea as they looked to be building a promising attack. 68 min: Some respite for Chelsea as Pulisic wins a free-kick midway in the Brighton half. Just over a quarter of the match to go and this one remains in the balance. Man City are still winning 1-0 at Brentford so Chelsea cannot afford to drop points. 66 min: A big cheer as N’Golo Kante comes on for Hudson-Odoi. Can the Frenchman stop the flow of Brighton chances? 65 min: Maupay tries a one-two on the edge of the box with the unlikely figure of Dan Burn but it’s poked way for a corner. Chelsea are asleep and Lallana shoots for goal but fires over the crossbar. Surely it’s a matter of time before Brighton knock one of these in. 63 min: Bissouma, who has been excellent, is clattered by Hudson-Odoi as he drives forward. The Chelsa No.20 is booked by Dean. 62 min: Brighton absolutely deserve an equaliser - and maybe even more - here. They’ve been peppering the Chelsea goal with shots and, as far as I can remember, the hosts haven’t had an effort since Lukaku’s goal. 60 min: Brighton still pressing and pressing. Mac Allister is fed in behind the Chelsea defence and pulls the ball back to Maupay whose shot is blocked. Lamptey has a crack soon after from the edge of the box but his left footer is dragged wide. 58 min: Chelsea are being stretched and Kovacic goes into the book for a lunge. Mac Allister takes the free-kick from the right but, despite bouncing awkwardly in front of him, Mendy gathers cleanly. 56 min: Golden chance for Chelsea to double their lead. Hudson-Odoi and Mount are streaming through two on one but Veltman positions himself well and intercepts the pass. Hudson-Odoi should have done far better there. Play swings to the other end and this time it’s Brighton with head in hands as Maupay’s right-footer drills just wide of the post. 55 min: March gets another cross into the box which Chelsea clear. 53 min: Alonso stops March’s cross with his stomach but then only clears to Bissouma. The all-action midfielder pulls the trigger from 25 yard and larrups a fine volley which causes Mendy to arch his back and tip over. Brighton deserve to be level here. 52 min: Brighton still sniffing and they pump a free-kick and corner into the box but again without any tangible results. Chelsea then break and the game is looking more stretched now. 51 min: Oof! Mendy dithers and dallies with his clearance and Maupay half charges the ball down. Nothing comes of it apart from raised heartbeats in the Stamford Bridge crowd. 49 min: Pulisic dances into the box and goes down. He appeals and VAR are taking a look. Looks like he’d lost control to be honest and it’s just a corner which Brighton clear. 48 min: Chelsea finally get going and Hudson-Odoi relieves the pressure by winning a corner down the right. Mount’s delivery again causes panic in the Brighton defence but this time they do enough to keep it off Lukaku’s bonce. 47 min: Brighton have started on the front foot again in this second 45. March, from the left, feeds the ball across to Lallana, who plays it first time into the area and Moder’s shinned effort from eight yards grazes the top of the crossbar! So close! Half-time switch for Chelsea. Trevor Chalobah has come on for the injured Christensen. Welcome Trev. We’re in play in the second half. Well, there is a goal now at Brentford and it’s gone to Man City thanks to Phil Foden. While you boil the kettle or work your way through the Christmas chocolates (I polished off a huge family box of Maltesers prior to the game tonight despite the intention to pick away at them throughout the 90 minutes: madness!), don’t forget you can keep up to date with Brentford v Man City here via Rob Smyth’s blog. Still 0-0 but just 15 minutes gone. More on the Brighton kit.. Daniel Taylor-Lind: “Being a total guitar nut I would say that Brighton’s kit is ‘seafoam’ green; this was a a colour fender used that was developed by US car manufacturers in the late 1950’s!” Forgive me, I forgot to say that it was Mount who swung in the corner for Lukaku to head home. That’s the England man’s fifth assist of the season. The half-time whistle blows and Chelsea are in front thanks to Lukaku’s 27th minute header. But it’s a fragile lead. Brighton have had nine shots to Chelsea’s six, 55% possession and ended the first period much the stronger side. Remember, this is a Brighton team that came from 2-0 down at Anfield to draw 2-2 while they’ve suffered just one away defeat in the Premier League this season. Tuchel has plenty to point out you’d imagine when he gathers his team for the half-time chat and orange segment. 45 min + 3: Brighton again pour forward and get numbers in the box but Maupay can only get a weak header on the loose ball and, once more, Mendy has it safely. Chelsea will want the interval here. 45 min + 2: Brighton have had 65% possession in the last five minutes. Can they do something with it though? Mac Allister tries to with a left-foot thump from the edge of the D but it’s straight down Mendy’s throat. The last six attempts in the game have all been for Brighton! 45 min: We’ll have four minutes of added time after those injury stoppages for Christensen and James. 43 min: Mount’s backheel intended for Lukaku is loose and Brighton threaten to break again before the Chelsea defence wins it back. The visitors have been excellent for the last 15 minutes or so. 42 min: Clattenburg says yellow for Rudiger is the right call. So there you have it. 40 min: A wild tackle from Rudiger on Lamptey near the touchline draws only a booking. Hmmm. He’s launched himself but Mike Dean, who hasn’t shown a red card this season, decides yellow is enough. Brighton then win another corner. Mendy punches clear and Lamptey, who is fine after the challenge, gets his volley wrong, floating it harmlessly over the bar. 38 min: Brighton have their tails up. Bissouma drives into the box but slips. There’s a scramble but it comes to Lallana on the edge of the box and his left-footer is tipped behind by Mendy. Lukaku heads the corner away but back to Lallana and this time the ex-Liverpool man makes a horlicks of his shot. Better from the visitors though. 36 min: Solly March has Pulisic on toast down the left. The ball breaks back to Bissouma and he thumps in a shot but straight at Mendy. Some housekeeping. Reece James went off with a hamstring problem while KitblissNZ on Twitter says: “I’m reliably informed that the official colour for Brighton’s away kit is ‘mint green’. I’m something of a kit nut, sadly...” 33 min: Cucurella, a whirl of hair and scampering legs, darts down the left and wins a corner for Brighton but it’s underhit and Chelsea head clear. 31 min: Brighton still look threatening on the break and have responded well since the goal. Christensen is now moving a little awkwardly so could we have another Chelsea defender down? 29 min: Lukaku hadn’t done an awful before that but he took the chance impressively. In the studio, Mark Clattenburg (Amazon Prime’s Peter Walton) says the goal is absolutely fine. Before the treatment for James, Chelsea had won a corner. It’s finally taken and, boom, Lukaku nods it in, easy as you like. It’s checked by VAR as Maupay went down when trying to disrupt the run of Lukaku but the goal stands. Another headed goal for Chelsea! 26 min: It’s game over for Reece James, who is down receiving treatment. It looks like a tackle from Bissouma has done the damage although it didn’t look anything too bad. James is hurt though and walks off in slow motion. A big round of applause for the England man as Alonso takes his place. 24 min: Finally a ball that releases Lukaku. Kovavic finds the striker, who plays in Mount for a shot from a narrow angle which Sanchez blocks for a corner. 22 min: Bissouma robs Kovacic in midfield and hares forward. He has Lamptey running with him and it’s a great chance to play the right-back in but his pass lacks accuracy and allows Rudiger to step across and put out the fire. 20 min: Chelsea winning a few corners now. They play it short this time and Hudson-Odoi, in too much space really, curls it too deep and out of play. A waste. Fans hate that. Just get it in the mixer! 19 min: James, playing down the left tonight, tries a shot or was it a cross after cutting back in from the wing? Either way, it’s catching practice for Sanchez although, on the evidence so far, he needs it. 18 min: At the other end, Cucurella pulls the trigger from 25 yards but his left-footer is always angling away from the post. 17 min: Mount wins a corner off Cucurella and up come the Chelsea big men. It’s a huge scramble. Sanchez flaps at it, the ball breaks back to Azpilicueta and the defender’s bobbled effort strikes the post! They press again and this time Sanchez shows a clean pair of hands. Best chance so far. 15 min: Chelsea are trying to look for Lukaku when they can but he has very little space to operate in so far. 13 min: Christiansen tries a Joel Matip-style gallop forward from defence but has his pocket picked. Not as easy as the Liverpool man makes it look. Joe Pearson from Indianapolis helps me out with Brighton’s kit. “I think I’d go with sea foam or turquoise, but my wife used to own a boutique.” 11 min: Some Brighton possession before they they play in Lamptey down the right. The former Chelsea man beats James, runs in a line across the penalty area and curls a left-foot shot not that far wide. James has his hands full here. 9 min: Sanchez flaps at the corner a little but Brighton clear. Lukaku drops a little deeper in a bid to see some action but the visitors are disrupting him well so far. 8 min: Hudson-Odoi cuts in from the left and goes for goal but a Brighton leg deflects his shot into the air and Lukaku can’t get to the rebound. Chelsea press again and win a corner. 6 min: Decent start by Brighton apart from that scare on the break. They’re pressing Chelsea and making Tuchel’s men rush a little. 4 min: Jorginho gives the ball away carelessly and Brighton have a free-kick. They play it out wide right and the speedy Lamptey tries to get in behind Reece James. The two crash to the ground in the area and, for a split second, everyone looks to Mike Dean. Thankfully for the hosts, he awards a free-kick to Chelsea. 2 min: Chelsea’s first attack of the game and Mount has a golden chance to play in Odoi but Bissouma gets back to nick it off the Chelsea man’s toe. Vital interception. 1 min: Brighton have a couple of throws down the left. Cucurella hoists the ball into the box but it comes to nothing. Chelsea still penned in their own half. Peeeep!! After everyone takes the knee (much applause from the crowd), Brighton get us in play. Here come the teams! Chelsea in their usual blue and Brighton in a sort of all-cyan, shell, erm, greeny, strip. I’m colour blind so probably not the best man to be explaining this. A few music-themed emails... Matt Burtz: “I imagine Fatboy Slim doesn’t count as being “from” Brighton but he seems deserving of a mention, at least to this American who at the very least vaguely remembered his Brighton connection and had never heard of The Go! Team until 10 minutes ago.” Peter Oh: “Flock of Seagulls aren’t from Brighton?” Andreas Tangen: “Nice to see the Television Personalities get some airtime. They did all live (the original line-up, at least) in the King’s Road and environs but Dan was a Man U fan, the silly sod.” Steve Waterhouse: “Ladyflash (Go! Team) is an absolute banger. Honourable mention to The Electric Soft Parade whose album should be ‘filed under brilliant debuts’ according to these pages.” Brighton boss Graham Potter is asked why Neal Maupay has suddenly started banging them in this season. The Frenchman has seven goals in 15 games so far. Potter replies: “Erm, it’s a fine line between scoring and not. Not too much difference; this time the goals are going in.” Brighton have never scored a Premier League goal at Stamford Bridge. Why Graham? Why? What makes them so strong defensively? Potter decides not to revisit history and opts for the forward defensive. “They’re champions of Europe, they’ve invested a lot in their team.” Thomas Tuchel is asked if Lukaku is back to his best following that impressive 45-minute cameo against Villa. The German replies: “It’s too early to say but he will be at his best at some point, at which point I don’t know.” He adds the striker’s intensity seems to be back following injury and catching Covid. Actually that was a preview feature as Gus is now pitchside. He’s everywhere tonight. Discussion now focuses on Lukaku. Will we see the Lukaku of group stage Belgium (niche dig) that reappeared against Villa last time or the muted figure that hasn’t really clicked at Chelsea? Amazon Prime are billing this as the ‘Gus Poyet derby’ and, in fact, they have the man himself on a two sofa set-up in the studio. Gus laughs when asked who he wants to win but then says “Chelsea”. On the other sofa, Tim Sherwood says centre-forwards are a dying breed. If ever Romelu Lukaku needed some incentive, it’s right there. Rob Smyth is in his comfy chair for the Brentford v Man City match and he’s already preambled. Kick-off there is at 8.15pm and you can follow it here. John Terry is back at Chelsea! Well, in a part-time role as a coaching consultant in the club’s academy, but from small acorns... For the away side, there are several fine bands from Brighton but I’m picking The Go! Team. This is from their debut album ‘Thunder, Lightning, Strike’. Any song that starts off sounding like theme music to an athletics meeting from Oslo in 1981 (Coe going for a world record perhaps) and ends with a sample of a Northern Soul classic (Shirley Ellis’s ‘Soul Time’) is fine by me. Go! Team albums usually get four stars out of five from proper Guardian music critics by the way. Time for some pre-match music. Let’s start with the hosts and a nice early mention of the King’s Road in this shambling and enjoyable ditty from post-punk Chelsea band The Television Personalities. “This (adopting John Peel voice) is from the ‘Where’s Bill Grundy Now?’ EP.” Amazon Prime has this one although their coverage hasn’t started yet. That reminds me, I have a package to collect two doors down. Except they’re never in. Romelu Lukaku starting a game for the first time since October is the headline news for Chelsea. He’s one of four changes made by Tuchel. Mateo Kovacic and Andreas Christensen are the respective replacements for injured duo N’Golo Kante and Thiago Silva. Marcus Alonso is the other man missing from the side that won 3-1 at Aston Villa. Looks like Callum Hudson-Odoi will fill his left wing-back role. Brighton fans will be disappointed that the lively Leandro Trossard hasn’t made it following a hamstring injury. Solly March comes in. As expected, Yves Bissouma is back while Joel Veltman gets the nod at centre-back alongside man mountain Dan Burn. So that’s (looks at fingers) three changes made by Graham Potter. Chelsea: Mendy, James, Rudiger, Christensen, Azpilicueta, Jorginho, Kovacic, Mount, Pulisic, Hudson-Odoi, Lukaku Subs: Kepa, Alonso, Kante, Chalobah, Saul, Barkley, Ziyech, Havertz, Sarr Brighton: Sanchez, Lamptey, Veltman, Burn, Cucurella, Bissouma, Lallana, Moder, Mac Allister, March, Maupay Subs: Steele, Gross, Alzate, Welbeck, Mwepu, Richards, Duffy, Webster, Ferguson Referee: Mike Dean Any rush to judgement can make us look foolish. For a few games there, Chelsea were quickly being downgraded from title candidates to mere top four contenders. It was only a matter of time, they said, before Tommy T’s stuttering side would lose touch with the breakaway at the top and be sucked in by the peloton. But with Liverpool dropping five points in the last six and Chelsea returning to winning ways at Aston Villa, victory for the Blues tonight will take them up to second and three clear of Jurgen Klopp’s Reds. In theory, Chelsea could even end the evening just three points behind leaders Manchester City if all the cards fall their way. That seems unlikely though. Pep and co are in action too tonight and no-one really expects anything other than a convincing win at Brentford in the 8.15pm kick-off. You can join Rob Smyth for that one. As for visitors Brighton, they’re a mass of statistical contradictions. Graham Potter’s men have managed just one more win (five) than Watford (four) and yet have lost only once on the road. They gatecrashed the top four early in the season and then completely lost the ability to win games despite still playing quite well. After a slow drift down the table, the Seagulls flew back to ninth with victory over Brentford last time, their first top-flight win for 12 matches, but they’ll start this one in 11th. If only they had a decent striker, eh; someone who could knock them in on a regular basis? Well, er, they have. Fun fact: Neal Maupay has scored the same number of Premier League goals (seven) as Cristiano Ronaldo this season. Only seven players are above the Frenchman in the Golden Boot charts and, for further comparison, Romelu Lukaku has just four. Perhaps this is all a long-winded way of saying the smart money is on Maupay grabbing an equaliser in a 1-1 draw. Brighton forced a 0-0 stalemate at Stamford Bridge last season so, y’know, don’t dismiss them lightly. It’s off to Stamford Bridge then. Let battle commence!Four of Ghislaine Maxwell’s accusers testified against her in Manhattan federal court, painting a compelling and powerful story of sexual abuse. These women – Jane, Kate, Carolyn and Annie Farmer – testified they met Maxwell as teens, and that she lured them into Jeffrey Epstein’s orbit. While the dates and exact circumstances of their encounters with Maxwell differ, they all share striking similarities. Only Farmer used her real full name. These four women all describe being vulnerable when they met Maxwell, such as suffering financial precarity or strained family relationships. They said that Maxwell made them feel comfortable before Epstein’s misconduct and that she made them feel special by asking questions about their lives. She served as a reassuring presence that tempered concerns or suspicions about Epstein. They all said that Maxwell was involved in Epstein’s abuse or misconduct. Three said that Maxwell coordinated their appointments with Epstein. Three said that Maxwell touched them. They all described Maxwell as working to satisfy Epstein’s physical needs. Accusers’ testimony portrayed Maxwell as an enabler and, in some instances, an enthusiastic participant. Here are their stories: Jane In summer 1994, Jane met Maxwell at Interlochen Center for the Arts youth camp in Michigan. Jane, then 14, was eating ice cream with her friends when a woman “walking a cute little Yorkie” dog – Maxwell – approached. They started chatting and eventually a man, Epstein, joined them. They were interested in her time at Interlochen, telling Jane that they provided children scholarships. They learned Jane was from Palm Beach and asked for her mother’s phone number. Jane gave them her contact information and, after she returned from camp, they called to invite her and her mom for tea. After that initial tea, Jane started spending time with Epstein every week or two. Epstein first abused Jane when she was 14. Jane said that there were sexual encounters with Epstein for the next three years, around every two weeks. Sometimes, Maxwell was in the room during this sexual abuse. There were occasions when Maxwell touched Jane’s breasts, she testified. “There were hands everywhere,” Jane recalled of an encounter with Epstein and Maxwell. Kate The second accuser to testify, Kate said that she met Maxwell around 1994, in Paris. Kate found Maxwell to be “very sophisticated and very elegant” and gave the British socialite her phone number. Kate testified that Maxwell invited her for tea. During this meeting, Maxwell gushed about “her boyfriend”, Epstein. Not long after their tea at Maxwell’s London townhouse, she called Kate and told her that Epstein was there, would she be able to come by and meet him? When she arrived, Maxwell told Epstein that Kate was “very strong” and told the teen, “Why don’t you give his feet a little squeeze to show him how strong you are?” She did so and “he seemed to be very approving and said, ‘Go ahead, you can do my shoulders.’” Epstein received a call and Maxwell shuttled her out of the house. Maxwell rang Kate a few weeks later, saying that Epstein’s masseuse had canceled, could she come over? Kate went and said that Maxwell led her up the stairs into a room with a table. Epstein was inside, sporting a robe, which he removed to be naked. Maxwell shut the door, Kate said, and Epstein initiated a sexual encounter. Kate said that Maxwell invited her over several days later, and that a similar encounter took place. Kate saw Epstein several times a year over the next few years. Carolyn At 14, Caroyln’s 17-year-old boyfriend introduced her to Virginia Giuffre – a longtime Maxwell and Epstein accuser. “Virginia asked me if I wanted to come make money,” Carolyn said of their meeting in the early 2000s. Giuffre, then 18, said they would go to her friend’s house on Palm Beach island to “give him a massage”. When they got to Epstein’s house, Carolyn said Maxwell greeted them, telling Giuffre: “You can bring her upstairs and show her what to do.” Giuffre disrobed. Epstein came into the room and climbed on to the massage table face-down. They massaged him for 45 minutes and then he turned over. Giuffre then had sex with him. Carolyn later went back to Epstein’s house, without Giuffre, saying that Maxwell got her phone number and called to schedule massages. Carolyn said she went to Epstein’s home “over 100” times from age 14 to 18. Carolyn said that at age 14, before one of the massages, Maxwell “came in and felt my boobs and my hips and my buttocks and said … that I had a great body for Mr Epstein and his friends.” Annie Farmer The fourth and final accuser to testify, Annie Farmer said that Maxwell gave her a nude massage when she was only 16. Farmer said that she met Epstein at his Manhattan manse in late 1995. Annie’s sister, Maria Farmer, worked for him as a fine arts painter. Epstein bought the ticket for Annie. The first time Farmer met Epstein was to pick up Phantom of the Opera tickets he had bought them. Farmer saw Epstein again when she and Maria went to a movie with him. He sat between the two sisters. At one point, he “caressed” Farmer’s hand and touched her foot and leg. Farmer learned in spring 1996 that she would travel to see him again, for a weekend at his ranch outside Santa Fe, New Mexico. She wasn’t eager to go but felt slightly more comfortable because a woman – Maxwell – would be there. After returning to the ranch following an excursion to town, “it was decided” that Farmer would learn to massage Epstein’s feet. Farmer said Maxwell instructed her and that she followed along. Maxwell then asked if she’d ever had a professional massage. A massage table was set up in the room where Farmer was staying. “She said to get undressed and get [under] the sheet on the massage table,” Farmer said. “She pulled the sheet down and exposed my breasts, and started rubbing on my chest and on my upper breast.” Information and support for anyone affected by rape or sexual abuse issues is available from the following organisations. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support on 0808 802 9999. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.htmlGhislaine Maxwell’s sex-trafficking trial ended on Wednesday when the Manhattan federal court jury weighing her fate rendered a guilty verdict. It was a trial that captured headlines around the world and offered a rare and intimate look into the elite social circles that Maxwell and her former boyfriend Jeffrey Epstein moved in, as well as the wealth and power that the disgraced financier wielded to help carry out his crimes. The prosecution presented 24 witnesses, over the course of 10 days, to make their case that between 1994 and 2004, Maxwell lured girls as young as 14 into Epstein’s abusive orbit. Maxwell was present during some of the late financier’s abuse and at some points, she participated in his predatory misdeeds, prosecutors said. Maxwell’s defense presented nine witnesses over the course of two days in their attempt to clear her. They elicited testimony to undermine allegations of inappropriate sexual contact with minors – including calling Eva Dubin, a former Miss Sweden and Epstein ex-girlfriend, to the stand. They also called two of Maxwell’s former assistants to testify. Both described Maxwell in glowing terms, in an apparent campaign to make the British socialite seem more likable. Here are some key moments from the trial: Carolyn’s testimony While all of Maxwell’s accusers provided upsetting testimony, Carolyn’s statements were even more harrowing. Carolyn was an archetype of vulnerability when she met Maxwell at age 14 – with an alcoholic mother at home, a 17-year-old boyfriend and a history of sexual abuse. Her boyfriend, Shawn, introduced Carolyn to then 18-year-old Virginia Giuffre, who has been among the most vocal Epstein and Maxwell accusers. Giuffre asked Carolyn if she wanted to make some money, giving a massage to an older man she knew on Palm Beach island. Maxwell subsequently scheduled sexualized massage sessions with Epstein. Carolyn’s voice broke, and she wiped her eyes, after saying that she went to Epstein’s house “over 100” times from ages 14 and 18. Sometimes, Carolyn scheduled appointments, saying she needed money for drugs: “Marijuana, cocaine, alcohol, anything that could block out … the appointment.” Carolyn wept when addressing the defense’s contention that she was testifying for financial gain, saying: “Money would not ever fix what that woman has done to me.” A romance revealed The exact nature of Maxwell’s role in Epstein’s life remains somewhat mysterious, but a cache of photos presented to jurors showed them as a seemingly enamored couple. The images included notorious snaps of a cleavage-baring Maxwell rubbing Epstein’s feet. There are photos of Maxwell giving Epstein cheek-kisses while they appear to be on holiday. Jurors also saw a photo of Maxwell and Epstein swimming naked. Showing Maxwell and Epstein as a couple and not just business associates was integral to prosecutors case. “Ladies and gentlemen, when you’re with someone for 11 years, you know what they like,” prosecutor Alison Moe said in her closing. “Jeffrey Epstein liked underage girls. He liked to touch underage girls. Maxwell knew it.” Visuals of the relationship was key to bolstering witness accounts that described Maxwell and Epstein as romantically linked, thus supporting prosecutors’ claim that Maxwell was well aware of what was going on. Kate, the second accuser to testify against Maxwell, had testified that she described Epstein as her boyfriend. Maxwell “would ask me if I knew anybody who could come and give Jeffrey [oral sex] because it was a lot for her to do”, Kate said. “She said, ‘You know what he likes: cute, young, pretty, like you.’ She said he needed to have sex about three times a day.” A financial motivation Prosecutors have argued that Maxwell’s motive in fostering Epstein’s crimes was financial. Maxwell’s father, the British publishing baron Robert Maxwell, died shortly after her arrival to New York City in 1991. Maxwell wasn’t particularly wealthy when she first got involved with Epstein. Satisfying his needs, however, got her back to the high life, they claimed. An officer from JP Morgan bank testified about transfers from Epstein’s accounts to Maxwell’s. This banker, Patrick McHugh, explained documents which demonstrated that Epstein transferred more than $30m to Maxwell’s accounts between 1999 and 2007. “You don’t give someone $30m unless they’re giving you exactly what you want, and what Epstein wanted was to touch underage girls,” Moe argued in her closing. “When Maxwell took that money, she knew what it was for and now you do, too.” The house manager Testimony from Alessi, the former house manager of Epstein’s Palm Beach mansion, painted a damning portrait of Maxwell both as his domineering consigliere and indisputable lover. “Ms Maxwell was the girlfriend of Mr Epstein; I understand she was the lady of the house,” Alessi said. “From the day she came to the house, she right away took over, and she mentioned to me she was going to be the lady of the house. Also, she was in charge of other homes, other properties.” Alessi’s words, by showing Maxwell’s deep involvement in Epstein’s affairs, strengthened prosecutors’ argument that she was so enmeshed with him, she had to know about his abuse. “You should never look at his eyes. Just look at another part of the room and answer to him,” Alessi recalled Maxwell saying. His specific recollections of Epstein and Maxwell’s intimacy further spoke to the twisted personal-and-business relationship that prosecutors said paved the way for abuse. “She was sleeping at Mr Epstein’s bedroom,” he said. Alessi once found a large dildo in Epstein’s massage room, which he then placed in Maxwell’s bathroom. “That’s the place what I was told – it was kept all the time.” Information and support for anyone affected by rape or sexual abuse issues is available from the following organisations. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support on 0808 802 9999. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.htmlIt’s New Year’s Eve eve, and you’ve found yourself looking at Five Great Reads, a newsletter where we pull together a daily reading list to keep you going through the summer. And by “we” I mean me, Alyx Gorman, lifestyle editor of Guardian Australia. “But hang on, aren’t newsletters meant to appear in my email inbox?” I hear you ask. Yes, that’s exactly where they’re meant to appear, so if you’re reading this some other way and would like to read it as an email, just pop your address in the box below. Australia is not exactly gearing up for a huge party to see out 2021, though, given the year that saved its highest Covid case numbers for last. How high? Well, Doherty Institute modelling is saying we could get to 100,000 daily cases within weeks. So there’s that. But at least we have rapid antigen tests to help us make informed decisions now – oh wait, they’ve doubled in price. Rats! Meanwhile queues at PCR testing clinics are so long, and results come so slowly, many potentially Covid-positive people have not been able to get their status confirmed. With that deeply grim blast of Covid news out of the way, let’s get on to something less infectious. 1. Guardian Australia readers throw a YouTube party Here’s a round up of the funniest things on the internet, as chosen by you, in 2021. Why should I look at this? It will make you feel better. How? It features mean bird names, scary snowmen and a mysterious and terrifying baked good. 2. When ‘which actor would play you?’ isn’t hypothetical It can be surreal and a bit awful, actually, when your life story ends up on TV – as these writers who’ve had their memoirs adapted for the screen are willing to share. Notable quote: “It would be a lie to say that I can completely depersonalise it,” Dolly Alderton admits. “There were certainly moments in the process of hashing out stories where I realised that when I was defending Maggie [her on screen character], I was actually defending myself.” How long will it take to read? About three minutes. 3. A swamp that does not need draining Not just known for the Big Merino anymore, the NSW town of Goulburn now has a thriving wetland re-wilding project, as Nigel Featherstone tells in this lovely story. No-context concluding sentence: “Thank you,” beam the dog walkers. “We appreciate it so very much.” 4. Resolutions: the reading list Cultural historian Anna Katharina Schaffner picks her top 10 books on bettering oneself. But I hate self help. Then this is for you: The Secret does not make the cut here; Dante does. How long will it take me to read? About three minutes. The books will take a little longer, but no one said change comes quickly. 5. The ingredients of the year From the most delicious variety of turnip, to a flower that packs a peppery punch, 19 chefs, growers and food writers share their favourite culinary components of 2021. What’s in it for me? It’s a long read (about 10 minutes or so) but it will make you a better home cook. I should know. After I edited it, I immediately tweaked my grocery list. What else is in it for me? You get to share your favourite ingredient at the end. Fun!The destiny of the Premier League title may well have been decided in the same week as the Ashes. After Liverpool faltered at Leicester on Tuesday and Chelsea were depth‑charged by Danny Welbeck elsewhere in west London on Wednesday, Manchester City enter 2022 with a fourth title in five years firmly within their grasp. Victory at Brentford opened the gap to eight on Chelsea and nine on Liverpool. Their chasers face each other at the weekend. With Brentford troublesome, disciplined opposition, City could not close out 2021 with a display of the glorious pyrotechnics that won the title last season and had rattled in 17 goals in their last three matches. Phil Foden’s early goal, coming from Kevin De Bruyne’s assist, gave them what they came for, a 10th successive Premier League win, a pace with which their rivals cannot live. As Pep Guardiola remarked: “The reason they [Chelsea and Liverpool] drop points is that we won 10 games in a row.” On a ground where Arsenal lost, Liverpool drew 3-3 and Chelsea squeaked a 1-0 win, Guardiola did not underestimate Brentford. The restoration to the starting lineup of Foden and Jack Grealish after being benched because of a pre-Christmas drinks session reflected the strength of City’s options, and paid dividends in Foden’s match-winning contribution. Grealish, as his drinking partner showed off his superior capability within City’s freeform attacking, continues to be a disappointment. The devil-may-care attacker of Aston Villa yore is yet to evidence himself, though in mitigation Bernardo Silva was similarly quiet in this game. Facing all that talent, and someone Thomas Frank had called the “greatest manager of the modern era”, was a Brentford team ravaged by injury rather than illness. Only one player, Vitaly Janelt, is currently on the Covid absentee list, though it appears whoever Frank picks will give their all for the cause. Guardiola offered plenty of credit to Brentford for his team’s problems in finding a way through. “You cannot make more chances when they play 10 players in such a space,” Guardiola said. “The space is always impossible. In that situation you have to be patient.” Despite space being so squeezed, the champions dominated possession from the start. A heavy surface – with suspiciously long grass – at the Community Stadium also curbed the usual City flow. Gabriel Jesus’s 10th‑minute miscontrol was by no means the only slip. Brentford were never completely restricted to their own half and the City goal came just as the home team created their best sequence of chances. Frank Onyeka and Mads Sørenson took early potshots before Ederson was forced into a reaction save after Yoane Wissa had crashed the ball off Rúben Dias’s face. It then took a timely Nathan Aké intervention to clear danger when Ivan Toney threatened. Within seconds of that flurry, Foden had the ball in the net. De Bruyne crossed from the right in a style David Beckham once patented and Foden, onside by millimetres, slotted past Álvaro Fernández. VAR offered no mercy. “I wasn’t too confident,” Foden said of the lengthy delay that followed his strike. “I thought I went a little too early.” Foden, in a false-nine position he clearly relished, was often the City player furthest forward . “He likes it, this position,” Guardiola said, sidestepping questions of the discipline he had meted out to his young England stars. “[Foden] does not have anything to prove to me.” Brentford, urged on by Frank’s squawking presence from the touchline, were often reduced to last-ditch tackles. Dominic Thompson, on Jesus, delivered the pick of them. It got tetchy, too. Just before the break Toney and Fernandinho fought out a running battle. Both fell theatrically but neither engaged the attention of officialdom. The second half began with De Bruyne again teeing up Foden, this time for a header wide. The Belgian then struck the foot of the left-hand post. Foden did net a header, only to be ruled offside. Brentford were retreating ever more, pressed into mistakes on the rare occasions they did regain possession. “We met City in their highest form, and we gave one chance away in 45 minutes, so the first half is fantastic,” Frank said. “Unfortunately we lacked the cutting edge in attack and on the counter. But I’m fully proud and disappointed we didn’t take a point.” The lack of a second City goal opened the door on a later Brentford counter nicking a point and halting City’s winning run at nine matches but the home team were too exhausted to try it, with Thompson, only one previous Premier League game to his name, pulling up with cramp. Guardiola, meanwhile, could leave Riyad Mahrez and Raheem Sterling on the bench. They will come in handy for Arsenal on Saturday, a chance to put further distance on City’s increasingly desperate chasers.John Brewin’s match report has landed, so I’ll wrap the blog up. Thanks for your company and emails - goodnight. The post-match thoughts of Phil Foden “It’s an important win. Brentford made it really difficult – they’re a physical team and really dangerous from set-pieces. I’ve had a few disallowed goals this year and I wasn’t too confident [when he scored the winning goal]; I thought I might have gone too early. “I’m enjoying it [playing as a false nine], it’s really good. I started off the left in the first half, don’t forget. Wherever the manager puts me, I try to do my best for the team. It’s good that I’m adaptable and can fit in anywhere. “[Have you won the league, Phil? Have ya?] This is the most challenging team in the world and you can drop points at any time. Like I said, we’re remaining focussed and playing really well, so I’m happy.” Manchester City had two good results in west London tonight. Here’s Jacob Steinberg’s report on Chelsea 1-1 Brighotn. City’s goal was a gem, made by De Bruyne and finished by Foden, and they had a couple more disallowed for tight offsides. But they were nowhere near the best, and you can argue it was a moral victory - or at least a draw - for injury-hit Brentford. They fought admirably to restrict City to a handful of chances, and could have taken the lead themselves in the first half. Brentford should stay up; City will almost certainly win the league. Peep peep! Manchester City go eight points clear after a scruffy but deserved victory at the Brentford Community Stadium. 90+3 min Jesus charges thrillingly into the area and thrashes a left-footed shot that is palmed up in the air by Fernandez. 90 min There will be three minutes of added hope. 89 min Brentford have done so well to stay in the game, but in truth they don’t look like equalising. City have kept them at a distance throughout the second half. VAR has done Brentford a solid. Laporte was this far offside, so the goal is disallowed. That foul on Foden led to the goal. De Bruyne clipped a flat free-kick into the middle, where Laporte steered an accomplished header back across Fernandez. Goodnight. 86 min Foden dances past three players and is fouled. It feels like the match is petering out, which is unusual when the score is only 1-0. 83 min “Greetings from Dublin,” writes Nora. “Is Jack really playing tonight?” He surely is. He barely touched the ball in the first 45 minutes but had a good spell in the first half of the second half. Grealish will be fine – a lot of creative players who sign for Pep Guardiola enjoy a different kind of second-season syndrome. 81 min The young left wing-back Dominic Thompson is struggling. I’m not sure what the problem is but he’s limping off. Saman Ghoddos replaces him. 80 min Fernandinho angles a fine pass over Thompson to find Jesus, but his volleyed cross is too close to Fernandez. 80 min Imagine being so good that you can go eight points clear and still get an almighty brollocking from your manager after the game. 79 min City started the second half superbly but have become increasingly sloppy. It’s going to be a helluva disappointing victory if it stays like this. 77 min Foden’s corner is half cleared towards Fernandinho, who screeches it into orbit from the edge of the area. Pep silently fumes. 75 min Another change for Brentford: Mads Bidstrup replaces the impressive Frank Onyeka. 72 min A Brentford corner is partially cleared to Onyeka, whose snapshot is blocked. This is, by a distance, Brentford’s best spell of the second half. 71 min Pep Guardiola looks disgusted with City’s performance in the last five or ten minutes. He’s pacing round the touchline, stroking his face like he’s having an existential crisis. 70 min “Is there anything, I mean anything, that can de-rail Man City?” asks Andy. “Aside from Guardiola being hit by a bus.” Well, you’ll have a chance if you win 26 of your first 27 games, like Liverpool did two seasons ago. I do think Pep Guardiola teams can be slightly vulnerable when they slip behind a high-quality opponent, but as frontrunners they are savage. 69 min De Bruyne wafts over from 30 yards. Then Brentford make a change: Sergi Canos is on for Yoane Wissa. He usually plays at wing-back but he’s going straight up front. 66 min: De Bruyne hits the post! It was a classy effort, a threaded low shot from 20 yards that beat the sprawling Fernandez and hit the outside of the near post. 65 min Whatever the final score, Brentford should be proud of their performance tonight. They’re missing 11 players, they’re playing the best team in the world on current form, yet they are still in the game after 65 minutes. 64 min Keep reminding yourself it’s only 1-0. 63 min “Hi Rob,” says Simon McMahon. “You seem to be discounting Man United and Tottenham in your title calculations. Both have three games in hand. Hic.” 62 min A dangerous low cross from Jesus is grabbed by the diving Fernandez. 61 min Grealish is playing from the left in the second half, with Foden as the false nine. Grealish has been much more involved since that change was made. 59 min Here’s the Premier League table as things stand. As Sid Lowe used to say of La Liga, draws are the new defeats. 58 min A dismal square pass from Cancelo goes straight to Baptiste, who moves to within 25 yards of goal and hits a stinging shot that is blocked by Ake. 57 min A rare Brentford attack ends when Toney’s sharp cross is cleared at the near post. 55 min “Alright, Rob,” says Adam Griffiths. “Just a quick thank you to you and your fellow MBMers, and all the listeners out in MBM land, for helping keep me sane and full of football this past year. Merry New Year to all, let us hope that 2022 is less of a pr!ck about things. Hugs to anyone that needs them.” Cheers Adam – the same to you and all our readers. Okay, most of them. 53 min City have been brilliant since half-time, much more aggressive both in their pressing and passing. Pep Guardiola may be a cherished member of the bald community but he still has a top-of-the-range hairdryer. 51 min It’s all over - at Stamford Bridge, and maybe in the title race. Chelsea’s next game is against Liverpool, so at least one of them will drop points. 50 min: Foden has a goal disallowed! It was a lovely team goal, with Foden eventually heading Jesus’s cross past Fernandez, but he was a couple of yards offside. 50 min More good news for City: Danny Welbeck has scored an injury-time equaliser for Brighton at Stamford Bridge. That means, as things stand, City are eight points clear. 48 min Fernandez makes a comfortable save from De Bruyne, who whipped a left-footed curler from 22 yards. 46 min Foden almost makes it 2-0 after 49 seconds of the second half! It was another wicked ball in from De Bruyne towards Foden at the near post. This time it came at head rather than ankle height, and Foden’s flicked header drifted just wide of the far post. 46 min Peep peep! Brentford begin the second half. Half-time reading Peep peep! City lead through Phil Foden’s clinical finish, their only shot on target in an intriguing but largely uneventful first half. They have controlled the game, what with it being a football match, and have had 81 per cent of the possession. But Brentford have been determined, resourceful and dangerous on the counter-attack. Their best chance came less than a minute before the goal, when Yoane Wissa’s shot was headed off the line by Joao Cancelo. There has also been a bit of niggle, most notably between Fernandinho and Ivan Toney, and that’s all you’re getting for now. 45 min Cancelo shapes to shoot and plays a beautiful disguised pass to Jesus in the area. He twists past one defender but can’t beat the second. City keep the ball alive, and Fernandinho flattens Jensen with a rising shot to the face. Dias’s follow-up takes two deflections and is pushed away to his right by Fernandez, though the shot was going wide anyway. 43 min “Shame to see the game over so early,” says Phil Haran. “Man City will now go into pass overdrive and bore everyone whilst scoring if opportunities arise due to the desperation of Brentford.” In fairness to City, when it comes to boredom, they have nothing on the Spanish Art Project of Euro 2012. 42 min Fernandinho stays down after a retaliatory stamp of sorts from Toney, who might be in trouble. His studs brushed the side of Fernandinho’s shin, and again I’m sure it was accidental. VAR aren’t interested. It wasn’t a full stamp from Toney, more a gentle lowering of his studs onto Fernandinho’s skin. 41 min Toney goes down holding a few body parts after an off-the-ball spat with Fernandinho. It looks like Fernandinho stood on Toney’s toes, though I’m sure it was accidental. 40 min “I don’t think any video exists (27 min),” says Matt Dony, cackling as he throws the last VHS on the bonfire. “Which is a shame, because as I remember, I gave a powerhouse performance. One minute, addressing the audience directly in defence of the morality of Robin Hood’s theft, and then in a separate skit, miming a striptease. I wish I was joking.” 38 min City have had 78 per cent of the possession, it says here, but Foden’s goal is still their only shot on target. 36 min Jesus drives it flat and beyond the far post, where Ake heads the ball off Toney and behind for a goalkick. 36 min Jensen will have another chance here, because Cancelo has fouled Toney 30 yards from goal. 34 min Jesus, harassed by Onyeka and Toney in his own half, hacks at the former to give Brentford a free-kick on the left wing. Jensen, who is usually so good from set pieces, hoofs it straight out of play. 32 min Jesus cuts inside and thrashes a shot that hits Thompson and ricochets across the Brentford penalty area. No City player was able to take advantage. If he signs for this lot, Erling Haaland will score 200 goals a year. 31 min De Bruyne’s free-kick is headed away. The goal aside, Brentford’s defence have kept City at arm’s length. 30 min Jesus jinks past Thompson and is fouled. Free-kick to City on the right wing, 19 yards from goal... 28 min A dangerous free-kick from Jensen is headed over his own bar by Fernandinho. That was an important intervention because Jansson was waiting behind him to score, or miss, or draw a save from Ederson. 27 min Now Dias goes down holding his face after eating an accidental elbow from Toney. He’s fine. 27 min “Brentford really have been a great story,” says Matt Dony. “But, almost as importantly, they give me a chance to reminisce about Brentford Arts Centre, and the time an excruciatingly pretentious 16yr old me performed there as part of project. Twenty-four hours to write and stage a piece based on the works of Bertolt Brecht. In a similar theme, VAR officials appear to be applying Brechtian alienation techniques to their work. Certainly alienating a lot of football fans.” Please tell me this is on YouTube somewhere. 25 min Jensen is flattened by a stray elbow from, and you’ll like this, the referee David Coote. “There’s a case he should be giving himself a yellow card...” says the co-commentator Ally McCoist. 22 min Ake stops a Brentford break with an apparently clumsy foul on Toney. In reality he knew what he was doing and should have been booked. 22 min The goal has deflated Brentford, who were having a superb spell at the time. City are starting to pass them to sleep. 20 min “I’m now even more confused re: broadcasting rights, because we have Jon Champion on the call here in the U.S. and he doesn’t do Premier League anymore because he’s contracted to ESPN, but he does do the Amazon games&lt;” says Matt Burtz. “And Champion did the Newcastle-Man U game on Monday. So why would Peter Drury (whom we frequently have here) be on your feed, I wonder?” I have precisely no idea. You’re welcome! GOAL GIVEN! And what a beauty it was. De Bruyne, 20 yards from goal in the inside-right channel, curled a wicked first-time cross - the kind we’ve seen him deliver a million times - towards Foden at the near post. He opened his body smartly to sidefoot a volley past Fernandez. The goal came less than a minute after Cancelo had cleared off the line from Wissa. VAR check for offside I think it will be given. Football is a cruel old game, part 432423413412321. 16 min: Off the line by Cancelo! The resulting corner was driven deep and headed back across goal towards the unmarked Wissa. His shot was saved by Ederson, but would still have spun into the net had Cancelo not headed it away at the far post. 15 min: Good save from Ederson! This is a brilliant spell for Brentford. Onyeka’s cutback takes a big deflection off Dias, forcing Ederson to jump backwards to push the ball behind. 14 min Jensen tries to score from the halfway line! It was a worthwhile effort, with Ederson near the penalty spot, but it drifted a few yards wide. 12 min But Ederson has had something to do! Brentford pressed well, forcing Dias (I think) into a mistake. Onyeka charged away from Joao Cancelo, into the area, before sidefooting too close to Ederson. 11 min Thomas Frank will be really pleased with this start. Brentford have barely had a kick, truth be told, but all of that’s what the point is not. The point’s that the goalkeeper Alvaro Fernandez has had nothing to do. 8 min Peter Drury, the Amazon commentator, spots that the grass is unusually long, a deliberate attempt to disrupt City’s passing game. Great stuff. I wonder if they’ve put the heating on full blast in the away dressing-room as well. 7 min Loads of early City possession - who knew - but Brentford look comfortable in defence for now. It’s been a pretty sedate start to the game. 4 min Roerslev’s low cross is cleared lazily by Laporte. The ball loops towards Baptiste, who can’t resist a volley from 25 yards. Goalkick. 2 min De Bruyne surges through midfield and finds Grealish on the right side of the area. He screws a low cross that is intercepted by Pinnock, though his clearance hits Jansson and goes behind for a corner. Nothing comes of it. 2 min City have started with Jack Grealish as their false nine. Foden is on the left wing, Bernardo Silva is the left-sided central midfielder. 1 min Peep peep! City kick off from right to left. There’s a cracking atmosphere at the Brentford Community Stadium, as usual, and the home fans are currently repurposing Hey Jude to pay tribute to their team. They’ve been one of the feelgood stories of 2021; imagine if they finish it by beating the champions. The UK’s most trusted clickbait There’s been a goal at Stamford Bridge. Three changes for Brentford from the defeat at Brighton on Boxing Day. Mads Roerslev, Frank Onyeka and Yoane Wissa replace Sergi Canos, Christian Norgaard (suspended) and Bryan Mbuemo (calf injury). Brentford are missing 11 players in total. The booze brothers are back for City, who make four changes from that madcap 6-3 win over Leicester. Nathan Ake, Gabriel Jesus, Phil Foden and Jack Grealish come in; Oleksandr Zinchenko, Riyad Mahrez, Ilkay Gundogan and Raheem Sterling are rotated out. We don’t know yet how City’s front six will line up - I’ve put Phil Foden as the false nine but it could be any of them. Except Fernandinho; that would be a bit weird. Pep would probably make it work, mind. Brentford (3-5-2) Fernandez; Pinnock, Jansson, Sorensen; Roerslev, Baptiste, Jensen, Onyeka, Thompson; Wissa, Toney. Substitutes: Cox, Stevens, Peart-Harris, Bidstrup, Canos, Forss, Ghoddos. Manchester City (4-3-3) Ederson; Cancelo, Dias, Laporte, Ake; De Bruyne, Fernandinho, Bernardo; Jesus, Foden, Grealish. Substitutes: Steffen, Carson, Sterling, Gundogan, Zinchenko, Mahrez, Mbete, Palmer. Referee David Coote. There’s another important game tonight, Chelsea v Brighton at Stamford Bridge. That one kicks off at 7.30pm, and you can follow it with Dave Tindall. Brentford, your country needs you. For the good of the title race, somebody needs to take some points off Manchester City quicksmart. There’s a grave danger that, for the fifth time in six seasons, the greatest league in the world will have a title procession rather than a race. It would be particularly deflating this year, because for most of the autumn it looked like we were heading for a classic three-horse race. Chelsea’s blip, Liverpool’s slip last night and another terrifying run of form from City have threatened that. City have won their last nine league games, scoring 30 goals in that process, and are six points clear at the top. The year will end as it started for City, with a trip to West London. They were eighth (!) in the table and ravaged by Covid when they went to Stamford Bridge on 3 January; an awesome first-half performance changed their season at a stroke. Since then, domestically at least, they have been irresistible. A win tonight would be their 36th in the Premier League in 2021. City will probably take three points, this being a football match, but that doesn’t mean they have an easy fixture. Brentford’s home performances have been better than a record of 10 points from eight games suggests - don’t make me get the xG out - and the rest of the top four have had a tough time on this ground. Arsenal lost, Liverpool drew 3-3 and Chelsea’s 1-0 victory was mainly down to their goalkeeper Edouard Mendy. Aye, it might be a bit of a reach. But if you want an exciting title race, it’s all we’ve got. Kick off 8.15pm.For years, Ghislaine Maxwell operated in a social circle of the global elite so exclusive that its powerful members seemed insulated from meaningful scrutiny. That circle was the world of Maxwell’s ex-boyfriend Jeffrey Epstein, the disgraced late financier who for years sexually abused teen girls. Some of his victims were as young as 14. That world came crashing down when she was arrested in June at a hideaway in New Hampshire and charged for her role in Epstein’s crimes. Her fate was decided on Wednesday, when a Manhattan federal court jury returned a guilty verdict. But, though Maxwell’s fall came quickly and her time in court unfolded at speed, the stage for Maxwell’s trial was actually set decades ago, when she first met Epstein. Witness testimony during the case has painted a dramatic and intimate picture of Maxwell’s life and times at the center of Epstein’s world. Maxwell, the daughter of the media baron Robert Maxwell, was a prime candidate for entry into Epstein’s orbit. She arrived in New York City in 1991, around the time her father purchased the New York Daily News. Maxwell’s role was that of a polished liaison, to smooth the way for her father’s takeover of the paper. That summer, she became closely associated with Epstein. The Oxford-educated Maxwell was striking. She stood around 5ft 8in, with a slim frame and dramatic dark hair, and noticed for her “defined cheeks”. She was “well put together, pretty”, one former Epstein employee said. Longtime Epstein pilot David Rodgers recalled Maxwell as “very energetic” with a “great personality”. Maxwell had a posh English accent, likely enhancing her glamorous newcomer allure. In keeping with Maxwell’s worldly persona, she resided in a “very large residence” in the Columbus Circle area of Manhattan, on an “upper floor”, Rodgers said. On 5 November 1991, Robert Maxwell died in a boating accident on his yacht, the Lady Ghislaine. “She was really, really upset. You could tell this was ‘daddy’s girl’. She was inconsolable; she could hardly speak. When she saw her mother, her knees just buckled,” Ken Lennox, then the Maxwell-owned Daily Mirror’s senior photographer, previously told the Guardian. “She was really devastated. If you look through the Maxwell files, he would take her to events: Elton John’s birthday, football matches. She was always there, clinging on to him. She called him ‘my daddy’ all the time.” Following Robert’s death, news emerged £460m was missing from his companies’ pensions funds. The family’s reputation was in ruins. Two of Maxwell’s brothers, Kevin and Ian, were tried in 1996 for their roles in their father’s businesses. They successfully defended themselves against fraud charges. One or two months after Robert’s death, Maxwell moved from her impressive home to a studio. Epstein did not abandon Maxwell following her apparent financial descent. “Early on, they were romantically involved,” Rodgers said. Another one of Epstein’s former pilots, Lawrence Visoski, said of Epstein and Maxwell’s relationship: “I thought it was more personal than business.” Viskosi didn’t see them holding hands or kissing, describing them as not necessarily romantic but “couple-ish”. She was “on a lot of the flights”. Maxwell became “No 2” in Epstein’s hierarchy, with Epstein being “No 1”, tasked with handling every aspect of the financier’s life that didn’t deal with his businesses. Juan Alessi, the house manager at Epstein’s Palm Beach home from 1992 to 2002, gave an even clearer picture of when their complicated relationship solidified – and their level of intimacy. “Ms Maxwell was the girlfriend of Mr Epstein; I understand she was the lady of the house,” Alessi recounted. “From the day she came to the house, she right away took over, and she mentioned to me she was going to be the lady of the house. Also, she was in charge of other homes, other properties.” Others filled out that picture. “She told me lots of amazing things about her boyfriend and that she said he was a philanthropist,” said Kate, one of the four accusers to testify at Maxwell’s trial. Kate was 17 when she met Maxwell in Paris around 1994. Kate said that Maxwell first lured the then teen into sexual encounters with Epstein at her London townhouse, under the guise of giving him a massage. Maxwell “would ask me if I knew anybody who could come and give Jeffrey [oral sex] because it was a lot for her to do”, Kate testified. “She said, ‘You know what he likes: cute, young, pretty, like you.’ She said he needed to have sex about three times a day.” Photos of Maxwell and Epstein introduced at trial also show them enjoying romance across the globe. In one waterfront image, Maxwell has her arms around Epstein’s neck, and she is kissing him. In another, she is giving him another cheek-peck in a sunny town. One photo shows them posing close in black-tie clothing, another several show them side-by-side in fancy cold-weather attire. Several images show Maxwell massaging Epstein’s feet on his private jet, a giddy smile on her face. Maxwell seemed smitten with Epstein. In October 2002, Maxwell even appeared to write a gushing word document about them, albeit in the third person. “Jeffrey and Ghislaine have been together, a couple for the last 11 years. They are, contrary to what many people think, rarely apart – I almost always see them together,” read the document, which was introduced as evidence at trial. “Jeffrey and Ghislaine share many mutual interests and they have a lot of fun together. They both have keen searching and inquisitive minds. She grew up amongst scientists and in an academic and business environment,” the text continued. “Jeffrey and Ghislaine complement each other really well and I cannot imagine one without the other. On top of being great partners, they are also the best of friends.” Whether Maxwell was actually enamored or not, prosecutors contended that financial benefits motivated her involvement with Epstein. They tried establishing that despite her tony pedigree, she wasn’t particularly wealthy when they met. “While this horrific abuse was going on behind closed doors, the defendant was jet-setting in private planes and living a life of extraordinary luxury,” prosecutor Lara Pomerantz said in her opening. “These girls were just a means to support her lifestyle, a way for the defendant to make sure that Epstein – who demanded constant sexual gratification from young girls – remained satisfied so that the defendant could stay in the lifestyle to which she was accustomed.” Kate’s testimony pointed to an enticing financial link between Maxwell and Epstein. “She told me that she owned her house in New York City, and that Jeffrey had got it for her.” Rodgers described how Maxwell’s residences changed over the time she was dating Epstein. Maxwell swapped her one-room flat for a “large apartment” then, around the late 90s, she had a townhouse on East 65th Street. “I believe it was a brown, five stories tall. It had a courtyard in the back of it,” he said. “It was a pretty big place, probably … approximately 6,500 sq ft, maybe seven [thousand]” And then there was the cash. Prosecutors called an officer from JP Morgan bank to testify about cash transfers from Epstein’s accounts to Maxwell’s. The banker, Patrick McHugh, walked jurors through documents which demonstrated that Epstein moved more than $30m to Maxwell’s accounts from 1999 to 2007. At some point in the early 2000s, Epstein and Maxwell’s romance ended. Cimberly Espinoa, Maxwell’s assistant from 1996 to 2002, said their relationship seemed to end around her last two years in the office. Maxwell started dating other men. She and Epstein stopped showing up at his Manhattan office around the same time. They no longer left together. Maxwell started dating Ted Waitt, the billionaire co-founder of Gateway Computers. This relationship shored up Maxwell’s social status post-Epstein, according to the New York Times. Waitt’s “check-writing helped secure her place at conferences as they replaced benefit galas as the first-tier social gatherings of the late aughts”, the paper said. In 2007, Epstein brokered a controversial plea deal that allowed him to escape federal charges for child-sex crime allegations. While Maxwell was shielded by a non-prosecution agreement, she was not protected from bad publicity. This “wore” on Waitt, and he and Maxwell split in 2010. But the tech mogul had given a minimum of $12m to Bill Clinton’s philanthropic foundation, which kept Maxwell maintaining a foothold with the former president’s family. Maxwell made connections at Clinton family summits, allowing her to start the ocean charity TerraMar Project in 2012, according to the newspaper. TerraMar had a website, and raised money, but didn’t appear to provide any grants, the newspaper noted. Then Maxwell’s position among polite society took another blow in the mid-2010s. Virginia Giuffre publicly alleged that Maxwell and Epstein forced her into a sexual encounter with Prince Andrew when she was just 17. Maxwell called her a liar, and Giuffre sued for defamation in 2015. They settled the lawsuit in 2017. Aside from some intermittent dialogue about these allegations, the scandal died down significantly until late 2018. That was when the Miami Herald’s Julie K Brown published an explosive series that renewed attention on Epstein’s crimes – and spurred outrage over his avoidance of justice. In July 2019, Epstein was arrested for sex trafficking. He killed himself in a New York City federal jail shortly thereafter, while awaiting his trial. Epstein’s victims, no longer able to confront him, were given an opportunity to speak in court. Five named Maxwell as a participant or enabler in Epstein’s abuse. Maxwell’s whereabouts immediately became the subject of immense speculation, and many wondered whether federal prosecutors would pursue her. These questions were answered a year after Epstein’s arrest. Manhattan federal prosecutors announced that she was apprehended and charged with sexual crimes, conspiracy and perjury, in Epstein’s sexual abuse ring. They described Maxwell as “slithering away” into hiding. Before Maxwell’s capture, however, she lived the high life on the run. She purchased the 156-acre estate in Bradford, New Hampshire that became her hideaway in an all-cash deal. Two real estate websites said this property sold for $1,070,750. It was described as “an amazing retreat for the nature lover who also wants total privacy”. Or, in Maxwell’s case, a disgraced heiress on the run. Information and support for anyone affected by rape or sexual abuse issues is available from the following organisations. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support on 0808 802 9999. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.htmlMinisters have been urged to take tougher action against companies that fail to stamp out anti-vaccination content online, as it was revealed posters with hundreds of thousands of followers on social media are still churning out disinformation. After Boris Johnson said that up to 90% of patients with Covid in intensive care across England had not had their third booster vaccine, Labour accused the government of being complacent on “a matter of life and death” and failing to stand up to social media giants. Prominent anti-vaxxers on Instagram, Facebook and Telegram still have nearly 1.5 million followers, analysis compiled by Labour showed. The most popular were in the name of David Icke, a conspiracy theorist who wrongly believes that coronavirus is spread by 5G. Some disinformation is also hosted on an alternative streaming site – BrandNewTube – a link to which is then posted on other, mainstream social media sites. Videos have amassed up to 3.7m views, sparking fears that during a crucial stage in the booster programme some people are being put off getting jabbed. Around 10% of eligible people have not had their first vaccine, rising to 17% for a second dose. The booster rollout is still under way but 42% of people have not yet had a third vaccine. The shadow culture secretary, Lucy Powell, said the continuing spread of vaccine misinformation online “is hitting vaccine uptake, and tackling this is critical to getting the unvaccinated vaccinated”. Given the government has urged everyone eligible for a booster vaccine to take up the offer, she added: “One person put off the vaccine by dangerous anti-vaxxers is one too many.” Powell said tech giants were “failing to wipe out vaccine lies” and that “government complacency on fake news means that they are failing to take action against online platforms that are facilitating the spread of disinformation”. She called it as “matter of life and death” and called on ministers to stand up to social media firms, “ignore their excuses, and introduce financial and criminal penalties for failures that lead to serious harm”. It was also claimed that a government-commissioned body known as the counter disinformation policy forum was wound down in June 2021. It had brought together social media companies, academics and fact-checkers in response to fears about the harm posed by anti-vaxxers. Powell asked for an update on the forum in a parliamentary written question, but in his answer DCMS minister Chris Philp said it had “concluded”. He added the department still “regularly meets with major social media platforms bilaterally” to discuss the issue. A government spokesperson said ministers had “been providing people with advice and information about vaccines in one of the most extensive public health campaigns ever launched”. They added that although a pilot had ended in the summer a counter-disinformation unit still exists and “continues to work closely with social media companies to identify and remove dangerous disinformation about vaccines”. The spokesperson said: “Our tough new online safety laws will force these companies into action. Now that parliament has provided the necessary scrutiny of the legislation, we will introduce it as soon as possible.” A senior government source said: “It’s a real shame that Labour are spreading their own misinformation in a desperate attempt to score political points in the fight against the virus. The counter disinformation unit continues to carry out its work and has not been stood down.” Just before the coronavirus pandemic broke out, the World Health Organization said in 2019 that vaccine hesitancy was one of the top 10 threats to global health and that it was important people were given “credible information” about inoculation to understand the benefits of getting jabbed. Last October the Guardian revealed lies and conspiracy theories about Covid-19 had amassed millions of views on TikTok and were accessible to young children.For the Duke of York, the fact he was barely mentioned in Ghislaine Maxwell’s trial will have been an undoubted relief. With Maxwell declining the stand, no opening of her “little black book” of society contacts and, crucially, no sign of his accuser Virginia Roberts Giuffre, Prince Andrew was a mere footnote in the New York proceedings. Maxwell opted not to give evidence before being found guilty on five of six charges, saying there was “no need” because prosecutors had failed to prove their case, so the subject of Andrew was not raised with her via cross-examination. Of her book of contacts – said to be a version of Jeffrey Epstein’s infamous 97 pages of names and addresses – all but one small extract remained under seal on the judge’s orders. As a close friend of Maxwell’s, Andrew’s details would undoubtedly have been inside, possibly allowing prosecutors to prise the door open on her relationship with the royal. However, it was the non-appearance of Giuffre, 38, who was called neither by the prosecution nor the defence, that prevented him being thrust head-first into the high-profile trial. Giuffre is suing Andrew in a civil lawsuit, claiming he had sex with her on three occasions two decades ago when, aged 17, she had been sexually trafficked by Epstein, allegations Andrew vehemently denies. Her absence was perplexing, as her name was introduced countless times, her photograph was shown in court and she has been one of the most prominent accusers of Epstein and Maxwell. A deposition, given by Maxwell in a 2016 civil suit brought by Giuffre, formed the basis of two perjury charges against the British socialite, who denied all charges. Giuffre was “available” if called upon to give evidence, the court heard. “Certainly, if she had been called, it would have seen Andrew centre-stage,” said Mark Stephens of the law firm Howard Kennedy. Prosecutors gave no reason for their decision. But they may have feared it would complicate the case, especially if inconsistencies could be shown in accounts Giuffre has previously given over the years. It could be, said Stephens, “that the reason the prosecution did not call Giuffre in the Ghislaine Maxwell case is that they risked an own goal if her credibility could be undermined, which would have given Maxwell a leg-up”. Andrew’s lawyers have sought to target Giuffre’s credibility as they attempt to get the case against him dismissed in the civil proceedings she has brought. His legal team has painted her as an unreliable witness, querying certain dates and figures she has provided, and accusing her of seeking another “payday”. She has previously explained any discrepancies as innocent mistakes, and the result of recalling events from many years ago that had left her traumatised. Andrew’s part in Maxwell’s courtroom drama was, therefore, reduced to mentions of him being a guest onboard Epstein’s “Lolita Express” private plane, with the pilots testifying to seeing nothing to suggest sexual activity on the part of those onboard during flights. “It’s fair to say, I think, there must be some relief for Andrew that Giuffre did not appear, because it does distance him, somewhat, from the case,” said Stephens. Nonetheless, he added, “it did not matter if Maxwell was found guilty, or innocent”, as the prince’s reputation was already tarnished, “indelibly so, as, frankly, the association with a convicted paedophile like Jeffrey Epstein is enough”. “A guilty verdict on Ghislaine Maxwell, you might say, is almost priced in regarding Prince Andrew and reputational damage. People have already made up their minds about him and the verdict would have no impact on how they view him.” Now Andrew must brace for the next round in the civil case against him, with the US district judge Lewis Kaplan in Manhattan scheduling a 4 January hearing when the royal’s lawyers are expected to argue for a dismissal of the case. If they are not successful, or if the case is not settled, it is expected to go for trial between September and December 2022.France has registered a national and European record for new coronavirus infections as the Omicron variant fuels a surge in cases across the continent, with multiple countries hitting new highs. France on Wednesday reported 208,000 cases in the previous 24 hours, up from its previous record of almost 180,000 set the day before. “This means that 24 hours a day, day and night, every second in our country, two French people are diagnosed positive for the coronavirus,” said the health minister, Olivier Véran. “We have never experienced such a situation,” he said, calling the increase “dizzying”. He said the situation in France’s hospitals was already worrying because of the Delta variant. Although the “massive wave” of Omicron cases had yet to have an impact on the healthcare system, he said it would inevitably do so eventually. The UK, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Denmark and Greece have all reported new case records this week, while beyond Europe the rolling seven-day average of new cases in the US hit a high of 267,000 on Tuesday, with Omicron accounting for 59% of these. New infections in Australia rose to nearly 18,300 on Wednesday, eclipsing the previous high of about 11,300 a day earlier. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, said the country needed “a gear change”. The World Health Organization (WHO) said the simultaneous circulation of the Delta and Omicron variants was driving an alarming wave of infections that could lead to increases in hospitalisation and deaths. Its director general, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said he was “highly concerned that Omicron, spreading at the same time as Delta, is leading to a tsunami of cases”. The WHO has said Omicron poses a “very high” risk and could submerge health systems. Studies in Britain, South Africa and Denmark suggest Omicron is less deadly than some of its predecessors, but the huge numbers of people testing positive mean hospitals in some countries might soon be overwhelmed and businesses could struggle to carry on operating because of workers having to quarantine. The rapid transmission rate of the new variant is forcing governments to find a delicate balance between reimposing restrictions to protect hospitals and keeping economies and societies open. Spain reduced its Covid self-isolation period to seven days from 10, even as the number of new infections hit record highs, after businesses expressed fears the Omicron surge would leave them with mounting staff shortages. The Italian cabinet decided on Wednesday night to scrap the isolation period for people who have received three shots of a Covid vaccine and are subsequently exposed to someone who has tested positive. The cabinet also tightened measures against the unvaccinated, and from 10 January a health pass proving immunisation or recovery from coronavirus will be required when travelling by bus, metro, train and taking domestic flights. Meanwhile, a proposal to tighten measures against unvaccinated workers was rejected. Authorities reported another new record daily tally of 98,030 cases on Wednesday. French MPs on Wednesday started debating a new law that would allow only vaccinated people to enter bars, restaurants, cinemas, museums, sports arenas and other public venues, with a negative Covid test no longer to be accepted. Italy is one of several countries to have cancelled or restricted public celebrations since the resurgence of the virus. Greece, which has also banned Christmas and new year festivities in public places, on Wednesday imposed new restrictions on the hospitality sector, bringing forward measures planned for early January, after authorities announced a new daily record of 21,657 cases, more than double Monday’s figure. Bars, nightclubs and restaurants will have to close at midnight, with no standing customers and no music, with the exception of New Year’s Eve when they can stay open until 2am. “These measures, if they are applied in our entirety, will allow us from mid-January to go back to our normal lives,” said the health minister, Thanos Plevris. Some countries are still waiting for the Omicron wave to hit. Case numbers are still falling in Germany, but its health minister, Karl Lauterbach, said the true number could be much higher because fewer tests were being done over the holiday season. He said the real incidence was “two or three times as high” as Wednesday’s reported rate of 205 Covid cases per 100,000 people over seven days, the lowest since November, adding that a sharp jump was expected “within a very short period of time”. On Tuesday Germany closed nightclubs and ordered organisers of sports events to hold them behind closed doors. It also limited private gatherings to 10 vaccinated people, or just two households if an unvaccinated person is present. The rules came on top of restrictions already hitting the unvaccinated, who are barred from shops, restaurants and cultural events. Lauterbach said the rules may have to be toughened further, as existing measures “will not be enough to prevent a significant rise in Omicron cases”. In Belgium, however, where case numbers are also relatively low, the government reversed course on Wednesday, allowing theatres and cinemas to reopen after a court suspended their closure. Meanwhile, other European countries are still grappling with the Delta variant. Poland reported 794 Covid-related deaths on Wednesday, the highest number in the fourth wave of the pandemic. The deputy health minister, Waldemar Kraska, said more than 75% of those who died were unvaccinated.Ghislaine Maxwell gave little away as the jury handed down its guilty verdict in her sex-trafficking trial on Wednesday, standing in a black face mask with her hands folded. The jury had come to its decision after a trial in which lawyers and witnesses for the 59-year-old British socialite had argued that she was being scapegoated for the wrongdoing of close confidant Jeffrey Epstein, the financier who took his life awaiting trial on similar charges in August 2019. Meanwhile, prosecutors had portrayed Maxwell as intimately aligned with Epstein and his activities, both emotionally and financially. Ghislaine Maxwell attends a pre-trial hearing. In opening arguments, prosecutor Lara Elizabeth Pomerantz said the trial would hinge largely on testimony by four victims who would accuse Maxwell of grooming them for abuse by Epstein between 1994 and 2004, when some were minors. Three Jane Does – Carolyn, Jane and Kate – as well as artist Annie Farmer gave evidence during the trial. Pomerantz said Maxwell played an essential role in abusing young girls, saying she “manipulated them and served them up to be sexually abused”. Maxwell, she said, was motivated to satisfy Epstein’s sexual desires in order to maintain her jet-set lifestyle. Sarah Ransome arrives at the courthouse The sex-trafficking trial drew a wide range of onlookers, including Sarah Ransome, who recently published a book about her experiences on Epstein’s Caribbean island. Others standing sentinel were members of the Q-anon conspiracy group, who linked Maxwell to far-fetched beliefs of a Democratic party child sex ring centered on a Washington pizza parlor, victims rights attorney Lisa Bloom and members of Maxwell’s family. A protester stands outside court during the trial. Ghislaine Maxwell’s sister Isabel Maxwell, left, and Jeffrey Epstein accuser Sarah Ransome. Protests outside court. Defense attorney Bobbi Sternheim, left, and two other attorneys. Maxwell’s defense attorneys sought to undermine the credibility of her four accusers, arguing that their memories of Maxwell’s involvement had been embellished over time and that they now wrongfully implicated Maxwell in Epstein’s crimes. Bobbi Sternheim, Maxwell’s lead defense attorney, told the court that “ever since Eve was tempting Adam with the apple, women have been blamed for the bad behavior of men, and women are often villainized and punished more than the men ever are.” She continued: “The charges against Ghislaine Maxwell are for things that Jeffrey Epstein did, but she is not Jeffrey Epstein, she is not like Jeffrey Epstein, and she is not like any of the other men, powerful men, moguls, media giants who abuse women.” Lawyer Sigrid McCawley and Teresa Helm, who accused Jeffrey Epstein of rape. During the trail, defense lawyers sought to capitalize on witness testimony that strayed from the central charges, including the testimony of Juan Alessi, a housekeeper and driver for Epstein. Alessi said he was told to pick up an accuser known as Jane from her school and deliver her to Maxwell, but went on to testify that during his time working for Epstein he’d seen topless women lounging around the pool hundreds of times. “There were many, many females,” he added. “Most of them appeared to be in their late 20s or 30s.” Ghislaine Maxwell trial witnesses Annie Farmer, Carolyn, Jane and Kate The three victims who testified under pseudonyms – Carolyn, Jane and Kate – offered the court often harrowing accounts of their (alleged) experiences under Maxwell’s direction at Epstein’s properties. All three described how, as teenagers, they were drawn into intimate conversations with Maxwell, who then arranged massages with Epstein that then led to sexual encounters in exchange for cash and gifts. Carolyn – 14 at the time – claimed Maxwell had touched her breasts, hips and buttocks and told her she had “a great body for Epstein and his friends”. A fourth witness, Annie Farmer, testified that she’d been told by Maxwell to get undressed and lie on a massage table at Epstein’s New Mexico ranch. Maxwell, she testified, “pulled the sheet down and exposed my breasts, and started rubbing on my chest and on my upper breast”. Ghislaine Maxwell has appeared confident and composed throughout the trial, even sketching the court artists. Trial evidence Photographs shown in court, including this one that some say was taken at the Queen’s Balmoral estate, were seized by US authorities after Epstein was arrested in July 2019 when FBI agents searched Epstein’s townhouse on the Upper East Side of Manhattan. Prosecutors said agents had seized hundreds of pictures, some featuring nude or partially nude young women and girls. Those that the court released mostly showed Maxwell and Epstein in holiday settings. Defense lawyers objected their release, arguing it could not be shown that the images were unaltered and it was unnecessary for prosecutors to place multiple pictures into evidence. Maxwell gives Epstein a foot massage on the financier’s Boeing 727 – called “Air Lolita” by some – and a plane that flight logs revealed in court show had once carried passengers Prince Andrew, Bill Clinton and Donald Trump. The plane’s pilot, the first witness in the case, testified that it had been outfitted with a purple carpet. In another undated photo Maxwell and Epstein take to the hills on a trailbike. Sarah Kellen and Nada Marcinkova, both former Epstein assistants, were questioned by lawyers about whether Prince Andrew had any involvement in Epstein’s abuse of underage girls. They were among four named Epstein associates identified by US prosecutors as “potential co-conspirators” in a controversial plea deal Epstein struck in 2007, after admitting he solicited prostitution from a minor. The women have since reinvented themselves as Nadia Marcinko and Sarah Kensington. Outside the court, advocates for survivors of child sex trafficking said the Maxwell trial was a rare case in which prosecutors were attempting to hold a perpetrator accountable. The Polaris Project, which runs the US National Human Trafficking Hotline, has said it has recorded 14,597 probable victims of sex trafficking, with 17 being the average age “of entry”. A supporter of Never Stand Alone, a rights group dedicated to survivors of abuse from plain communities. The group says its mission is “to ensure that no one walks their path alone as a survivor, and no one stands alone when facing their abuser in the courtroom”. Ghislaine Maxwell’s siblings: Kevin, Christine, Isabel and Ian. A week into the trial, Maxwell’s family wrote to US attorney general Merrick Garland to appeal for “immediate improvements” in her detention conditions. A two-page letter, signed by all of Maxwell’s surviving siblings, claimed she had “received minimal sustenance during the first week for each whole court day – sometimes no food at all.” Jennifer Kalin, who has never publicly told her story, also appeared at the courthouse in Lower Manhattan. Her attorney, Bradley Edwards, said Kalin had been ensnared by Epstein, abused and forced into marriage. “She realizes people are sticking their necks out and testifying and wants them to know they’re not alone,” Edwards told the Daily Beast. Maxwell’s defense had wanted to call Bradley Edwards, who represented the victim known as Kate, but were denied by judge Alison Nathan. Their purpose, it seemed, was to draw further attention to the Epstein Victim Compensation Fund, which has paid out about $150m to victims of the financier, including Kate, who received $3.2m, and Carolyn, who received $2.8m. As the trial wound down, defense lawyers could be seen removing boxes from the federal courthouse. As they were deliberating, jurors requested to review testimony of three of four women who testified against Maxwell. Bobbi Sternheim, a defense attorney for Ghislaine Maxwell talks to reporters after a guilty verdict in the case. Information and support for anyone affected by rape or sexual abuse issues is available from the following organisations. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support on 0808 802 9999. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.htmlThe British former socialite Ghislaine Maxwell was found guilty of sex trafficking in her Manhattan federal court trial on Wednesday afternoon. Maxwell, 60, was arrested in July 2020, charged with involvement in ex-boyfriend Jeffrey Epstein’s sexual abuse of teenage girls, some as young as 14. Maxwell was convicted on five of the six charges she faced. In addition to sex-trafficking, Maxwell was found guilty of conspiracy to entice individuals under the age of 17 to travel in interstate commerce with intent to engage in illegal sexual activity, conspiracy to transport individuals under the age of 17 to travel in interstate commerce with intent to engage in illegal sexual activity; transportation of an individual under the age of 17 with intent to engage in illegal sexual activity; and conspiracy to commit sex trafficking of individuals under the age of 18. Maxwell was found not guilty of one count: enticement of an individual under the age of 17 to travel with intent to engage in illegal sexual activity. Jurors reached their verdict after 40 hours of deliberations over the course of six days. Following the guilty verdict, Damian Williams, the Manhattan US attorney, said in a statement: “A unanimous jury has found Ghislaine Maxwell guilty of one of the worst crimes imaginable: facilitating and participating in the sexual abuse of children. Crimes that she committed with her longtime partner and co-conspirator, Jeffrey Epstein.” “The road to justice has been far too long. But, today, justice has been done. I want to commend the bravery of the girls, now grown women, who stepped out of the shadows and into the courtroom,” William also said. “Their courage and willingness to face their abuser made this case, and today’s result, possible.” As the verdict was read, Maxwell appeared to remain expressionless and looked forward. When judge Alison Nathan finished reading the verdict, Maxwell poured herself a cup of water from a bottle of water that was in front of her and took a drink. Nathan then asked jurors whether the verdict was unanimous. A microphone was passed from juror to juror, who all agreed that it was. One of Maxwell’s lawyers, Jeffrey Pagliuca, patted Maxwell on the back. After Nathan dismissed the jury, another one of Maxwell’s lawyers, Bobbi Sternheim, asked whether the judge could help arrange for Maxwell to get a booster shot for Covid-19. When Maxwell left the courtroom, she glanced quickly at her siblings, who were seated in the front row of the gallery. Maxwell faces up to 65 years in prison when sentenced. Epstein, a convicted sex offender and presumed billionaire, counted Prince Andrew and former presidents Bill Clinton and Donald Trump as cronies before killing himself in a New York jail in 2019, about one month after his sex-trafficking arrest. The verdict marks a dramatic conclusion to an unexpectedly fast-moving trial: proceedings were originally expected to take at least six weeks. Prosecutors called 24 witnesses over 10 days, and defense attorneys called nine witnesses over two days. Prosecutors said that Maxwell “preyed on vulnerable young girls, manipulated them and served them up to be sexually abused” by Epstein. There were four accusers in this case: Jane, Kate and Carolyn, who did not use their full names, and Annie Farmer. Jane testified that she was 14 in 1994 when Epstein started to sexually abuse her – and that sometimes Maxwell was present during this abuse. At times, Maxwell participated in the abuse, Jane said. “There were hands everywhere,” Jane recalled of an encounter with Epstein and Maxwell. The abuse continued when she was 15 and 16. Kate testified that she met Maxwell in Paris around 1994, at 17. Maxwell extended a tea invitation to her London townhouse shortly after they met, and introduced Kate to Epstein at a subsequent meeting. Several weeks later, Maxwell called Kate, and said: “Jeffrey was meant to get a massage but the massage therapist had canceled. Could I do her a favor and come over … because I had strong hands.” Kate testified that Maxwell led her upstairs, where Epstein was wearing a robe. Maxwell closed the door, leaving them alone; Epstein initiated sexual contact. Kate saw Epstein a few times annually over the next several years. Carolyn said that she wound up in Maxwell and Epstein’s orbit around the early 2000s, when she was 14-years-old, at his Palm Beach mansion. Carolyn said she went to Epstein’s house “over 100 times” from ages 14 to 18, and testified about a physical encounter with Maxwell while setting up a massage table. “I was getting fully nude, and she came in and felt my boobs and my hips and my buttocks and said … that I had a great body for Mr Epstein and his friends. She just said that I had a good body type,” Carolyn said. Annie Farmer, the only accuser to testify under her full name rather than a pseudonym or first name, testified that Maxwell gave her a nude massage when she was only 16 at Epstein’s New Mexico ranch. Farmer met Epstein in late 1995, when she traveled to visit her sister, Maria, in New York City. Maria worked as a fine art painter for Epstein. In spring 1996, her mother informed the teen that she would be traveling to Epstein’s ranch, believing it was an educational retreat for high school students. Annie didn’t want to go – Epstein had touched her hand when they went to a movie in New York – but felt better knowing a woman, Maxwell, would be there. Following an excursion into town, Maxwell said she’d teach Annie to give Epstein a foot massage. Then, Maxwell said she wanted Annie to have the “experience” of a professional massage. “She said to get undressed and get [under] the sheet on the massage table, and I did,” Annie said, saying a table was set up in the room where she was staying. “She pulled the sheet down and exposed my breasts, and started rubbing on my chest and on my upper breast.” The verdict means jurors agreed that Maxwell had conspired to lure, and shuttle, girls for illicit sexual activity – and that she had conspired to sex-traffick them. They agreed that Maxwell transported Jane for illegal sexual activity. The sex-trafficking count related specifically to Carolyn. Maxwell has maintained her innocence. Bobbi Sternheim, Maxwell’s lead defence, said outside the court: “We firmly believe in Ghislaine’s innocence, obviously. We are very disappointed with the verdict. We have already started working on the appeal and we are confident she will be vindicated. Everyone be healthy, have a happy new year.” Maxwell’s brother, Kevin Maxwell, said the family believes she will be vindicated on appeal. “We firmly believe in our sister’s innocence,” he said in a written statement. Reactions streamed in following the verdict. Annie Farmer, who testified at the trial, said: “I am so relieved and grateful that the jury recognized the pattern of predatory behavior that Maxwell engaged in for years and found her guilty of these crimes. “I hope that this verdict brings solace to all who need it and demonstrates that no one is above the law. Even those with great power and privilege will be held accountable when they sexually abuse and exploit the young.” Virginia Giuffre, one of Maxwell and Epstein’s most prominent accusers, said: “My soul yearned for justice for years and today the jury gave me just that. I will remember this day always. Having lived with the horrors of Maxwell’s abuse, my heart goes out to the many other girls and young women who suffered at her hands and whose lives she destroyed.” A sentencing date has not yet been set. Edward Helmore and the Associated Press contributed reporting. Information and support for anyone affected by rape or sexual abuse issues is available from the following organisations. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support on 0808 802 9999. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.htmlThe Westminster Kennel Club’s annual dog show has become the latest event to be postponed or canceled in New York as the number of coronavirus cases surges. The club’s board of governors announced Wednesday it was postponing its 2022 event, scheduled for late January, to later in the year. A new date wasn’t given. “The health and safety of all participants in the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show are paramount,” the group said in a statement. “We appreciate the community’s continued interest and support as we delay the show to a time when we can safely convene.” The 144-year-old dog show attracts thousands of competitors from around the US and is normally held in February, with semi-final and final rounds at Madison Square Garden. Last year, it was moved to June and held outdoors at the Lyndhurst estate in suburban Tarrytown, north of New York City. Spectators weren’t allowed, and human participants had to be vaccinated or newly tested. A Pekingese named Wasabi won best in show, beating out a whippet, a French bulldog, an old English sheepdog, a German shorthaired pointer, a Samoyed and a West Highland white terrier. With Covid-19 cases now exploding around the US, the postponement comes less than two weeks after more than 8,500 canines, owners and handlers converged for another top US dog show, the American Kennel Club National Championship in Orlando, Florida.Chris Silverwood looks set to pay the price for England’s Ashes debacle and, to continue a chastening tour, now faces 10 days of isolation following the emergence of a seventh positive Covid case in the camp. The head coach, who will now miss the fourth Test in Sydney after one of his family members contracted the virus, is unlikely to remain in his job, with Joe Root, the captain, given contrastingly stronger support behind the scenes at 3-0 down. Tom Harrison, the ECB chief executive, has already met with Root in Melbourne and is understood to have backed his continuation despite chalking up a record nine defeats in 2021. Root is also said to have indicated his desire to lead the rebuild. Significant caveats remain, not least given the potential for further damage to follow during the final two Tests of the series. Ashley Giles, the director of men’s cricket, arrives in Sydney next week and along with Harrison will undertake a review of the tour. Silverwood will be one of four coaches absent in Sydney, with Jon Lewis (seam bowling), Jeetan Patel (spin) and Darren Veness (fitness) having all tested positive in the past week, along with four family members on tour. Graham Thorpe, assistant coach, will take charge provided he clears the fourth round of testing on Thursday. Covid aside, it may well be that a number of coaching roles hinge on the feedback Root and others give to Harrison and Giles. Although neither he nor Silverwood have covered themselves in glory over strategy, support for Root in part reflects a lack of credible captaincy alternatives who could be viewed as likely first-team regulars. Ben Stokes, Root’s vice-captain, is arguably the only other player who could claim to be in this position but there would be concerns about overburdening an all-rounder who has struggled for form during the series. It is also his first outing since taking a four-month break during the summer to address a finger injury and his mental health. The batting unit would usually present candidates but has disintegrated over the past 12 months. After Root’s 1,708 Test runs in 2021, the next highest run-scorer with 530 is Rory Burns who, though a title-winning captain at Surrey, was recently dropped for a second time. To sum things up, extras sit in third place with 412 runs. From the team that lost inside three days at the MCG, only the incumbent top three of Zak Crawley, Haseeb Hameed and Dawid Malan took up at an optional net session on Wednesday, along with the players who missed out on selection for the third Test. Chris Woakes, dropped after the first two, was asked whether the team would endorse Root’s continuation and replied: “Absolutely. It’s clear that the captaincy isn’t having an effect on his batting, which a lot of the time with captains can be the case. “The fact that he’s scoring the runs he is is great for the team. It would be great if we could help him out with that and build some partnerships with him, and score a few more runs around him. But Joe is a great cricketer, he’s got a great cricket brain. “I think his record as England captain [59 Tests, 27 wins, 24 defeats, eight draws] is pretty good, as far as I’m aware. I definitely feel like Joe will continue.” Asked if Silverwood has the same backing, Woakes replied: “Who am I to talk about people’s futures other than my own, to be brutally honest? We have two more games and we want to show a lot of character, a lot of fight.” Internal support for Root should be couched by the fact that a number of Test careers are potentially on the line in the coming weeks, as well as uncertainty over Harrison’s own continuation at the ECB once the governing body’s £2.1m long-term incentive plan for its executive team matures at the end of the financial year. There is also no permanent ECB chair at present, with Barry O’Brien only interim, and any new leadership team will likely have their own ideas about roles such as those held by Giles – the director of men’s cricket technically hires the head coach and captain – and the performance director, Mo Bobat, who oversees long-term strategy. The latter was in charge of the Lions team that played a tour match against Australia A during the first Test in Brisbane yet selected only off-spinner Dom Bess from the unused players in the senior Test squad. Crawley, who made scores of 12 and five on his return to the Test team in Melbourne, might have benefited from playing.Hello and thanks for following along. We will be closing today’s Covid blog but you can keep up with all the latest coronavirus news here. Paris, France, is set to reimpose wearing face masks outdoors again in this week in a bid to slow the spread of the Omicron coronavirus variant, French police said on Wednesday. The mandate will apply from Friday to everyone over the age of 11 except those inside vehicles, cyclists, users of two-wheeled transport like scooters and those doing sport, Paris police HQ said in a statement. France reported a new record-high daily Covid-19 case total of 208,000 on Wednesday as Omicron drives infections up after Christmas. “I wouldn’t call Omicron a wave anymore... I would call it a tidal wave,” said French Health Minister Olivier Veran. The government has announced new restrictions including an extension on the closure of nightclubs and encouraging more remote working. However it has so far shied away from mass closures or lockdowns seen in other EU countries such as the Netherlands. Hello it’s Samantha Lock here taking over from my colleague Leonie Chao-Fong. As I’m reporting to you from Sydney here is a snapshot of how Covid is unfolding across Australia. Victoria has recorded 5,137 new Covid-19 cases and 13 deaths while NSW recorded 12,226 new cases and one death. Prime minister Scott Morrison has pinned responsibility for sourcing RATs on the states ahead of a national cabinet meeting today where premiers are expected to make a national definition of a close contact. Confused anti-vaccine protesters entered a test-and-trace centre in Milton Keynes, England on Wednesday, appearing to believe it was a coronavirus vaccine centre, where they were filmed shouting abuse at staff and appearing to steal equipment. Video shared on social media showed the group of several dozen activists, led by former Ukip candidate Jeff Wyatt, walking through the facility holding signs encouraging people not to get vaccinated and criticising the BBC. Wyatt, a former deputy leader of the far-right For Britain Movement, addressed crowds at a rally held before the storming of the Covid-19 testing site, where he claimed there are “millions” of like-minded anti-vaccine activists who have “woken up”. Piers Corbyn, a prominent anti-lockdown protester and brother of the former Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, could not be seen in the footage but was pictured attending other stops during the so-called Freedom Rally including an invasion of the Milton Keynes Theatre. Protesters were filmed walking towards the NHS test-and-trace centre while a man on a loudspeaker claims that it is where the “vaccine rollout” is taking place as activists walk by a sign that reads “Testing”. Other demonstrators are heard shouting “disgrace” and “shame on you” as staff appear to run away and take shelter in offices. Read the full article here: Today’s reported figure surpasses the country’s previous all-time high of 41,080 cases recorded in May. Argentina’s health ministry also reported a further 26 deaths in the latest 24 hour period, Reuters reports. “We are at a very high level of contagion ... in the federal capital and Greater Buenos Aires the situation is serious,” local doctor Rodrigo Salemi told television. New York City is exhausted, beleaguered and riddled with coronavirus thanks to the Omicron variant, according to the New York Times. The state reported a record high of 67,000 positive cases on Tuesday and a steady increase in hospitalisations over the past week. One New York City subway line was suspended today and many others were running with delays because so many workers were off sick. At least 20 testing centres were closed because of staffing shortages and nearly one in three paramedics are currently off sick. More than 110,000 people have tested positive just since Christmas Day, and in some neighbourhoods in the city, the positivity rate is approaching 30%. Libya has confirmed its first cases of the Omicron variant, health officials said. The National Center for Disease Control did not provide any further details including the number of people who were found to have the variant. The centre reported 665 new cases and nine deaths in the latest 24-hour period, bringing the country’s total to 387,540 cases and 5,685 deaths. France has registered a national and European record for new coronavirus infections as the Omicron variant fuels a surge in cases across the continent, with multiple countries hitting new highs. France on Wednesday reported 208,000 cases in the previous 24 hours, up from its previous record of almost 180,000 set the day before. “This means that 24 hours a day, day and night, every second in our country, two French people are diagnosed positive for the coronavirus,” said the health minister, Olivier Véran. “We have never experienced such a situation,” he said, calling the increase “dizzying”. He said the situation in France’s hospitals was already worrying because of the Delta variant. Although the “massive wave” of Omicron cases had yet to have an impact on the healthcare system, he said it would inevitably do so eventually. The UK, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Denmark and Greece have all reported new case records this week, while beyond Europe the rolling seven-day average of new cases in the US hit a high of 267,000 on Tuesday, with Omicron accounting for 59% of these. Read the full article by my colleagues Jon Henley and Angela Giuffrida here: More than 44,000 people in the US could die of Covid-19 in the next four weeks, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Data from Johns Hopkins University (JHU) showed at least 821,251 people have died of Covid-19 in the United States. The CDC forecast, published today, estimates that could rise to 866,000 deaths reported by 22 January. The forecast could mean an average of up to 1,800 deaths per day, up from a current average of 1,523 each day, CNN reports. The CDC included projections indicating that the quickest rise in deaths may happen in early January, with the average slowing after 22 January. Ireland has confirmed 16,428 new cases today, representing the country’s highest daily figure since the pandemic began. The previous record was 13,765 cases reported on 25 December. As of 8am on Wednesday, 568 people were in hospital with the virus, 93 of whom are in intensive care. That is a sharp rise on 378 people in hospital on 25 December. In a statement, Ireland’s chief medical officer, Tony Holohan, said: All of the latest epidemiological indicators are a cause of concern. Given the very high levels of transmission nationwide, every individual should consider themselves potentially infectious, and strictly adhere to the public health measures. It comes as Tánaiste Leo Varadkar said that infections fuelled by the Omicron variant will remain very high for the “next few days” but should peak “in the next week or so”. Turkey recorded 36,684 new cases today, the highest number of daily infections since 29 April, health ministry data showed. The country also recorded a further 142 deaths from the virus. Today’s reported caseload is more than 4,500 up from the previous day when 32,176 cases were reported. Tuesday also marked the first time the country exceeded 30,000 daily cases since 19 October. “Due to the rapid spread of the Omicron variant, it can be seen we are now entering a rising trend,” Health Minister Fahrettin Koca said on Twitter yesterday, urging people to get vaccinated and receive their booster shots. Last week, Turkey’s domestically developed Covid-19 vaccine, Turkovac, received emergency use authorisation from Turkish authorities. Hello, it’s Léonie Chao-Fong here, taking over from Lucy Campbell to bring you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next few hours. Feel free to get in touch on Twitter or via email. We’ll start in Belgium, where theatres, cinemas and concert halls are set to reopen after a court ruling found that entertainment venues were being unfairly singled out amid new restrictions intended to stem the spread of the Omicron variant. The move followed protests by the cultural sector angry that it was being made to close its doors while bars and restaurants were allowed to keep working. On Tuesday, the country’s highest administrative court suspended the decision to shut down the cultural sector, ruling that the government had not shown “how cultural venues are particularly dangerous to human health and life in so far as they promote the spread of the coronavirus, to the extent that it is necessary to order their closure.” In a statement today, Belgian prime minister Alexander De Croo said: “We continue to follow closely the evolution of the pandemic in our country where Omicron is dominant.” A leading figure at the World Health Organisation has said it is not “advisable” to reduce Covid controls, including self-isolation periods, as increasing case numbers spiral across the globe. Dr Michael Ryan, executive director of the WHO’s Health Emergencies Programme, warned that governments need to be “careful” about reducing restrictions in the light of the Omicron variant. At present in England, people who receive negative lateral flow results on day six and day seven of their self-isolation period – with tests taken 24 hours apart – no longer have to stay indoors for a full 10 days. But calls are growing on the UK government to cut this further after the US slashed its self-isolation period to five days for asymptomatic people when the US Centres for Disease Control said most transmission of the virus happens in the two days before and three days after symptoms develop. Speaking at a WHO press conference on Wednesday, Dr Ryan said: Even with the previous variants, most people will incubate and show symptoms or be positive within that first six days or so, and the chances then of being positive or transmitting the disease after that are lower – but it is then for governments to make that judgment call of when to allow people out of a quarantine situation with extra tests. The most important thing at this moment is we need to be careful about changing tactics and strategies immediately on the basis of what we’re seeing in early Omicron data. ‘Oh, it’s less severe’ – maybe it’s not; ‘It’s more transmissible’ – maybe it is, but we have to wait and see if the vaccines work or they don’t work, we have to wait and see, and I think it will be advisable at this point if we don’t see huge shifts, huge moves in reducing control measures for Covid-19 purely on the basis of initial and preliminary studies. On Tuesday, Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers – the membership organisation for NHS trusts in England – said many in the health service now fear staff shortages caused by people isolating could represent a “bigger challenge” than the number of patients needing treatment for Covid. In a statement on Wednesday, he said: Given the current pressures on NHS services due to staff absences, trust leaders are keen that everything possible is done, as quickly as possible, to maximise rapid safe return of staff to work. That includes ensuring appropriate timely access to both PCR and lateral flow testing, both of which are currently proving problematic for some trusts. Others have emphasised a need for an evidence-led approach. Matthew Taylor, chief executive of the NHS Confederation – a membership body for organisations that commission and provide NHS services – acknowledged staff absence “is a huge issue for the NHS right now”, but said the case for amending isolation rules further needs to be made clear. Speaking to BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Taylor said: The government, with scientific advice, has to make an assessment of the balance of risk here, but it’s important to recognise that there are risks to anything that we do, and if we were to reduce to five days that would have to be based on very clear evidence that it is not going to increase the rate of infection. Healthcare unions have lambasted Québec’s decision to allow some asymptomatic workers infected with Covid to stay on the job, even as an infectious disease specialist warned more Canadian provinces may be forced into similar steps as Omicron surges. Québec said on Tuesday it had no choice but to allow some essential healthcare staff to continue working instead of isolating at home after testing positive, to prevent staff shortages from crippling healthcare services. A number of unions said they are worried the decision will put healthcare networks under further strain, and workers and patients at risk. “The network is not prepared to face the risks of the government’s decision to bring asymptomatic infected staff back to work. Right now, we are not even able to test staff in their workplace,” said Réjean Leclerc, president of the Fédération de la santé et des services sociaux, which represents 120,000 public and private sector healthcare workers in the province. Leclerc called for better testing for workers and improved ventilation in hospitals. “We cannot subscribe to this decision which endangers the health and safety not only of our members, but above all of the vulnerable people to whom they must provide essential care and services,” the Alliance of Professional and Technical Personnel in Health and Social Services said in a social media post. The union represents 60,000 workers in public health and social services institutions across Québec. Provinces across Canada, including heavily populated Québec and Ontario, are reporting new daily Covid case records as the highly infectious Omicron variant takes hold, forcing ten of thousands of people into isolation. Andrew Morris, a professor of infectious diseases at the University of Toronto, said on Wednesday other provinces were likely discussing similar measures to help tackle staffing shortages in hospitals. “Every jurisdiction in the northern hemisphere is dealing with the same problem. The clear reality is we will not be able to function by keeping everyone isolated for 10 days,” he said. Morris said he was not aware of other jurisdictions allowing infected healthcare staff to work, but noted that Norway had already shortened its isolation period during a wave of the Delta variant earlier this winter. US health authorities on Monday also shortened the recommended isolation time for Americans with asymptomatic cases of Covid to five days from the previous guidance of 10 days. Spain has also reduced its self-isolation period from 10 to seven days, even as the number of new infections recorded in the country hits record highs. *I’m grateful to reader Ed for flagging this. Here is my colleague Nicola Davis’s full report on the UK’s latest reported figures, which is the first time since 24 December that data on daily case numbers has been made available for all four nations. The UK has reported another 183,037 Covid cases and a further 57 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest data from the government’s coronavirus dashboard. That is a new record high and more than 50,000 higher than the previous record. The caseload figure breaks down to 138,287 new infections in England, 15,849 in Scotland, 5,929 in Wales, and 22,972 in Northern Ireland. The reported figures for Northern Ireland within that data set cover a 5-day period. The figures reported on Wednesday are compared to 138,831 infections and 19 fatalities recorded in the 24 hours prior. Italy reported another fresh record daily tally of Covid cases on Wednesday, with new cases hitting 98,030, up from 78,313 a day earlier, the health ministry said. The number of coronavirus-related deaths fell to 148 from 202 on Tuesday. Italy has registered 137,091 deaths linked to Covid since its outbreak emerged in February last year, the second-highest toll in Europe after the UK and the ninth highest in the world. The country has reported 5.85 million cases to date. Patients in hospital with Covid - not including those in intensive care - stood at 10,578 on Wednesday, up from 10,089 a day earlier. There were 126 new admissions to intensive care units, up from 119 on Tuesday. The total number of intensive care patients increased to 1,185 from a previous 1,145. Spain has reduced its Covid self-isolation period to seven days, even as the number of new infections recorded in the country hits record highs. Previously those who tested positive had to isolate for 10 days. On Wednesday the country’s health ministry said that the new, shortened isolation period would also apply to non-vaccinated people who are in close contact with Covid cases. The Spanish decision follows similar moves in countries such as the United States and England, where businesses had voiced fears that the fast-spreading Omicron variant would leave them with mounting staff shortages. On Tuesday the number of cases in Spain hit an all-time pandemic high after nearly 100,000 cases were reported in the span of 24 hours. The surge sent the 14-day infection rate soaring to 1,360 cases per 100,000 residents, though hospitals appeared to be under less strain than previous waves of the pandemic. The prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, was confident that the country’s high vaccination rate – hovering around 80% of the population – would translate into a milder wave this time around. “We are obviously going to see high numbers of infections, but not hospitalisations and ICU admissions compared to previous waves,” he told reporters earlier this week. Portugal reported a new record of 26,867 Covid cases over the last 24 hours on Wednesday, up from 17,172 the previous day, although daily deaths dropped to a fraction of early 2021 peaks. Health authority DGS registered 12 fatalities, down from 19 on Tuesday, while the number of patients in intensive care units was steady at 151. In late January, the number of daily deaths exceeded 300 and there were more than 900 patients in intensive care. Portugal has one of the world’s highest Covid vaccination rates with around 87% of its 10-million population fully inoculated, but the fast-spreading Omicron variant has caused the recent surge in cases, amplified by an increase in mass testing. The 14-day infection rate jumped to 923 cases per 100,000 people from 804 reported on Tuesday. The health minister, Marta Temido, warned on Tuesday that the country could reach as many as 37,000 daily cases in the first week of January, although recently imposed restrictions should have a dampening effect. Before Christmas, the government ordered nightclubs and bars to close and told people to work from home for at least two weeks. After decades of decline and with the public wary of human interaction amid Covid fears, vending machines are back in fashion in Japan, writes my colleague Justin McCurry. Here is his report: More than 90% of community Covid cases in England are the now Omicron variant, according to the latest data from the UK Health Security Agency. As it is now by far the dominant variant, the UKHSA said it would stop providing Omicron-specific daily updates from 31 December. Scotland has already stopped reporting Omicron cases separately from other Covid cases in daily reports. Another 39,923 Omicron cases were detected across the UK as of Wednesday, the second-highest daily figure so far, taking the total number of Omicron cases identified in the country to 210,122. As we reported earlier, the US has broken its record for daily coronavirus infections, as the Omicron variant has surpassed Delta in distribution across much of the country amid a massive surge. The seven-day average of cases exceeded 267,000 on Tuesday, beating its January 2021 record of 251,232, according to a New York Times database. Here is my colleague Edward Helmore’s report: Cuba will give booster shots to its entire population in January, according to a report in state-run media, in a bid to keep the highly contagious Omicron variant at bay. Health authorities in the island, heavily dependent on tourism, last week reported a 35% week-on-week rise in coronavirus cases. As of Tuesday, they had registered at least 44 cases of Omicron, though both infections and deaths from Covid-19 remain at 1% of their pandemic peak on 22 August, according to statistics compiled by the online database Our World in Data. The health minister, José Angel Portal Miranda, said the threat from Omicron had prompted Cuba to fast-track its booster campaign, and that all those eligible would have a booster shot in January, according to the state news outlet CubaDebate. Cuba has already administered nearly 1.5 million boosters in the capital Havana, and to high risk groups such as health care workers. That campaign will now spread across the island in the coming weeks. The country has vaccinated 92% of its population with at least one shot, and 85% with a full course, of its homegrown vaccines, according to Our World in Data. That puts it second in the world behind only the United Arab Emirates, among countries of at least 1 million people. Cuba has vaulted ahead of its neighbours in Latin America and other emerging economies by developing its own vaccines instead of competing for those produced by wealthier nations. Officials say Cuba’s protein-based shots - Abdala, Soberana 02 and Soberana Plus - give upwards of 90% protection against symptomatic Covid when offered in three-dose schemes, though those claims have yet to be fully vetted in peer-reviewed journals, or by the World Health Organization. Cuban scientists had previously called for boosters to be given six months after the first three shots, but have now halved that time, the CubaDebate report said. The German health minister, Karl Lauterbach, said on Wednesday that the number of new Covid cases has been under-reported and the actual incidence rate of infections is about two or three times higher than the officially reported figure, Reuters reports. Lauterbach said the under-reporting was due to fewer tests being performed at workplaces and at doctors practices during the holiday season, as well as only a few of those test results being submitted to authorities. Lauterbach also expressed concern about a clear rise in cases of the Omicron variant and appealed to people to celebrate the new year only in small groups. Hajo Zeeb of the Leibniz Institute for Prevention Research and Epidemiology also expressed doubts over the accuracy of Germany’s reported figures for the coronavirus and the Omicron variant. “The figures now are certainly under-reported,” he told the media group RND. The Robert Koch Institute for infectious diseases on Wednesday reported 2,686 new cases of Omicron, bringing the total number to 13,129. Four people have died with the variant. The seven-day incidence rate, which has been a key metric for determining coronavirus policy, was reported as 205.5 cases per 100,000 residents, the lowest figure since early November. This translated into 40,043 new cases over the past 24 hours. In neighbouring France, by comparison, authorities on Wednesday reported 208,000 new cases [see 2.31pm.]. A spokesperson for the German health ministry said earlier on Wednesday that the government expects a clearer picture of the infection situation early next year. “The number of infections is an important indicator, but of course it’s not the only one,” the spokesperson said. The sinking incidence rate comes despite repeated warnings by health officials of an impending fifth wave of infections. The health ministry confirmed on Tuesday that Germany is buying 1m packs of Paxlovid from Pfizer, which has said that the pill cuts by 89% the chance of hospitalisation or death for adults at risk of severe disease. The simultaneous circulation of the Delta and Omicron variants is creating a “tsunami of cases”, the World Health Organization (WHO) director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, told a news briefing on Wednesday. “Delta and Omicron are now twin threats driving up cases to record numbers, leading to spikes in hospitalisation and deaths,” he said. “I am highly concerned that Omicron, being highly transmissible and spreading at the same time as Delta, is leading to a tsunami of cases.” Tedros repeated his call for countries to share vaccines more equitably and warned that the emphasis on boosters in richer countries could leave poorer nations short of jabs. He said the WHO was campaigning for every country to hit a target of 70% vaccine coverage by the middle of 2022, which would help end the acute phase of the pandemic. New Year’s Eve will mark the second anniversary of China alerting the WHO to 27 cases of “viral pneumonia” of unknown origin in the city of Wuhan. More than 281 million people have since been reported to be infected by the virus globally and more than 5 million have died, according to a Reuters tally. Bosnia has identified its first 10 Omicron infections and there are very likely more, with the highly transmissible variant expected to become dominant in the next couple of months, health officials said on Wednesday. Goran Čerkez, the assistant health minister in Bosnia’s autonomous Bosniak-Croat Federation, said the 10 cases were discovered in tests by the Clinical Centre of Sarajevo University. “We have no doubt that Omicron has been already circulating in Bosnia and that it will become the dominant variant in the next couple of months,” Čerkez told Reuters. Administratively fragmented Bosnia does not have a national health ministry but instead has 13 regional governments and ministries, each of which releases its own statistics. Official statistics suggest that only about 30% of Bosnians have been inoculated against Covid. However, Čerkez said he believed the number was far higher because the figures did not take into account a mass exodus of Bosnians in recent years. France is seeing a record rise in Covid infections, with 208,000 new cases reported over the past 24 hours, a national and European record, the health minister, Olivier Véran, told lawmakers on Wednesday. France has been breaking Covid records repeatedly over the past few days, with Tuesday’s 180,000 cases already the highest for a country in Europe, according to data on Covidtracker.fr. Every second, two people in France are testing positive for Covid, Véran said, adding that the situation in hospitals was worrying because of the Delta variant, with Omicron yet to have an impact. The flu will further complicate things for hospitals, he said. Earlier we reported that, amid the record surge in infections, the French government was accelerating introduction of the so-called vaccine pass to increase pressure on the unvaccinated to get the jab. [see 1.20pm.]. The Scottish government has resisted pressure from businesses and opposition parties to cut the isolation period from 10 to seven days, and will only decide next week, Nicola Sturgeon has told MSPs. Opposition and business leaders have urged the first minister to follow England’s lead by allowing infected people to leave self-isolation after seven days after a negative PCR test, arguing that would relieve the heavy pressure on businesses and services from staff absences. Sturgeon agreed there was a clear need to limit staff absences. John Swinney, her deputy, indicted in media interviews on Wednesday that changes were being considered. However, Sturgeon said the government would not make a final decision until next week: ministers wanted to greatly increase booster vaccinations first. So far, 75% of eligible Scots had had their booster jabs, five points short of the 80% target set for Friday, 31 December. She said: If Covid continues to spread rapidly, the economic impact in the form of staff absences and diminished consumer confidence will be severe. We’re already seeing those impacts. So doing nothing won’t help business. We must protect public health and the economy together - by slowing the speed at which Covid is spreading, while we complete the booster programme. [These] are finely balanced judgments and we are considering the current trends in infection carefully. However, I confirm that we hope to reach decisions in the next week with any changes taking effect from 5 January. She said extra effort was being made to prioritise PRC testing for exempt workers, those in critical NHS or transport roles, who may be allowed to end self-isolation early. Greece is introducing new restrictions on the hospitality sector from Thursday, bringing forward measures planned for early January as coronavirus infections surge. The decision came a day after authorities announced a new daily record of 21,657 cases, more than double compared with Monday. Authorities said the highly contagious Omicron variant appeared to be dominant in the community, barely a month after it was first detected. Bars, nightclubs and restaurants will have to close at midnight, with no standing customers and no music, with the exception of New Year’s Eve when then can stay open until 2am. “These measures, if they are applied in our entirety, will allow us from mid January to go back to our normal lives,” the health minister, Thanos Plevris, told a news conference. Authorities had also tightened curbs last week, mandating masks in open spaces and banning Christmas and new year festivities in public places. Nicola Sturgeon has told MSPs that Scotland recorded a record 15,849 Covid cases on Tuesday, with around 80% of them believed to be the new highly-infectious Omicron variant. As she began an emergency update to the Scottish parliament, the first minister said the positive cases comprised 29% of all tests carried out yesterday. The previous record, also attributed to Omicron, came on Sunday this week, when 11,030 cases were reported. She said 679 people were in hospital, an increase in 80 on yesterday’s total, with three deaths reported of people confirmed to have had Covid. She said over the past week, the number of cases had risen by 47%. She told MSPs: We should also bear in mind that any transmission over recent days will not yet be fully evident in the reported figures. It is reasonable to assume therefore that we will continue to see steep increases in cases in the days and possibly weeks ahead. Boris Johnson has urged people to get their booster vaccine as he said up to 90% of those in intensive care had not had their third Covid jabs. On a visit to a vaccine centre in Milton Keynes, the UK prime minister said people should enjoy their new year celebrations while taking extra precautions such as ventilation and testing, and he urged people to take up the offer of a third dose. “I’m sorry to say this but the overwhelming majority of people who are currently ending up in intensive care in our hospitals are people who are not boosted,” he said. “I’ve talked to doctors who say the numbers are running up to 90% of people in intensive care.” He added: If you’re not vaccinated, you’re eight times more likely to get into hospital altogether. So it’s a great thing to do. It’s very, very important. Get boosted for yourself, and enjoy new year sensibly and cautiously. The NHS has called on people to have a “jabby new year”, highlighting research from the Intensive Care National Audit and Research Centre (ICNARC) that found that at the start of last month about three out of five patients in London’s intensive care units (ICU) had not received a jab, a figure that it said was rising. Johnson, who spent the Christmas break at Chequers with his family, suggested people should take tests before heading out for new year events, but the system has been dogged by shortages. Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary, said the situation was “a total shambles”. He said: People are trying to do the right thing, follow the government’s own advice and test themselves regularly, but are prevented by the Conservative government’s incompetence. They need to get a grip and provide enough tests so people can keep themselves and everyone else safe. Read the full story here: Up to 90% of Covid patients in ICU are unboosted, says Boris Johnson Three people have died in Ukraine after a candle lit in memory of a patient who died of Covid set fire to an intensive care unit, officials said on Wednesday. On Tuesday, a hospital employee in Kosiv, a western town on the edge of the Carpathian mountains, lit a candle in memory of a recently deceased patient according to local tradition, the emergencies services said. The candle was lit in the hospital’s intensive care unit where five oxygen concentrators had been operating, with equipment instantly catching fire. “Ignorance of the elementary laws of physics and disregard for safety rules have led to irreparable losses,” the emergencies services said, describing the incident as a “terrible mistake”. Three people - including two patients - were killed. Four other people were treated for severe burns. Malta registered a record number of Covid infections on Wednesday as the United States added the island to its highest-risk category for travel and urged its citizens not to visit. Health authorities said 1,337 new cases were detected, marking a record high for the second day in a row. It is the fifth time in eight days that the number of new daily infections hit a national record. However, hospitalisations remained low at just 82. The US Centers for Disease Control advised against travel to Malta late on Tuesday, placing the country at the level 4, “very high” category, where more than 500 cases per 100,000 residents are registered in the previous 28 days. “Because of the current situation in Malta, even fully vaccinated travellers may be at risk of getting and spreading Covid-19 variants,” the advisory said. The increase in infections came despite a high rate of vaccination, with 95% of Malta residents having received two doses of a vaccine. The island is currently vaccinating children aged over five. The health minister, Chris Fearne, also said on Tuesday that 200,000 out of a population of some 500,000 - had already had a booster dose. Business lobby groups on Wednesday urged the government to reduce a two-week quarantine period for patients and those who come into contact with them, saying it was impacting the economy. The Times of Malta newspaper reported that at least 20,000 people were currently in quarantine, four times the population of the capital, Valletta. France’s government is forging ahead with efforts to increase pressure on unvaccinated people to get Covid jabs, as the Omicron variant fuels a record surge in infections, the Associated Press reports. At a parliamentary hearing on Wednesday afternoon, the health minister will defend a government plan to allow only the fully vaccinated to enjoy continued access to places such as restaurants, cinemas, theatres, museums, and sports arenas. The accelerated introduction of the so-called “vaccine pass” forms part of a government strategy to use vaccinations, rather than new lockdowns, to try to soften the impact of the fast-spreading omicron variant on already overburdened hospitals. France reported nearly 180,000 new cases of Covid on Tuesday, a record, and is bracing for that number to keep increasing, with forecasts warning of more than 250,000 daily infections likely by January. France has vaccinated more than 75% of its population and is rushing out booster shots, again to combat Omicron. But more than 4 million adults remain unvaccinated. The government wants the vaccine pass to be in place by mid-January. If approved by parliament, its introduction will mean that unvaccinated people will no longer be able to use negative test results to access places where the vaccine pass is required. The Belgian government was set to reverse course on Wednesday by allowing theatres to reopen after a court suspended their closure ordered a week ago to stem the surge in infections from the Omicron variant, Reuters reports. The ruling from the Council of State did not cover cinemas, but the government says they too can reopen because they operate like theatres, with audiences seated and obliged to wear masks and only allowed in with a Covid pass to prove vaccination, a negative test or a recent recovery. Georges Gilkinet, the mobility minister, said in a tweet that the government had agreed to both opening. A final decision will be taken by ministers and regional chiefs later on Wednesday. Other indoor venues, such as casinos and bowling alleys, will remain closed. The prime minister, Alexander De Croo’s, government and regional chiefs decided last week to close cinemas and theatres and play sporting fixtures behind closed doors, while allowing bars, restaurants, gyms and other indoor sports venues to continue as before. Belgium has seen infections fall since a late November peak, but Omicron cases are rapidly rising, and now make up well over half of all Covid cases. The country has recorded 881 cases per 100,000 people over past two weeks, less than half November’s peak. For readers in the UK, walk-in PCR tests appear to be available to book once again in most parts of the country on the government’s website here. UK new year celebrations should be ‘cautious and sensible’, warns Boris Johnson – video Daily coronavirus infections in the United Arab Emirates, the Gulf region’s tourism and commercial hub, have risen above 2,000 for the first time since June, Reuters reports. Authorities on Wednesday recorded 2,234 new infections in the past 24 hours, without breaking down the cases by variant. The UAE, which is hosting the Dubai Expo 2020 world fair, announced its first known case of the Omicron variant earlier this month. Daily cases had fallen below 100 in October but started to climb again in December as tourists flocked to Dubai in the holiday period. The UAE, a federation of seven emirates, saw daily infections hit a record near 4,000 last January amid the peak tourism season as millions of visitors travelled to Dubai to escape lockdowns at home. Abu Dhabi this week reimposed restrictions requiring those entering the emirate from within the UAE to show proof of vaccination and negative PCR results, as of Thursday. It also instituted remote learning for the first two weeks of the new school term. Dubai, which is hosting the Expo until the end of March and whose economy relies heavily on the travel industry, has not yet reintroduced restrictions that were largely lifted in mid-2020. Mask-wearing in public has remained mandatory in the UAE, which does not give a breakdown of Covid cases for each emirate. Chinese officials have admitted they have faced challenges getting enough supplies to residents in locked-down Xi’an, after the city’s inhabitants took to social media to complain they didn’t have enough food and to call for help, AFP reports. Thirteen million residents in northern Xi’an are in their seventh day of home confinement, and national health officials have called for measures to be strengthened further as China battles its worst virus surge in months. Beijing has followed a strict “zero Covid” strategy involving tight border restrictions and targeted lockdowns since the virus first surfaced in late 2019. But officials admitted at a press conference on Wednesday that “low staff attendance and difficulties in logistics and distribution” had led to trouble providing essential supplies as the country faces a resurgence in infections. A day before, many residents asked on social media for help acquiring food and other essentials, with some saying their housing compounds would not let them out even though they were running out of food. Xi’an official Chen Jianfeng told reporters that the local government has mobilised enterprises to step up community distribution, with cadres supervising wholesale markets and supermarkets. “We’re trying our best to assist in the problem of staff turnout, and are issuing passes for vehicles that guarantee the supply of necessities,” he said. But some were still struggling with supplies. “How do we live? What do we eat?” one user wrote on Weibo. “Days ago, we could go out once to buy groceries but that’s been cancelled... all online grocery apps are either sold out or beyond the delivery range,” the user added. The city stepped up confinement measures on Monday, with many residents told not to leave their homes except for virus testing - after previously being told they could go out once every three days to buy supplies. Authorities had previously insisted that supplies remain stable as they maintain strict controls of movement into and out of Xi’an. The city has logged over 960 domestic virus cases since 9 December. Although the surge in China is low in comparison with caseloads in Europe and the United States, Chinese officials imposed what they have called the “strictest” possible curbs in Xi’an. Authorities have also detained at least seven people in the city over attempting to skip quarantine, disrupting order and spreading rumours, local media said. Calls for a reduction in England’s Covid self-isolation period from seven days to five in order to ease NHS staff shortages have been dismissed by a government minister. Chloe Smith, the minister for disabled people, health and work, said the previous period of 10 days had only recently been cut by three. That came after a senior NHS official warned that staff absences due to Covid over the winter months – exacerbating the underlying shortages – was likely to pose the NHS a bigger problem than the number of Omicron-related patients being hospitalised. “There are no current plans in England to change that period,” Smith told BBC Breakfast on Wednesday. “Of course, we have actually only recently taken it down from 10 to seven, and we want to look at that – we want to make sure that that is working as we believe it ought to. “We think the current period, therefore, is the right one, so we haven’t any plans to change that further.” On Tuesday, US health authorities halved the recommended isolation time for people with asymptomatic Covid to five days. A leading immunologist suggested the UK could follow a similar path if rapid testing capacity and quality could support it. Sir John Bell, regius professor of medicine at Oxford University and the government’s life sciences adviser, said illness associated with Omicron was proving less severe than with previous variants. “My view is that lateral flow tests are quite a good way of marking who is infectious and who isn’t and, as you know, we’ve dropped from 10 days to seven days if you have sequential lateral flow tests. That is a much better way to measure and quantitate whether we are allowing people to go back into the community who are infectious,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Wednesday. Asked if he thought that should lead to a further cut to the self-isolation period in England, he said: “If it was supported by lateral flow data, yes.” Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation, which represents the healthcare system in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, told Today that a decrease in the self-isolation period would help ease the staffing crisis. But he acknowledged that ministers needed to carefully balance that against the risk of increasing transmission. More here: Minister rejects calls to reduce self-isolation to five days in England Scottish revellers planning to travel to English cities for Hogmanay celebrations have been urged to stay at home, to avoid spreading the Omicron variant. John Swinney, Scotland’s deputy first minister, said travelling to England to bypass the closure of all nightclubs in Scotland would be the “wrong course of action” and went against the spirit of Scottish policy. “People are free to take those decisions, but I would discourage them from doing so,” Swinney said on BBC Breakfast on Wednesday. “I think it is the wrong course of action for people to take because we have a serious situation we have got to manage and we encourage everybody to play their part in addressing that.” Swinney, the Scottish government’s Covid response minister, said the rate of spread of Omicron was “alarming” and rising far faster than any previous variant. Earlier this week, Scotland reported its highest ever number of daily cases reported on Sunday, at 11,030. The first minister, Nicola Sturgeon is due to update the Scottish parliament later on Wednesday and may unveil further restrictions. She said the country should be braced for even more cases in the near future. The Scottish government ordered all nightclubs to close for at least three weeks from 27 December in an effort to suppress the latest waves. At the same time, outdoor events were limited to 500 people. The country’s main open-air Hogmanay and New Year’s Day events, including the street party and concerts organised in Edinburgh, have been cancelled. With Omicron infections surging, Scottish ministers have urged people to limit any celebrations to a maximum of three family groups. Swinney said he was asking for voluntary restraint, but his request echoes restrictions on travel over the Scotland-England border in July 2020 after a significant outbreak in the Dumfries area, with linked cases in Carlisle. That led to Sturgeon ordering people not to travel further than five miles from home. Swinney said: People have got to make their own choices, they have got to follow the advice we put in place. We have the power in Scotland to put in place certain restrictions and we have done those on what we consider to be a proportionate and appropriate basis. Read the full story here: Scottish revellers urged not to travel to England for New Year’s Eve A lack of lateral flow tests (LFTs) in UK pharmacies is a “huge” problem as people have been requesting them every five minutes over the Christmas period, providers have warned. Leyla Hannbeck, the chief executive of the Association of Independent Multiple Pharmacies, said a lack of LFT kits over Christmas and new year had put those “doing the responsible thing” in an impossible situation. “What our members are telling us is that demand for the lateral flow tests is very high at the moment due to the current guidelines around self-isolation. Pharmacies are reporting that every five minutes, approximately, somebody comes into the pharmacy asking for a test,” she told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. She went on: But, unfortunately, because of the issues around supply being patchy and inconsistent, it means that those who come for the test don’t always get it, which is very stressful; not just for the pharmacy team, but for the patient. The scale of the problem is huge because the demand is high, because of the current guidelines. People are doing the responsible thing by wanting to be tested. And we are in the Christmas area of time and the new year is just around the corner and people want to be with family and friends. Current rules in England allow anyone who has tested positive to cut their self-isolation from 10 days to seven if they have negative LFTs on days six and seven. In Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland the self-isolation period for those who test positive remains 10 days. The UK Health Security Agency has said nearly 900,000 test kits are being provided each day, double the supply before 18 December. The government’s policy has driven demand for LFTs in England, adding to the seasonal demand throughout the UK among those wanting to see family and friends over Christmas, and the underlying testing requirements. Read the full report here: Lack of lateral flow tests is ‘huge’ problem, UK pharmacies warn The average number of daily Covid cases in the US has hit a record high of 258,312 over the past seven days, a Reuters tally showed, as officials weigh the impact of the more transmissible Omicron variant. The previous peak for the seven-day moving average was a figure of 250,141 recorded on 8 January of this year. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention director, Rochelle Walensky, in a round of television interviews, said she was watching the nation’s case load and its potential impact on health care providers. Meanwhile, the White House Covid-19 Response Team is scheduled to hold a news conference at 11am. While there was some data from other countries that showed less disease with Omicron, it was too early to say what the impact might be across the United States, particularly given its uneven vaccination rates, Walensky told MSNBC. “We may have many, many more cases and so we may still very well see a lot of severe disease in the hospitals,” she said. “What I am focused on now is making sure that we can get through this Omicron surge, that we do so with minimal amount of hospitalisation and severe disease,” she added, pointing to vaccines and booster shots as top tools to curb infections. “We are seeing and expecting even more cases of this Omicron variant,” even if many are mild, she said separately on CNN. States showing the highest daily infection numbers on Tuesday included New York, which reported as many as 40,780 cases, and California, which reported over 30,000. Texas reported more than 17,000 cases and Ohio over 15,000. The Omicron variant was estimated to make up 58.6% of the coronavirus variants circulating in the US as of 25 December, according to data from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) on Tuesday. The Pharmaceutical Services Negotiating Committee, which represents all NHS community pharmacies in England, says deliveries of lateral flow device test kits to pharmacies have restarted today after four days of no deliveries. Alastair Buxton, director of NHS Services at the PSNC, said: The wholesaler which supplies the LFD test kits to pharmacies, on behalf of the UK Health Security Agency, made its last deliveries on Friday afternoon, following which all deliveries were paused until this morning, when they fully re-opened, as all pharmacies also returned to their normal opening hours. Many pharmacies were open over the four-day Christmas break, but as deliveries of medicines and LFD kits would not be made during that period, it is likely that their supply of test kits will once again have been exhausted. More stock of test kits will have been delivered to pharmacies this morning and they will be able to order more for delivery tomorrow and on Friday. Good morning from New Orleans. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ British prime minister Boris Johnson said the vaccination campaign had allowed England to maintain its current level of coronavirus controls. He said: The Omicron variant continues to cause real problems. You are seeing cases rising in hospitals. But it is obviously milder than the Delta variant and we are able to proceed in the way that we are. That was due to the “huge proportion of the British public” which had been vaccinated. “That is allowing us to go ahead with New Year in the cautious way that we are.” Johnson said people should enjoy the New Year in a “cautious and sensible way”. He said: I cannot stress too much” how important it is to get a booster jab against Covid-19 to be able to enjoy the New Year “sensibly and cautiously” The prime minister said there were 2.4 million eligible double-jabbed people who were yet to take up the offer of a booster. He told reporters: I’m sorry to say this but the overwhelming majority of people who are currently ending up in intensive care in our hospitals are people who are not boosted. I’ve talked to doctors who say the numbers are running up to 90% of people in intensive care, who are not boosted. If you’re not vaccinated, you’re eight times more likely to get into hospital altogether. So it’s a great thing to do. It’s very, very important. Get boosted for yourself, and enjoy New Year sensibly and cautiously. Asked about reports of people travelling across the border from Wales and Scotland into England to celebrate, he told reporters: I think everybody should enjoy New Year but in a cautious and sensible way. Take a test, ventilation, think about others – but above all, get a booster. Boris Johnson said the UK government had looked at the “balance of the risks” on Covid policy. Asked why England had acted differently to the devolved nations, Johnson told reporters: I think that we’ve looked at the balance of the risks together, we generally concert our strategies together, we see the data showing that, yes, the cases are rising and, yes, hospitalisations are rising, but what is making a huge difference is the level of booster resistance or level of vaccine-induced resistance in the population. What we need to do now is really finish off that work. I’ve no doubt at all that by 1 January, by the new year, every adult in the country will have been offered the slot to get a booster. They’ll be given a slot to get one. The question is, are we getting people coming forward to take advantage of those slots? And that’s what needs to happen. Johnson urged people to think about the risk they are running with their own health if they fail to get a booster jab. He told reporters: We’re looking at the data and what we’re seeing is that we’ve got cases certainly going up, we’ve got a lot of cases of Omicron. But, on the other hand, we can see the data about the relative mildness of Omicron. What we can also see is the very, very clear effect of getting those jabs, getting those boosters in particular – and that’s what’s making a huge difference. According to some of the surveys I’ve seen, 90% of the patients in ICU are people who are not boosted. So, think about that. Think about the risk you’re running with your own health if you fail to get a booster. There are no walk-in PCR tests available to book anywhere in England or Northern Ireland. Appointments had been unavailable in every region of the country, although there were some in Scotland and Wales. The NHS website also said no home tests were available either for the general public or for essential workers. On Monday, the UKHSA said the problem was due to “high demand” and the problem only lasted for a few hours before people could book appointments again. A fear of catching Covid-19 is not a protected belief under the Equality Act, a judge has ruled, after a woman claimed she was discriminated against by her employer when she refused to go into work during the pandemic. A tribunal held in Manchester this month heard that the claimant refused to return to her workplace in July 2020 because she had a “genuine fear” of contracting coronavirus and passing it on to her partner, who was at high risk of becoming seriously unwell. Neither the woman nor her employer were named in the judgment. In a statement given to the tribunal, the worker said her employer had refused to pay her and she had suffered financial detriment as a result. She said: I claim this was discrimination on the grounds of this belief in regard to coronavirus and the danger from it to public health. This was at the time of the start of the second wave of Covid-19 and the huge increase in cases of the virus throughout the country. Asked what her belief was, she told the tribunal: “A fear of catching Covid-19 and a need to protect myself and others.” In his ruling, the employment judge Mark Leach said he accepted that the woman had a genuine fear, but he did not believe it met the criteria for a “philosophical belief” that would be protected under section 10 of the Equality Act 2010. Read the full story here: The World Health Organization says the number of Covid-19 cases recorded worldwide increased by 11% last week compared with the previous week, with the biggest increase in the Americas. The gain followed a gradual increase since October. The UN health agency said in its weekly epidemiological report released late Tuesday that there were nearly 4.99 million newly reported cases around the world from Dec. 20-26, AP reports. Europe accounted for more than half the total, with 2.84 million, though that amounted to only a 3% increase over the previous week. It also had the highest infection rate of any region, with 304.6 new cases per 100,000 residents. WHO said that new cases in the Americas were up 39% to nearly 1.48 million, and the region had the second-highest infection rate with 144.4 new cases per 100,000 residents. The US alone had more than 1.18 million cases, a 34% increase. Reported new cases in Africa were up 7% to nearly 275,000. The agency said that “the overall risk related to the new variant omicron remains very high.” It cited “consistent evidence” that it has a growth advantage over the delta variant, which remains dominant in parts of the world. It noted that a decline in case incidence has been seen in South Africa, and that early data from that country, the UK and Denmark suggest a reduced risk of hospitalisation with omicron. But it said that more data is needed “to understand the clinical markers of severity including the use of oxygen, mechanical ventilation and death, and how severity may be impacted by vaccination and/or prior infection”. WHO said that the number of newly reported deaths worldwide last week was down 4% to 44,680. Any decision to cut the Covid self-isolation period to five days in the UK “would have to be based on very clear evidence” that it will not drive a rise in infections, an NHS leader has said. Matthew Taylor, chief executive of the NHS Confederation, acknowledged staff absence “is a huge issue for the NHS right now” but said the case for amending isolation rules further needs to be made clear. At present, people who receive negative lateral flow results on day six and day seven of their self-isolation period – with tests taken 24 hours apart – no longer have to stay indoors for a full 10 days. Calls are growing on the government to cut this further after the US slashed its self-isolation period to five days if people are not showing symptoms. The US Centres for Disease Control said most transmission of the virus happens in the two days before and three days after symptoms develop. Speaking to BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Taylor suggested he had not seen a process where the evidence on cutting isolation could be assessed. He said: The government, with scientific advice, has to make an assessment of the balance of risk here, but it’s important to recognise that there are risks to anything that we do, and if we were to reduce to five days that would have to be based on very clear evidence that is not going to increase the rate of infection. He pointed to Omicron being a new variant and the fact that Covid hospital admissions are still rising. He said: The news about the acuity of those patients is good. It seems as though they are suffering less bad symptoms, and indeed many people who’ve got Covid are not coming to hospital because of Covid and it’s then been subsequently found out – that’s good. It’s also important to recognise the hospitals are full of people who are very vulnerable and, for those people, even a relatively mild form of the virus can have serious consequences, so whilst anyone in the NHS would be delighted if people were able to come back to work earlier, if they are safe, we need to be absolutely sure that that is the case. Shadow work and pensions secretary Jonathan Ashworth also said the government should avoid “rushing into” cutting Covid isolation times. Asked about reducing it to five days, he told Sky News: I think we should always follow the advice of our leading scientists, medical scientists like Chris Whitty and Patrick Vallance, and I don’t think they’ve given an opinion on this. Let’s see what they say on this before rushing into this. Sajid Javid has criticised the Welsh government for banning parkrun as a measure to control the spread of Covid. The health secretary tweeted: “I can’t see how restricting outdoor exercise in this way is justified or proportionate.” Since 26 December, all outdoor gatherings of 50 or more adults have been prohibited in Wales. The rule has put a temporary stop to Welsh parkruns – free, weekly 5km runs that take place across the world every Saturday at 9am. Junior parkruns, which are for children aged four to 14, can continue. “We know that some Welsh parkrun events regularly have fewer than 50 people attending, however it would take a very small influx (at what is typically a very busy time of year) for them to exceed the limit,” parkrun said in a statement. “We understand that this news will be incredibly disappointing to many Welsh parkrunners, and we’d like to reassure you all that we will do everything we can to bring parkrun events back across Wales as soon as these restrictions are lifted.” The former communities secretary Robert Jenrick called the Welsh decision “madness”. “Having worked with councils to restart parkrun in England this summer, it would be madness to stop it again in Wales or elsewhere,” he tweeted. Read more here: Plaid Cymru has backed Welsh Conservatives’ calls for the Labour-led Welsh government to publish the advice from its scientific advisers on which it has based its post Christmas restrictions. The government has been criticised by many in the hospitality and sporting industries for rules that severely limit how people can celebrate the new year and watch and take part in sporting events. Sajid Javid, the UK health secretary, joined the attacks after Parkrun cancelled its free, 5km runs in Wales because of a rule banning more than 50 people gathering together. Speaking on BBC Radio Wales, the Plaid leader, Adam Price, said he supported the Welsh administration’s cautious approach but said: “I agree we should be seeing more up to date information on the advice. We need to see the advice.” Plaid and the Tories have been briefed on the advice but have not actually seen it. Thai health authorities warned on Wednesday that residents should brace themselves for a potential jump in coronavirus cases after classifying the country’s first cluster of the Omicron variant as a super-spreader incident. The Omicron cluster identified in the northeastern province of Kalasin on Christmas eve has been linked to a couple who had travelled from Belgium and visited bars, concerts and markets, Reuters reports. The ensuing cluster had infected hundreds, with cases spreading to 11 other provinces, said senior health official Opas Karnkawinpong, citing how one of the bars linked to the cluster had been packed and did not have good ventilation. “During the New Year, if you visit any place and it does not look safe, just don’t go,” Opas told a briefing. Up to now, Thailand has reported 740 cases of the highly transmissible Omicron variant, including 251 in people who had come into contact with foreign arrivals, said Opas. After coronavirus infections peaked in August above 20,000, daily case numbers have fallen to around 2,500 in the past week. But the health ministry’s planning scenario indicated that by March daily infections could hit 30,000, with more than 160 deaths, without a faster rollout of measures like vaccinations and testing, as well as greater social distancing. If restrictions were tightened, daily cases could peak at 14,000 in February, with fewer than 60 daily deaths, the scenario showed. In the first two weeks of January, government employees have been advised they can work from home, coronavirus taskforce spokesman Taweesin Wisanuyothin told a separate briefing, where he urged the private sector to follow suit. Wales’ leading doctor, Chris Jones, has warned that a “huge surge” of Covid cases is expected in January because of mixing over the festive period. A record seven-day Covid rate – 1,004 per 100,000 people – has been reported by Public Health Wales. Speaking on BBC Radio Wales on Wednesday, Jones, the country’s deputy chief medical officer, said he was very worried at the figures: We are really concerned. We are at the beginning of a fourth wave of the pandemic with a very transmissible version of the virus. We are still not out of the third wave, the Delta wave. Our hospitals are already full. Omicron has been increasing in Wales with a doubling time of less than three days. During the last two to three weeks it has gradually replaced Delta and is now the dominant variant. Because of that I expect we will see a further acceleration. We are in a better position than we were a year ago due to the booster campaign. But the difficulty we have got is the sheer number of cases we anticipate in January where we have the new year weekend coming up with all the social mixing. We don’t yet know the effect of mixing over Christmas as well as new year. If that generates a huge surge in cases, which I fear we may see, then there will be a lot of people who will be very ill and end up in hospital. People in the UK should “persevere” in their efforts to secure Covid tests amid reports of patchy supply, the work and pensions minister Chloe Smith said. She told BBC Breakfast: Of course, what we’re seeing is increased demand for testing, which is good and sensible because that’s part of people having been cautious, I think, and being sensible around Christmas and around New Year. So, we’re seeing spikes of demand. What we’ve done in response to that then is double the delivery capacity – so we’ve taken action to make sure that people can get testing kits delivered to them at home. An additional method to that, of course, is going to a pharmacy. I quite understand that people will be wanting to make sure that the testing kits are there - that follows on from people having been doing the right thing in being cautious and in wanting to be tested, perhaps before big events or family gatherings. What I would say is to please persevere with either making use of your friendly local pharmacy or using the delivery method on the gov.uk website. Even whilst there have been periods of great demand on that, and every so often we’ve had to replenish the means behind the scenes there, that is happening and the delivery is occurring. People in Australia testing positive to Covid using rapid antigen tests are being turned away from, or are giving up on, getting a PCR test, as the New South Wales government warns that the actual number of Covid cases could be much higher than the 11,201 reported on Wednesday. Wait times for testing clinics have ballooned across NSW, Victoria, Queensland and South Australia. Guardian Australia has spoken to people who have developed Covid symptoms after being in contact with a confirmed positive case, or who have a positive rapid antigen test, who have been trying for several days to get a PCR test but have been turned away. Others were tested before Christmas but are still waiting on their result. Long queues result in wait times of several hours. Some people had been turned away half an hour after a testing site opened because it was over capacity. At others people camped out overnight to ensure they were at the top of the queue. Read the full story here: Nightclubs in France will remain closed for a further three weeks, it has been announced, after nearly 180,000 new Covid cases smashed the record for daily cases since the pandemic began. Approximately 1,600 clubs were ordered shut on 6 December for four weeks as officials hoped to avoid a wave of infections prompted by holiday travel and festivities, fuelled by the highly infectious Omicron variant. But on Tuesday, France’s health agency said 179,807 Covid cases had been reported over the previous 24 hours, exceeding the previous record of 100,000 reported on Saturday, AFP reports. Tourism minister Jean-Baptiste Lemoyne told France Inter radio that the decision to extend nightclubs closures was part of a series of new measures announced by the government this week in a bid to halt the Omicron spread. “I can imagine the distress for these employees and entrepreneurs,” he said. Financial aid would be provided for the huge loss of holiday business, he added. Interior minister Gerald Darmanin this week encouraged local officials to limit public New Year’s Eve gatherings, in particular by requiring face masks outdoors and stepping up police patrols to enforce a ban on public alcohol consumption for the night. Parliament will start debating on Wednesday a new law to require a “vaccine pass” for entering restaurants, cinemas, museums and other public venues in a bid to spur further Covid jabs. France already has one of the highest vaccination rates in the world, at 90% of the eligible population. Previously, the so-called “health pass” could also be obtained by providing a recent negative Covid test in the absence of vaccination. The UK’s shadow work and pensions secretary Jonathan Ashworth said the government should avoid “rushing into” cutting Covid isolation times. Asked about calls for the isolation period to be reduced to five days, he told Sky News: I think we should always follow the advice of our leading scientists, medical scientists like Chris Whitty and Patrick Vallance, and I don’t think they’ve given an opinion on this. He added: “Let’s see what they say on this before rushing into this.” Ashworth said politicians “should always be careful to listen to scientific experts”. The current daily supply of almost 900,000 lateral flow tests in the UK is not enough to meet demand, the chief executive of the Association of Independent Multiple Pharmacies, Leyla Hannbeck, has said. She urged the government to improve the consistency of deliveries. She told the BBC’s Today programme: It just simply isn’t enough to meet the demand and it’s patchy. Some days you get one box delivered and other days none. It isn’t enough for the pharmacies to deliver to the patients. We want to make sure that the message is clear to the government that the supply needs to be consistent. People can get it easily from pharmacies if the supply is consistent. The UK Health Security Agency has said there are now nearly 900,000 test kits being supplied per day – which is double the delivery capacity seen before 18 December. Mistakes in a Sydney laboratory that led to nearly 1,000 people getting incorrect Covid test results will cause positive cases to ripple through the community, but epidemiologists say Australia’s infection rate is now so high it might not make a significant difference. Over the Christmas period, St Vincent’s hospital told 886 people their result was negative when in fact they were positive. The hospital’s pathology department, SydPath, has apologised for the “specific human error” that led to the wrong results being delivered. Initially 400 people were sent text messages saying they had a negative result, but were later told they were positive. A further 950 people were told they were negative when the results were not yet known, with 486 of them later told they were positive. “Once again, we are sincerely sorry for this error and acknowledge the significant impact it has had on those involved,” SydPath said in a statement, adding that it had procedures in place to ensure it would not happen again. Read the full story here: People in the UK are turning up to pharmacies for lateral flow tests approximately every five minutes and often not being able to get one due to low supplies, according to the chief executive of the Association of Independent Multiple Pharmacies. Leyla Hannbeck told the BBC’s Today programme: What our members are telling us is that demand for the lateral flow tests is very high at the moment due to the current guidelines around self-isolation. Pharmacies are reporting that every five minutes, approximately, somebody comes into the pharmacy asking for a test. But, unfortunately, because of the issues around supply being patchy and inconsistent, it means that those who come for the test don’t always get it, which is very stressful not just for the pharmacy team but for the patient. The scale of the problem is huge because the demand is high, because of the current guidelines. She said that people are doing the responsible thing by wanting to be tested. She added: We are in the Christmas area of time, and the New Year is just around the corner and people want to be with family and friends. A run on rapid antigen tests in chemists and supermarkets across Australia has left governments scrambling for supplies as they seek to change the way people get tested for Covid. Rapid antigen tests (RATs) have been available in the US, Europe and parts of Asia since March this year, but the Australian testing regime has relied on the more expensive PCR tests as its program’s cornerstone. Now, as case numbers surge and the system comes under increasing strain, state and federal governments have sought to promote RATs as an intermediate step before people join a queue to be tested. In response, RATs have been flying off shelves in supermarkets and pharmacies, raising concerns about a lack of supply. Jini Maxwell, a games journalist from Melbourne, said that while they had been able to easily find tests a week and a half ago, they had struggled to find any since Christmas “anywhere”. “There are two chemists near me that I’ve been checking every day that have been sold out for the past three or four days,” they said. Read more here: Poland is reporting 794 Covid-related deaths on Wednesday, the highest daily number in the fourth wave of pandemic. Deputy minister of health Waldemar Kraska made the announcement on broadcaster Polsat News on Wednesday morning, adding that 600 people were not vaccinated at the time of their deaths. Kraska told the outlet: They could go on living if they had the vaccine. The average age of the remaining deceased is over 75; They were burdened with many diseases: obesity, hypertension, heart diseases or cancer.” The country also reported another 15,571 new daily coronavirus cases. Poland has been dealing with persistently high daily case numbers in a fourth wave that has forced authorities to tighten restrictions. Thailand is reporting 2,575 new confirmed coronavirus cases: 116 from abroad, and 2,459 from local transmission. A further 17 deaths were also reported, according to recent figures published by the ministry of health. As the UK wakes up for what will be one of the final days of 2021 here is a quick visual snapshot of how the coronavirus is unfolding across Britain. New Zealand has reported its first community exposure to the Omicron variant from a person arriving from the United Kingdom earlier this month. The person, who tested positive for the Omicron variant of Covid-19, had briefly been active in the community in Auckland. The recent international arrival reportedly returned a positive result on day nine of their self-isolation period but had previously returned three negative tests for Covid-19 while completing seven days of managed isolation at a facility in Auckland, the ministry of health said in a statement on Wednesday. “The case arrived on a flight from the United Kingdom via Doha on 16 December and is fully vaccinated with a mRNA vaccine. No other Covid-19 infections have been identified from the individual’s flight,” the statement read. Read the full story here. Good morning/evening/afternoon wherever you may be in the world. Countries across Europe have reported a record high number of infections as authorities scramble to stem the surge while the US also reported its single highest number of daily cases on Tuesday. In the latest reporting period, the UK saw a record 129,471 new Covid cases, up from 98,515 reported on Monday. France reported 179,807 new cases, by far the highest number since the start of the pandemic. Greece also reported a new daily record of 21,657 Covid cases, more than double the number the day before. Denmark and Iceland similarly broke pandemic records with Denmark recording the world’s highest infection rate at 1,612 cases per 100,000 people. If you’ve just tuned in to our live Covid blog here is a quick rundown of the latest developments: New Zealand reports its first community exposure to the Omicron variant in a person arriving from the UK who had been active in the community in Auckland. The person reportedly arrived in New Zealand from the United Kingdom on 16 December and tested positive on 27 December, the health ministry said in a statement. Japan will consider bringing forward Covid-19 vaccine booster shots amid concern over the spread of the Omicron variant. The Chinese city of Xi’an has entered its seventh day of lockdown on Wednesday, with many of the 13 million residents unable to leave their homes and dependent on deliveries of necessities. The US reported its single highest number of daily cases on Tuesday. The 512,553 daily new cases was by far the single highest number of cases recorded since the beginning of the pandemic, according to data released by the Johns Hopkins University. The previous record was 294,015 set on 8 January 2021. California became the first state to record more than 5 million known coronavirus infections. Hundreds more US flights have been cancelled in the fifth day of travel chaos. US airlines Delta Air Lines and Alaska Air Group cancelled hundreds of flights on Tuesday due to adverse weather conditions and rising cases of the Omicron variant. The World Health Organization has warned that the Omicron coronavirus variant could lead to overwhelmed healthcare systems even though early studies suggest it sparks milder disease. Japan will consider bringing forward Covid-19 vaccine booster shots amid concern over the spread of the Omicron variant. Prime minister Fumio Kishida told Kyodo News in an interview on Tuesday: Besides 31 million health care workers and elderly people, we’d like to consider bringing (the schedule for third shots) forward as much as possible.” New Zealand says it has recorded its first community exposures from a border-related Omicron case, Reuters reports. We will have more on this story as it develops. India has recorded another 9,195 confirmed coronavirus cases in the past 24 hours, according to recently released data from its health ministry. A further 302 deaths were also recorded, bring the total death toll to 480,592. The Chinese city of Xi’an has entered its seventh day of lockdown on Wednesday, with many of the 13 million residents unable to leave their homes and dependent on deliveries of necessities. Xian reported 151 domestically transmitted infections with confirmed symptoms for Tuesday, or nearly all of the 152 cases nationwide, bringing the total number of local Xian cases to nearly 1,000 during the 9-28 December period. No cases of the Omicron variant have been announced in the city. While the Xian outbreak is small compared with outbreaks in many other places around the world, officials imposed tough curbs on travel within and leaving the city from 23 December, in line with Beijing’s drive to immediately contain outbreaks as they appear. Since Monday, the Xian government has stopped granting permission to people seeking to leave their homes to buy essentials, as epidemic containment measures rose a notch. It said in-person shopping could be resumed for people in less risky areas once mass testing returned negative results, but it did not say exactly when stay-at-home order would be lifted. Germany is reporting another 40,043 new daily coronavirus cases and 414 deaths, according to recently released data from the Robert Koch Institute. The new figures bring the nationwide tally to 7,066,412 confirmed coronavirus cases and 111,219 deaths. The US recorded 512,553 daily new cases on Tuesday – by far the single highest number of cases recorded since the beginning of the pandemic, according to data released by the Johns Hopkins University. The previous record was 294,015 set on 8 January 2021. The figure takes the seven-day average of US cases to 267,000, according to a New York Times database. This eclipses the previous 7-day average daily high of 248,209 on 12 January. However, mitigating factors such as the delay in reporting over the Christmas weekend are important to consider. Many testing centres were likely closed over the holiday, meaning some test results would have been likely rolled over to Monday and today. Infectious disease epidemiologist and World Health Organization Covid-19 Technical Lead, Maria Van Kerkhove, has cautioned against becoming “numb” to rising case numbers. Do not become numb to these numbers. Each one is a person, a family, a friend, a loved one… Do not become complacent. Even if Omicron is less severe. Many places are seeing record numbers of cases and hospitalisation rates… We can do more. We need to end this pandemic.” South Korea has just released its daily Covid report. The Asian nation recorded another 5,409 confirmed coronavirus cases and 36 deaths, according to data released by the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency. California became the first state to record more than 5 million known coronavirus infections, according to the state department of public health and data from Johns Hopkins University. The state with 40 million residents was poised for a surge in new infections amid holiday parties and family gatherings forced indoors by a series of winter storms. California’s caseload is ahead of other large states but can attributed to its larger population. In the last week the state averaged 16.4 new cases per 100,000 people, less than a third of the national rate. Coronavirus related hospitalisations have been rising slowly in California, up about 12% in the last 7 days to 4,401. That’s less than half as many as during the late summer peak and one-fifth of a year ago, before vaccines were widely available. California has recorded more than 75,500 deaths related to Covid-19 with 27,555 in Los Angeles alone. The World Health Organization has warned that the Omicron coronavirus variant could lead to overwhelmed healthcare systems even though early studies suggest it sparks milder disease. The WHO warned against complacency even though preliminary findings suggest that Omicron could lead to milder disease. WHO Europe’s Covid incident manager, Catherine Smallwood, warned: A rapid growth of Omicron … even if combined with a slightly milder disease, will still result in large numbers of hospitalisations, particularly amongst unvaccinated groups, and cause widespread disruption to health systems and other critical services.” However, the WHO highlighted the 29% decrease in the incidence of cases observed in South Africa - the country which first reported the variant to the WHO on 24 November. It said early data from Britain, South Africa and Denmark - which currently has the world’s highest rate of infection per person - suggested there was a reduced risk of hospitalisation for Omicron compared to Delta. However, further data was needed to understand Omicron’s severity in terms of clinical markers, including the use of oxygen, mechanical ventilation and death. More data was also required on how the severity might be being impacted by previous Covid infection, or vaccination. Read the full story here. US airlines Delta Air Lines and Alaska Air Group cancelled hundreds of flights on Tuesday due to adverse weather conditions and rising cases of the Omicron variant. Delta said it expected to cancel more than 250 of 4,133 scheduled flights on Tuesday, while Alaska Air cancelled 150 flights to and from Seattle and warned of more cancellations and delays throughout the day, Reuters reports. Total cancellations as of 2pm ET within, into, or out of the United States stood at 1,034, with 2,694 flights delayed, marking a fifth day of flight cancellations. Delta said it was working to reroute and substitute some planes. Thousands of flights were grounded over the Christmas holiday weekend as airlines struggled with staff shortages from Covid-19 infections and bad weather in parts of the country. Hello and welcome back to our live Covid blog. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be bringing you all the latest coronavirus developments as they happen. In two days time, on 31 December, it will be two years to the day since health authorities in Wuhan reported an unknown pneumonia outbreak to World Health Organization (WHO) colleagues in Beijing. It is also just over one month since the first case of Omicron was announced by South Africa. Countries across Europe have reported a record high number of infections as authorities scramble to stem the surge. On Tuesday, the UK saw a record 129,471 new Covid cases, up from 98,515 reported yesterday. France reported 179,807 new cases, by far the highest number since the start of the pandemic. Greece also reported a new daily record of 21,657 Covid cases, more than double the number the day before. Denmark and Iceland similarly broke pandemic records with Denmark recording the world’s highest infection rate at 1,612 cases per 100,000 people. Meanwhile South Africa, officially the most affected country in Africa, has recalled rules that no longer required people without symptoms of Covid-19 to isolate or test if they have been in contact with a positive case, the government announced on Tuesday. If you have any stories, tips or feedback please get in touch via email at samantha.lock@theguardian.com or Twitter @Samantha__Lock. I would love to hear from you. Here is a quick snapshot of how Covid is unfolding across the world: Europe: Omicron “appears to be less severe and many people spend a relatively short time in hospital,” Sir John Bell, regius professor of medicine at Oxford University and leading immunologist has said. UK prime minister Boris Johnson said he will not introduce further Covid restrictions in England before 2022 giving mass events the go-ahead and leaving nightclubs open for New Year’s Eve. Scientists say it is “the greatest divergence between scientific advice and legislation” seen since the start of the pandemic. The UK recorded 129,471 new Covid cases on Tuesday, the highest recorded total ever, and up from 98,515 reported yesterday. More than 500 children admitted to hospital with Covid in England in week up to Boxing Day. France has reduced the waiting time for a third booster shot to three months from four. From Monday, all indoor gatherings will be limited to 2,000 people, and to 5,000 people for outdoor events. Consumption of drinks and food will be banned in long-distance transport and home working will become mandatory for at least three days per week where possible. France reported 179,807 new confirmed cases on Tuesday, by far the highest number since the start of the pandemic. Denmark and Iceland reported record daily Covid cases on Monday. Denmark now has the world’s highest infection rate, with 1,612 cases per 100,000 people. Greece will impose further restrictions from January 3 including the closure of bars and restaurants at midnight, no standing customers at entertainment venues and a maximum limit of six people per table. Greece reported a new daily record of 21,657 Covid cases on Tuesday, more than double the number the day before. Germany toughens Covid restrictions with indoor and outdoor gatherings restricted in size and leisure facilities closing in several states. Asia: Daily cases in Australia exceeded 10,000 for the second consecutive day, with a total of 11,264 new Covid cases across the country – the highest figure since the beginning of the pandemic. In Yan’an, China, hundreds of thousands more people were ordered to stay at home, joining millions under strict lockdown in Xi’an. China’s coronavirus cases rose for a fourth consecutive day on Monday. Delhi, India, announces new Covid restrictions. Schools, colleges and educational institutions will close as well as sports complexes, cinemas, conference halls, stadiums and swimming pools. Offices will operate at 50% capacity, as will restaurants with a 10pm curfew. Japanese officials have detected a five-person cluster of Omicron cases in the city of Osaka. Hong Kong will tighten quarantine rules for air cargo crew. Malaysia will cut the booster vaccine waiting time to three months and has banned mass celebrations for New Year’s Eve with negative Covid tests required for private gatherings. India has approved Merck’s Covid-19 pill and two more vaccines for emergency use. United States: Omicron accounts for 58.6% of all Covid cases in the US, new CDC data shows. Delta accounts for 41.1% of Covid cases for the week ending 25 December. The US recorded 512,553 daily new cases on Tuesday – by far the single highest number of cases recorded since the beginning of the pandemic. Dr Anthony Fauci said a vaccine mandate should be considered for all passengers in the US. The US Centre for Disease Control has reduced the recommended isolation time for people recording a positive test from 10 days to five. Joe Biden said the dramatic surge in US Covid cases caused by the Omicron variant “should be a source of concern but it should not be a source of panic”.