There seems to be a perversity to human nature, in that we don’t really care about wild creatures until there are so few left that we can put a name to them. Think Martha, the last passenger pigeon, or the haunting images of Benjamin the last thylacine, pacing around its cage at Hobart zoo in 1936. The Action Plan for Australian Birds 2020 (released this week by CSIRO Publishing) bandies a lot of names of birds you may never have heard of, which are now classified as on the path to extinction – 214 to be exact, around one in six of Australia’s bird species and subspecies. It can all be too much to take in. So here is a guide to six birds of which there are so few left in the wild that we could easily remember them all if they had individual names. Mukarrthippi grasswren While there are several birds, such as Coxen’s fig-parrot or the Tiwi hooded robin, that we can’t unequivocally prove still exist, the candidate for the lowest population of any Australian bird that we can count is this obscure little bird that streaks between spiky clumps of spinifex in a small area of mallee in the Cobar shire of western NSW. Only officially identified in 2020 as a distinct subspecies of the more widespread striated grasswren (itself a threatened bird), the Mukkarthippi grasswren (pronounced mook-wah-tippy and meaning small bird of the spinifex in the local Ngiyampaa language) has only three or four pairs definitely known to survive and a total estimated population of not more than 20 birds. Norfolk Island morepork This small owl got as near to extinction as is possible to go, with only one female bird left on the entire island by 1988. The introduction of some males of its closest relative, the New Zealand morepork, saw a hybrid population develop to the extent that by 2019 there were thought to be between 25 and 50 birds on the island. However, only four pairs were known and since 2008 there have only been two successful breeding events observed. It is feared that most of the remaining birds are too old to breed, though the successful rearing of two chicks in 2019 gives some cause for hope. Northern eastern bristlebird While the southern subspecies of the eastern bristlebird has responded well to active conservation measures, its northern cousin has not been so lucky. In 2020 only 43 birds were known to exist, though a couple more may have been seen since then. This was up from a maximum of 30 reported in the 2010 action plan. It was feared all these gains were at risk in the 2019-20 bushfires, as these poor flyers often succumb to intense, large fires. (Though they do benefit from regular, small-intensity burns.) Fortunately, it seems the fires missed almost all remaining birds and the northern eastern bristlebird lives to scurry through the undergrowth another day. King Island brown thornbill Listed as the Australian bird most likely to become extinct in 2018, this unobtrusive little brown bird hadn’t been seen in a long time, until birdwatchers bumped into a couple around 2014. BirdLife Australia organised targeted searches and habitat assessments, initially by ANU researchers, which discovered about 50 remaining birds living across more of the island than the one small forest patch they were thought to have survived in. However, this good news is tinged with dread, as many of the new sites are in small patches on private land, all of which could be cleared due to a relaxation of vegetation protection laws. Grey range thick-billed grasswren This small, obscure, grey-brown ghost of the dusty saltbush plains of far western NSW was long thought extinct. Only rediscovered in 2008, the outlook was not rosy by the time of the 2010 action plan, with as few as five birds estimated to exist. Spurred by this grim scenario, BirdLife Australia funded an intense search effort – which met with success, with almost 60 birds now known to exist. But it is not out of the woods (saltbush) yet, as it faces threats from mining developments on the few properties where it is known to survive. Orange-bellied parrot Possibly the most well-known of all our critically endangered birds, the orange-bellied parrot was the first Australian bird to have a recovery plan developed for it, back in 1984. Showing how conservation of extremely threatened species is a long game, by 2018 it was still considered the second most likely Australian bird to go extinct, after only two wild females successfully raised chicks in 2016 at their one remaining Tasmanian nesting site. However, things seemed to have finally turned the corner. After a couple of successful seasons, boosted by the release of dozens of captive-bred birds, 62 wild orange-bellied parrots have returned to the breeding grounds. • Sean Dooley is BirdLife Australia’s national public affairs managerRafael Benítez insisted he did not fear for his job as Everton manager after fans turned on the club’s board in the wake of a comprehensive defeat by Liverpool in the Merseyside derby. Everton endured their heaviest home defeat in a derby for 39 years and have now gone eight matches without a win after Liverpool delivered what Jürgen Klopp described as their finest performance at Goodison Park during his tenure. Everton fans reacted by chanting “Sack the board” and roundly criticising the chairman, Bill Kenwright, and the director of football, Marcel Brands, as they left their seats after the final whistle. The majority shareholder Farhad Moshiri was not present. “No, I am a professional and I have enough experience,” Benítez replied when asked if the unrest would damage his job prospects. “I can see a team that is giving everything. The commitment of the players is there. We have to analyse the commitment, the effort and the desire of the players and after that, we have to make the right decisions.” Everton were outclassed in the 239th Merseyside derby but Benítez attributed the emphatic defeat to his team’s error-strewn display. He said: “Everybody has to be disappointed, we have lost the derby, but we lost because we made mistakes against a top side. You have seen how much money Liverpool have been spending and they have been successful over the last few years and it can happen if you make mistakes. Against other teams maybe not, but against a top side you suffer.” Klopp, by contrast, hailed another outstanding and clinical display from his team. The Liverpool manager said: “For sure it was the best performance we have showed at Goodison since I’ve been at Liverpool. We were never as calm or convinced as we were tonight and that’s why we won the game. “We’ve had to learn to play these kind of games. We had to learn to play at Old Trafford and we had to learn to play at Goodison. Tonight we showed that we have made a really big step forward in our development and that is really good. It doesn’t mean anything for the future but it shows that this is now our benchmark and that is what we have to do to reach when we play these kinds of teams. We are a very emotional football team but first of all, we need the right mindset. Emotion is good but not the all the important thing.”A Teesside factory that makes Covid-19 vaccines has received a £400m injection from its Japanese owners, the largest single investment in UK pharmaceutical manufacturing in decades. The biotechnology arm of the Japanese conglomerate Fujifilm, which is better known for its photography heritage, said the package would more than double its Billingham site’s development and manufacturing capability, creating the largest biopharmaceutical factory with several different technologies in the UK. The factory in Stockton-on-Tees produces ingredients from biological sources for pharmaceutical treatments, such as microbes, cell cultures and viral vectors, used to deliver genetic material into cells. The investment, which forms part of a ¥90bn global package unveiled by its Japanese owner in June, will boost the 890-strong workforce by a further 350. It employed 490 people in 2011, when it was acquired by Fujifilm Diosynth Biotechnologies. The site, where the chemical group ICI’s headquarters once stood, produces Covid vaccines for the US company Novavax. The factory began manufacturing the key ingredient of the jab in February and has been contracted to produce it for 60m doses, although it could ramp up the amount needed for up to 180m . News of the contract set the town “buzzing” when it was first announced in January in Teesside, which was once a global centre of steel and chemicals production but has endured decades of industrial decline. The factory also produces cell cultures for a range of monoclonal antibody treatments for conditions from cancer to inflammatory diseases as well as the treatment of Covid-19. Globally, the Fujifilm biotech business is working on half a dozen Covid projects, including vaccines, therapies and monoclonal antibody treatments. The £400m investment triples Billingham’s cell culture capabilities, increases its gene therapy production capacity tenfold and will add the ability to produce and deliver mRNA technologies in the manufacture of vaccines. The Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna Covid jabs are made using mRNA technologies. Martin Meeson, the chief executive of Fijifilm Diosynth, said: “We all know that there has never been a more important time to invest in biopharmaceuticals. With a strong growing demand for microbial, cell culture and viral gene therapy services, we are adding the capacity and latest technologies within one campus to offer a range of modalities to build an offering that will deliver novel promising treatments to patients for years to come.” The new facilities are expected to be up and running by late 2023. Boris Johnson said: “This is a significant investment in British biopharmaceutical manufacturing and will power our response to some of today’s most urgent global health challenges and deliver life-changing medicines and vaccines to patients in need.” Separately, GSK announced it was investing £30m in a new institute of molecular and computational medicine at the University of Oxford’s Nuffield department of medicine. The collaboration aims to deepen understanding of complex diseases such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s, for which there are no cures. Other recent big UK investments by pharmaceutical firms have been in R&amp;D, rather than manufacturing. AstraZeneca unveiled a new £1bn R&amp;D centre in Cambridge last week, the biggest science lab in Britain along with the Francis Crick Institute in London, while the US drugmaker Merck is building a £1bn research hub nearby. Investments in pharma manufacturing in recent years include GSK putting £275m into three of its UK factories at Barnard Castle in northern England, Montrose in Scotland and Ware in Hertfordshire in 2016. Pfizer put £10m into its Sandwich site in Kent in April to speed up the manufacture of medicines.Complaint of sexual offences in the armed forces will be dealt with outside the chain of command in future – but military police will retain the right to investigate allegations of rape, the Ministry of Defence announced on Thursday. The government commitment came in response to a landmark parliamentary inquiry into the experiences of women who serve or have served in the armed forces, although it was criticised for not going far enough with calls that only civilian forces should investigate allegations of rape and sexual abuse. Sarah Atherton, the Conservative MP who chaired the inquiry, said she believed “the fact that a servicewoman can now make a sexual complaint safe in the knowledge that her direct chain of command won’t be handling it is a huge step forward”. But she added that it was “disappointing” that the MoD had refused to remove rape inquiries from the court martial system “despite clear evidence that the current system is failing to deliver justice”. Labour also said an opportunity has been missed to take rape cases out of the military system. Stephanie Peacock, a junior shadow defence minister, said: “Without facing these issues head on, the government will never tackle the sexual harassment in the armed forces on the scale it exists, let alone provide the support needed to assist those who have experienced it.” Atherton’s inquiry, undertaken by a special subcommittee of the defence committee, concluded that “six out of 10” women in the forces who had experienced abuse had not complained for “fear of the impact it would have on their career, or because they thought nothing would be done”. It took evidence from more than 4,100 women who had either served in the military or were still serving. Overall, two-thirds of those who responded said they experienced bullying, sexual harassment and discrimination – and the report concluded that the armed forces were “failing to protect” female recruits. There were specific accounts of gang-rape, sex for promotion or advancement, and trophies or contests to “bag the women” on camp or on ships. Some women revealed they were intimidated for refusing sexual advances or admitted that they had seen colleagues being attacked but had been too scared to report it. The armed forces have been battered by allegations of harassment and abuse in recent weeks, including the unresolved 2012 killing of the 21-year-old Agnes Wanjiru, a Kenyan hairdresser who had turned to sex work to support her family. It was alleged a British soldier had confessed to her murder to colleagues, with his identity an open secret within the Duke of Lancaster’s regiment for years. Formally responding to the inquiry on Thursday, the MoD said “all service complaints of a sexual nature will be required to be fully dealt with outside of the direct chain of command”. Each of the services would use independent investigators from central units, while decisions and appeals would also be heard independently. But it added that Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, had previously decided to retain “the existing principle of concurrency” between civilian and military police – in which either can investigate an allegation of rape, sexual assault or other serious crime, as long as it is thought to have occurred in the UK. Conviction rates for rape are far lower in the military justice system, Atherton’s inquiry noted. It quoted official figures that the average conviction rate for rapes heard at courts martial between 2015 and 2020 was about 16%, compared with 34% in the civilian system. Rape and other serious cases have only been handled by the military police and courts martial system since 2006, it added. The MoD also announced that it wanted to dramatically increase the proportion of women serving in the armed forces, and set a new target that 30% of new recruits should be female by 2030. Women currently account for 11% of forces personnel, with the proportion of new recruits marginally higher at 12.6% across regulars and reserves. But that remains well below an existing target of 15%. Wallace said that it was clear from Atherton’s report that further change was needed. “I am grateful to all the women who contributed to the defence committee’s report, we’ve listened carefully and are implementing bold changes in response,” he said.The French president, Emmanuel Macron, referred to Boris Johnson in a private conversation as a “clown”, according to reports in France. The political magazine Le Canard enchaîné, often described as the French equivalent of Private Eye, reported Macron as saying the British prime minister has “the attitude of a vulgarian”. It came as Macron complained about Johnson’s behaviour after the leaders spoke by phone after last Wednesday’s sinking of a refugee boat in the Channel. The French president was angered after Johnson tweeted a letter outlining a five-point plan to tackle the issue of Channel crossings. “I spoke two days ago with prime minister Johnson in a serious way,” Macron said at a press conference on Friday after the tweet. “For my part I continue to do that, as I do with all countries and all leaders. I am surprised by methods when they are not serious. We do not communicate from one leader to another on these issues by tweets and letters that we make public.” But according to the magazine, the president was even more damning in private. It quoted him as saying: “BoJo talks to me at full speed, everything is going fine, we have discussions like big people, and then he gives us a hard time before or afterwards in an inelegant way. It’s always the same circus.” It added that Macron told his advisers that Johnson apologised privately for making France a scapegoat publicly over issues such as the Channel crossings and the “sausage war”. Macron reportedly said: “It is sad to see a major country with which we could do huge numbers of things being led by a clown.” It came as former French ambassador to the UK Sylvie Bermann told Times Radio that relations between France and the UK had “never been as bad since Waterloo”. The French president is also understood to have blamed Johnson’s attitude towards France on the shortcomings of the Brexit deal. Macron allegedly said: “Brexit is the starting point of the Johnson circus. Very quickly he realised that the situation was catastrophic for the British. There was no petrol in the pumps, there were shortages of a whole pile of products. “He is positioning himself as the victim and making France the scapegoat. He tries to turn simple situations into complex problems. We’ve been in this position since March. He’s done it over the ‘sausage war’, over fishing, over the submarine affair. “In private he says he’s sorry to behave like this, but he says that he has to consider public opinion over everything else.” Asked after Bermann’s comments if Johnson and Macron were friends, the PM’s spokesperson said: “The prime minister’s been asked about this on a number of occasions and has talked about his close relationship … working relationship with President Macron.”Alex Carey will live out a boyhood dream when he is presented with his baggy green cap on the Gabba pitch next week. The wicketkeeper is poised to make his Test debut in the Ashes series opener in Brisbane after being added to Australia’s squad on Thursday to fill the hole left by the departed Tim Paine. Carey had been widely expected to be named as Paine’s replacement behind the stumps after the former captain stood down from all cricket for mental health reasons in the wake of the texting scandal that has overshadowed Australia’s preparations for the series. Carey was preferred to the uncapped Josh Inglis and, after being told by the national selection panel chair, George Bailey, of his inclusion in the 15-man squad, said he was “incredibly excited and humbled” by the opportunity in the longest form of the game. “It’s always been a dream of mine to represent my country at the highest level,” he said. “Over the past two or three years it’s been a goal so I’ve been trying to work as hard as I can to reach that point. I’m just super proud to get the opportunity. “It’s Test cricket and it’s a dream come true. But my job is to focus on what I’ve done in the past to get to this moment and not get too overwhelmed by it.” Carey has been a regular member of the national side in white ball cricket and has represented Australia in 45 one-day internationals and 38 T20 matches. Earlier this year he served as stand-in ODI skipper. He was overlooked for the T20 World Cup as selectors opted for Inglis as reserve keeper, allowing him plenty of opportunity to state his Test case in domestic cricket. His form with the bat at home had been underwhelming – he made 50 in just one of eight Sheffield Shield innings and returned a total of just 18 runs in his last five – until a timely century for South Australia on Sunday boosted his chances of a call-up. “I really enjoy my batting and I feel like over the last couple of years it’s been quite consistent in first-class cricket,” he said. “I guess, for me, it’s [to] not go away from what’s helped me get to this situation – prepare pretty normally, hit enough balls to feel good and also catch a few balls.” Chief selector Bailey said the 30-year-old Carey was a deserved recipient of baggy green cap No 461. “He is an excellent cricketer and a fine individual who will bring many great strengths into the team,” he said. The door was opened to Carey as scandal engulfed Paine two weeks ago when he resigned as Test captain after it became clear to him that details of explicit text messages sent to a female former colleague in 2017 were about to be made public. Paine last week announced he would take an indefinite leave of absence from the game on mental health grounds following the scandal, which has likely signalled the end of his international career. “We all know there’s a lot going on at the moment,” Carey said. “My first thoughts are with Tim and his family. The full squad has got their arms around him so hopefully we will see him back soon. We know how good a captain and wicketkeeper he has been for Australia.” Carey’s selection comes after Inglis returned home to Western Australia this week and will instead play for Australia A in a tour match against the England Lions. “I know how good a player Josh is,” Carey said. “Not too long ago he and I were up here at the NCC [National Cricket Centre in Brisbane], we were training alongside each other. He’s a great person and a good friend of mine and he’s got such a bright future for this country. “But I try not to worry about my competition. All I can do is work as hard as I possibly can and try to do my job for the team and everything else takes care of itself. I try not to waste too much time focusing on things that are out of my control.” Just one selection conundrum now remains for Australia before the first ball is bowled at the Gabba next Wednesday, with batters Travis Head and Usman Khawaja in a straight fight for the No 5 spot.The Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization case, that could overturn the landmark ruling in Roe v Wade, has officially been submitted to the supreme court following a morning of oral arguments. However, a final ruling is not expected until June 2022. Conservative supreme court justices signaled they support restricting abortion access in their questioning. The first case of the Omicron variant has been identified in the US, Dr Anthony Fauci confirmed. “We knew it was just a matter of time,” Fauci said. The case was identified in California. Stacey Abrams announced she will be running for governor of Georgia once again. “If our Georgia is going to move to its next and greatest chapter, we are going to need leadership,” Abrams said in her announcement video. There appears to be little movement on Republicans and Democrats coming together on an agreement on a continuing resolution to fund the federal government and avoid a government shutdown by the 3 December deadline. In particular, a handful of Republicans in both the Senate and the House have been adamant that they will not vote to fund a government with a vaccine mandate The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack recommended the criminal prosecution of former Trump justice department official Jeffrey Clark for his refusal to comply with a subpoena in the inquiry into the 6 January insurrection. Clark’s lawyers have told the committee that he is ready to appear for a deposition on Saturday. But he is expected to refuse to answer questions and assert his Fifth Amendment rights. – Vivian Ho, Hugo Lowell, Maanvi Singh The committee unanimously voted to recommend Clark be held in criminal contempt of Congress. Next, the House will vote on whether to send the criminal referral to the DoJ. However, Clark will be given an opportunity to appear in front of the committee on Saturday for a new deposition and could be spared the charge. Jeffrey Clark’s lawyers have told the committee that Clark is ready to appear for a deposition on Saturday. But he is expected to refuse to answer questions and assert his Fifth Amendment rights. “We will not finalize this contempt process if Mr. Clark genuinely cures his failure to comply with this subpoena this Saturday,” Liz Cheney said. If Clark feels “that answering questions about his discussions with President Trump and others in November and December 2020 and January 2021 could incriminate him, and he, therefore, wishes to invoke privilege on that basis, the committee would certainly consider that”, she added. Right now, the House select committee investigating the Capitol attack is meeting to take up a criminal contempt referral for former Trump justice department official Jeffrey Clark, determining whether to punish his refusal to comply with a subpoena in the inquiry into the 6 January insurrection. If the committee approves the criminal contempt resolution, it will head to the full House of Representatives, which could refer Clark for prosecution in a vote that could come as soon as next week. Bennie Thompson, the chairman of the select committee, indicated that panel was seeking criminal prosecution to demonstrate their resolve in enforcing subpoenas, and to warn other Trump aides about the penalties for non-compliance. The select committee’s recommendation would bring grave consequences for Clark. Once passed by the House, the justice department is required to take the matter before a federal grand jury, which last month indicted the former Trump adviser Steve Bannon over his subpoena defiance. A successful contempt prosecution could result in up to a year in federal prison, $100,000 in fines, or both – although the misdemeanor offence may not ultimately lead to his cooperation, and pursuing the charge could still take years. Today, the US supreme court heard oral arguments in what has been called the most important abortion rights case in almost half a century – a case that could redefine reproductive rights across the country and have repercussions abroad for generations. Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization could lead to weakening or overturning the landmark 1973 supreme court ruling, Roe v Wade, which effectively legalized abortion in the US. If that were to happen, tens of millions people of reproductive age across the country would be affected. What is happening at the supreme court? In Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization, Dobbs refers to Dr Thomas Dobbs, Mississippi’s health department director, and the official who would enforce the law. Jackson Women’s Health Organization is the last abortion clinic in Mississippi, which is also known as the Pink House. The highest court in the US will hear from attorneys in the case, which centers on whether Mississippi can outlaw nearly all abortions at and after 15 weeks gestation. The case directly challenges the precedent in Roe v Wade, which guarantees the right to an abortion in the US. Roe v Wade protects the right to an abortion up to the point a fetus can survive outside the womb, widely regarded as 24 weeks gestation. A full term pregnancy is 39 weeks gestation. The court is now dominated by conservatives, with six of the nine justices leaning to the right. Abortion advocates see the Mississippi case as especially perilous for abortion rights because justices could have dismissed Mississippi’s law as unconstitutional under Roe. However, the court chose to take the case, indicating at least four justices see a reason to revisit the historic ruling. A decision is expected in June 2022, but the hearing on 1 December could provide clues as to the justices’ thinking. What could happen to Roe v Wade? Congress never enshrined the right to terminate a pregnancy in law. Instead, pregnant people in the US have relied on Roe v Wade for almost 50 years, and the precedent is now considered to be under threat. The justices could decide to dismiss the Mississippi case, upholding Roe v Wade. However, abortion advocates worry that the court could instead rule in a way that may weaken or even overturn it. The justices could decide that the 15-week law does not put a significant burden on people in Mississippi, and issue a ruling that would allow abortion to be banned at a much earlier stage of pregnancy. This is would considerably restrict abortion access and weaken Roe v Wade. If Roe is overturned, 26 states are expected to move to outlaw abortion in various ways, through state constitutional amendments, “trigger” laws which go into effect as soon as possible should Roe be overturned, or limits on abortion beginning at six weeks gestation, before most know they are pregnant. Read more: Julian Borger in Washington and Andrew Roth in Moscow report: The US says it has evidence Russia has made plans for a “large scale” attack on Ukraine and that Nato allies are “prepared to impose severe costs” on Moscow if it attempts an invasion. Speaking at a Nato ministers meeting in Latvia, the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said it was unclear whether Vladimir Putin had made a decision to invade but added: “He’s putting in place the capacity to do so in short order, should he so decide. “So despite uncertainty about intention and timing, we must prepare for all contingencies while working to see to it that Russia reverses course.” He said he had found solidarity among his fellow Nato ministers in the Latvian capital, Riga, saying the alliance was “prepared to impose severe costs for further Russian aggression in Ukraine” and would “reinforce its defences on the eastern flank”. While repeating the US position that Washington is “unwavering in our support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, and committed to our security partnership with Ukraine”, the secretary of state stopped well short of saying the US or the alliance would intervene militarily. “Should Russia follow the path of confrontation, when it comes to Ukraine, we’ve made clear that we will respond resolutely, including with a range of high impact economic measures that we have refrained from pursuing in the past,” Blinken said. He did not specify the nature of those measures, but most observers believe that the Nord Stream 2 pipeline project, intended to bring Russian gas to Europe, could be cancelled if there is another invasion. The new German coalition government is already sceptical about the scheme. Blinken said the US would spell out the consequences to Russia’s leaders “at the appropriate time”. His remarks represent the strongest warning from the Biden administration so far, and were delivered a day before Blinken is due to meet his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, in Stockholm under increasingly tense circumstances. Read more: The US is the world’s biggest culprit in generating plastic waste and the country urgently needs a new strategy to curb the vast amount of plastic that ends up in the oceans, a new report submitted to the federal government has found. The advent of cheap, versatile plastics has created “a global scale deluge of plastic waste seemingly everywhere we look”, the report states, with the US a leading contributor of disposable plastics that ends up entangling and choking marine life, harming ecosystems and bringing harmful pollution up through the food chain. Plastic waste has increased sharply in the US since 1960, with the country now generating about 42m metric tons of plastic waste a year, amounting to about 130kg of waste for every person in America. This total is more than all European Union member countries combined. The overall amount of municipal waste created in the US is also two to eight times greater than comparable countries around the world, the report found. Recycling infrastructure has failed to keep pace with the huge growth in American plastic production. Littering, dumping and inefficient waste disposal in landfills has caused up to 2.2m tons of plastic – including everything from plastic bottles and straws to packaging – to “leak” into the environment each year. The total waste may be even greater than this due to data gaps in tracking it. Much of this plastic ends up, via rivers and streams, in the world’s oceans. Worldwide, at least 8.8m tons of plastic waste enters the marine environment each year, the equivalent of dumping a garbage truck filled with plastic into the ocean every single minute. If current trends continue, scientists have estimated this total could leap to 53m tons annually by 2030, which is roughly half of the weight of all fish caught from the oceans globally each year. Read more: The Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization case, that could overturn the landmark ruling in Roe v Wade, has officially been submitted to the supreme court following a morning of oral arguments. Conservative supreme court justices signaled they support restricting abortion access in their questioning. The first case of the Omicron variant has been identified in the US, Dr Anthony Fauci confirmed. Stacey Abrams announced she will be running for governor of Georgia once again. There appears to be little movement on Republicans and Democrats coming together on an agreement on a continuing resolution to fund the federal government and avoid a government shutdown by the 3 December deadline. In particular, a handful of Republicans in both the Senate and the House have been adamant that they will not vote to fund a government with a vaccine mandate. While House Republicans aren’t doing much when it comes to admonishing far-right congresswoman Lauren Boebert for her Islamophobic comments about congresswoman Ilhan Omar, House progressives will be pushing Democrat leaders for action: House Republicans went full high school drama yesterday on Twitter, with Majorie Taylor Greene calling Nancy Mace “trash” and Mace calling Greene “batshit crazy” via emojis. This comes because far-right congresswoman Lauren Boebert made Islamophobic remarks about Democrat congresswoman Ilhan Omar, who has since received death threats related to these remarks. Republican congressman Adam Kinzinger called Boebert “trash”, and called out House minority leader Kevin McCarthy for his silence on her remarks. It appears McCarthy has finally weighed in - but not directly about the bigoted bullying. Instead, he’s just telling everyone in his party to behave. Democrat Stacey Abrams, who many have credited for being among those who helped turn Georgia blue in 2020, has announced that she will be running for governor once again. “If our Georgia is going to move to its next and greatest chapter, we are going to need leadership,” Abrams said in her announcement video. “Leadership that knows how to do the job. Leadership that doesn’t take credit without also taking responsibility. Leadership that works hard. Leadership that measures progress not by stats but by our ability for everyone to move up and thrive. Leadership that understands the true pain folks are feeling and has real plans. That’s the job of governor.” More on government funding, the continuing resolution and a possible government shutdown: House majority leader Steny Hoyer, who told reporters yesterday that he planned to pass a CR in the House today, now doesn’t think it’s possible. Whew, a lot happening today. Let’s hop back to Congress, where a handful of Republicans are threatening a government shutdown over the vaccine mandate for the private sector. To recap: In September, Joe Biden announced a federal mandate that all companies in the US with 100 employees or more must ensure either that their workers are fully vaccinated against Covid-19 or that they test negative for the coronavirus at least once a week. The deadline for this is 4 January. Conservatives across the country have taken issue with this, ranging the gamut of being fully anti-vax to arguing that vaccinations are a deeply personal issue, one in which the government should not be involved. There have been several challenges in courts that have sided against the mandate - the White House has since been urging private companies to act on their own to set their own vaccine mandates, as many have already. On top of all this, the federal government runs out of funding on 3 December - yep, two days from now. Congress must pass a stopgap funding bill, also known as a continuing resolution (CR), to prevent a government shutdown that would put hundreds of thousands out of work right before the holidays. Since early November, some Republican senators have made it clear that they will not vote for any short-term funding of a federal government with a vaccine mandate. Other conservative members of Congress have since joined in. Here’s a quick update on the situation: The Guardian’s David Smith was out front of the supreme court during the oral arguments in the Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization. Anti-abortion supporters waved models of fetuses and held prayer circles, while pro-choice advocates waved signs reading, “abortion is healthcare” and “protect abortion access”. Read more here: Joe Biden smiled wryly earlier when asked by reporters whether he thought the former president, Donald Trump, put him at risk when Trump had received a positive coronavirus test just three days before the first presidential debate in the 2020 election campaign, according to a new book by former chief of staff Mark Meadows, which was reported exclusively by Guardian US this morning. “I don’t think about the former president,” Biden said. That was his only word on the topic. Top health official Anthony Fauci said a little later, at the White House briefing, that he had not been aware of that positive test for Trump at that time. Trump subsequently tested negative, according to the Meadows book, but shortly after revealed publicly that he had coronavirus, following which he was admitted to hospital. Speaking generally, Fauci said: “If you test positive, you should quarantine yourself.” Trump had not done that and had not only stood a few feet from Biden, in person and unmasked, for that first debate, but he continued to travel and hold events in close proximity to people. Anthony Fauci is continuing to answer media questions at the White House. The top US public health official and chief medical adviser to Joe Biden, said that the molecular profile of the Omicron variant suggests it might be more transmissible than previous strains - and might have a higher risk of evading vaccine protection. He emphasized, however, that it is still too early to say what will happen in the pandemic with the emergence of the Omicron variant. Fauci urged those who have consistently adopted protection protocols, such as wearing a face mask in indoor settings with crowds, to continue to do so and said those who have stopped such practices should resume. Fauci said: “Do the things we have been saying every single day, not just for ourselves but internationally.” He said, however, that long term he believes there is “an end game” to the coronavirus pandemic. “There is no doubt that this will end, I promise you that, this will end,” he said. Fauci has now finished his section of the briefing and left the media room at the White House. Anthony Fauci, the director of the national institute of allergies and infectious diseases and chief medical adviser to the US president, has taken the podium in the White House press briefing room. He has confirmed what we all just found out - the first case of the omicron strain of coronavirus has been identified in the US. “We knew it was just a matter of time,” Fauci said. The case was confirmed moments ago by the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the federal health agency, and was identified in California. Fauci just said that the case was confirmed by the CDC and the California and the San Francisco health authorities. “This is the first case of Covid-19 caused by the omicron variant detected in the US,” said Fauci. He said the case involved an individual who returned to the US from South Africa on 22 November and tested positive for coronavirus on 29 November. Fauci added that the individual was fully vaccinated but to his knowledge had not received a booster shot. He said the patient has experienced mild symptoms. “We feel good that this patient had only mild symptoms and seems to be improving,” he said. He said the patient was isolating and those whom they had come into close contact with had been reached and tested and shown to be negative for coronavirus. Fauci reiterated that as many people as possible should get vaccinated and, if they have been vaccinated, get boosted if eligible. He told people not to wait to see if there will be a new vaccination designed to deal specifically with variants. “Right now I would not be waiting. If you are eligible ... get boosted now.” It is not yet known for certain if the current vaccines combat omicron, Fauci said. Many experts are optimistic that they provide protection but confirmation of protection or the level of protection are awaited. The federal authorities have identified the first confirmed case of the Omicron coronavirus variant in the United States. We are awaiting a live briefing from the White House from Anthony Fauci, chief medical adviser to Joe Biden and the top infectious diseases public health official in the US, and press sec Jen Psaki. We’ll bring you that. But meanwhile, this news is breaking across various wires services and TV news that the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have the first confirmed US case of Omicron, identified in California. The dominant variant in the US at this point is still the Delta strain, which emerged and spread across the country from the summer. Joe Biden gave a simple endorsement of reproductive rights in America moments ago as he remarked after the high-stakes hearing at the Supreme Court in Washington, DC, earlier today. Asked about the case by reporters, as the US president took a handful of questions after delivering remarks about the economy, Biden said he had not listened to today’s oral arguments in the key case, which were live streamed from the in-person hearing. “I did not see any of the presentation today,” Biden said. But he then added: “And I support Roe v Wade. I think it’s the rational position to take.” He didn’t add further details. Biden is the second US president who is a Catholic, following the milestone passed by the first, John F Kennedy. Conservative Catholic leaders had pushed in vain to ban Biden from being allowed to take communion because of his pro-choice political position, a move opposed by the Pope, whom Biden and his wife Jill Biden met with on his way to the G7 talks and Cop26 climate conference a few weeks ago. Roe v Wade is the landmark supreme court decision from 1973 that established the constitutional right to an abortion in the US, up to around 24 weeks of pregnancy. That precedent is now under direct threat from a case brought by Mississippi, which asks the court point blank to overturn Roe. Read a timeline of the law here. Oral arguments before the supreme court began today in the Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization that is a direct challenge to the landmark ruling in Roe v Wade, which legalized abortions across the US in 1973. Conservative justices signalled their support for overturning the Roe ruling, while justices like Sonia Sotomayor called the law out of Mississippi being argued before them a purely political play. Meanwhile, in Congress, Republicans are threatening to not vote for a stopgap funding bill that would fund the federal government and prevent a government shutdown ahead of the 3 December deadline because of the federal vaccine mandate for private sectors. US Capitol police arrested 33 people near the supreme court, where widespread anti-abortion and pro-choice demonstrations were taking place during the oral arguments of Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization. Quick update from Congress, and the stopgap funding bill that House majority leader Steny Hoyer hoped would be introduced in the house today: Reminder that the deadline is 3 December - yep, this Friday: With the oral arguments in the Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization concluded, reaction seems dejectedly certain that the supreme court will rule to overturn Roe v Wade, therefore putting into question safe abortion access across the country. After a quick rebuttal from Scott Stewart, the solicitor general of Mississippi, the supreme court has adjourned for the day. The case is officially submitted. This was a lot, but a ruling is not expected in the Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization - which could possibly overturn the landmark ruling in the Roe v Wade case that legalized abortion nationwide - until June 2022. Conservative supreme court justice Amy Coney Barrett keeps going on about safe haven laws and how all 50 states have safe haven laws which would an unwilling parent to safely give up their child, no questions asked. US solicitor general Elizabeth Prelogar is now before the supreme court: Questioning from conservative supreme court justice Brett Kavanuagh is signalling that he might be open to curbing abortion rights. “The Constitution is neither pro-life nor pro-choice ... and leaves the issue to the people to resolve in the democratic process,” he said. He asked if the court should be neutral on abortion rights, which would require overturning Roe v Wade. He argued that if Mississippi wins, overturning Roe wouldn’t prohibit abortion nationwide, but would just let states regulate abortion themselves as they want (though at least 26 states are poised to outright ban abortion if Roe fails). During his heated confirmation hearings in 2018, Kavanaugh said he considered Roe v Wade to be settled law. This appears to be quite a turnaround. Supreme court justice Clarence Thomas asked attorney Julie Rikelman about the constitutional right that protects abortion. ABC and Washington Post conducted a poll and found that the majority of Americans support maintaining Roe v Wade and oppose state legislation making it harder for abortion clinics to operate. According to the poll, 60% wanted the supreme court to uphold Roe v Wade, 58% opposed state legislation that made it harder for clinics to operate and 75% believe that the decision of whether a woman can have an abortion should be left to the woman and her doctor. Julie Rikelman, representing Jackson Women’s Health Organization - the only abortion clinic in Mississippi - is now before the supreme court. Quick update on government funding: House majority leader Steny Hoyer told reporters yesterday that he planned to bring a stopgap funding bill - also known as a continuing resolution (CR) - to the house floor as early as Wednesday - leaving enough time before the 3 December deadline. Well. It appears Republicans - in particular senate minority leader Mitch McConnell - have an issue with how long the funding will extend to. Supreme court justice Elena Kagan jumped in to talk about stare decisis - a Latin term that means “to stand by things decided”. “Not much has changed since Roe and Casey,” Kagan said. “People think it’s right or wrong, for the same reasons they’ve always thought it was right or wrong.” Supreme court justice Sonia Sotomayor has been strong in her questioning of Scott Stewart, the solicitor general of Mississippi “How is your interest anything but a religious view?” she asked. “It’s debated in religions, so when you say this is the only right that takes away from the start the ability to protect the life, that’s a religious view isn’t it?” She continued: “Where does the life of a woman and putting her life at risk enter the calculus?” Supreme court justice Amy Coney Barrett, who had advocated against abortion rights and publicly supported the reversal of Roe v Wade before her nomination to the court, has sounded in with her first question: Scott Stewart, the solicitor general of Mississippi: Undue burden is “perhaps the most unworkable standard in American law”. He’s talking about how in Planned Parenthood v Casey, the supreme court upheld the essential ruling in Roe v Wade but allowed states to pass more abortion restrictions as long as they did not pose an “undue burden”. What does that mean now? That means that Texas was allowed to ban abortions at six weeks of gestation, which reproductive right advocates say constitutes pretty much a full abortion ban - most don’t even know they’re pregnant at six weeks. Conservative justices allowed Texas to undermine Roe within its borders by arguing that the law’s unusual enforcement mechanism, which allowed private citizens to sue anyone who helped a pregnant person obtain an abortion after six weeks, made it difficult to block. More than 6 million women of reproductive age reside in Texas. Supreme court justice Sonia Sotomayor comes in hot, asking Scott Stewart, the solicitor general of Mississippi, about the politics around this case. “Fifteen justices over 30 years have reaffirmed that basic viability line,” she said, alluding to how Roe v Wade has been upheld since the 1992 Planned Parenthood v Casey decision. “Four have said no, two of them members of this court. But fifteen justices have said yes, of varying political background. “Now, the sponsors of this bill, this house bill in Mississippi, are saying, ‘We’re doing this because we have new justices on the supreme court’. Will this institution survive the stench that this creates in the public perception that the constitution and its reading are just political acts? Sotomayor continued with the question: “If people believe it’s all political, how will we survive? How will the court survive?” The first question was from supreme court justice Clarence Thomas: For those listening live to the oral arguments, you’ll hear some mentions of “Casey”. This is in reference to the 1992 case, Planned Parenthood v Casey, in which the court upheld the essential ruling in Roe v Wade but allowed states to pass more abortion restrictions as long as they did not pose an “undue burden”. For more background on abortion access in the US, read more here: Oral arguments have begun before the supreme court in Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization, a case with the potential of overturning the landmark ruling in Roe v Wade. Listen to the arguments live here. Over at Capitol Hill, several important deadlines continue to loom: Congress has until 3 December to fund the federal government and prevent a government shutdown and 15 December to raise the debt limit and prevent the US from defaulting on its debts, causing global economic catastrophe. No pressure. Add to that the ambitious Build Back Better Act – Democrats have set a 25 December goal of passing it through the Senate – and it’s a full wish list for the holiday season. We started off the week with pundits predicting low drama around both government funding and the debt limit. On Tuesday, senate minority leader Mitch McConnell told reporters: Well, it’s now Wednesday, so that has completely changed. Republicans are now discussing forcing a government shutdown in an effort to foil the federal vaccine mandate on the private sector. “I’m sure we would all like to simplify the process for resolving the CR (continuing resolution), but I can’t facilitate that without addressing the vaccine mandates,” senator Mike Lee told Politico Playbook in a statement. “Given that federal courts across the country have raised serious issues with these mandates, it’s not unreasonable for my Democratic colleagues to delay enforcement of the mandates for at least the length of the continuing resolution.” Congressmen Chip Roy and Matt Rosendale appear to also be taking a stand against the National Defense Authorization Act because it would require women to register for the draft as well as men. Unfortunately, this is not a new strategy. In early November, senator Roger Marshall spearheaded a letter to Joe Biden saying he would not vote for government funding that “enables the enforcement of President Biden’s employer vaccine mandate”. The letter was signed by senator Lee, as well as senators Marsha Blackburn, Ted Cruz, Steve Daines, Jim Inhofe, Ron Johnson, Cynthia Lummis, Rick Scott, Tommy Tuberville and Rand Paul. With arguments set to begin before the supreme court momentarily, scenes outside the courthouse grew lively and, at times, heated, with supporters from both sides of the issue of abortion rights gathering. With the landmark Roe v Wade ruling being directly challenged today by Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization in the supreme court, endangering this country’s access to safe abortions, here are some stats from the Guardian’s Jessica Glenza: If Roe v Wade were overturned, 26 states are expected to move to make abortion illegal. About 40 million women of reproductive age, or about 58% of the people who can get pregnant in the US, live in states considered hostile to abortion rights. Pro-choice advocates and legal experts warn that fetus-related prosecutions that over-criminalize women – in particular poor women of color – will increase should Roe be overturned. Already, Alabama has prosecuted nearly 500 women since 2006 for allegedly exposing a fetus to a “controlled substance” in the womb, even including prescription painkillers. Six of the nine supreme court justices learn to the right, meaning the court is now dominated by conservatives. Abortion advocates see the Dobbs case as especially perilous for abortion rights because justices could have outright dismissed law as unconstitutional under Roe. But the court chose to take the case, indicating at least four justices see a reason to revisit the historic ruling. Greetings, live blog readers. We’re in for a busy day today. The supreme court is set to begin hearing oral arguments today in a case that could reverse the landmark ruling in Roe v Wade, which effectively legalized abortion across the US. In the 1973 Roe decision, the court affirmed that access to safe and legal abortion was a constitutional right. The court ruled that states could not ban abortion before a fetus can survive outside the womb – 24 weeks gestation (a full term pregnancy is considered to be 39 weeks). Now, with this direct challenge of Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Clinic, the supreme court justices must consider whether the state of Mississippi can ban nearly all abortion from 15 weeks. Ahead of today’s hearing, more than 250 doctors and medical professionals across the country signed an open letter organized by the Committee to Protect Health Care, urging the courts and policymakers to uphold to uphold Roe v Wade. “Patients may need an abortion because of pregnancy complications that endanger their health,” the letter reads. “Forcing people with chronic illnesses, following a miscarriage, or after a serious medical condition diagnosis to carry a pregnancy to term against their will could have life-threatening consequences.” If the supreme court were to overturn Roe v Wade, at least 26 states hostile to abortion would outlaw abortion either immediately or as quickly as possible, according to the Guttmacher Institute, a pro-choice research organization. For example, Louisiana has passed a “trigger law” designed to outlaw abortion if Roe is overturned, meaning a person from Louisiana seeking an abortion would need to travel as far as Kansas to obtain one legally. The Guardian’s Jessica Glenza and David Smith will be bringing in live reports from the scene all day. For more information on what’s at stake, read more here:A batch of a popular shampoo has been urgently recalled by its manufacturer over concern it may be contaminated with a bacteria that can “cause significant infection or illness”. Product Safety Australia issued a recall notice for the A’kin shampoo, manufactured by McPherson’s, which is marketed as fragrance free, “natural” and “mild”. A McPherson’s spokesperson said on Thursday the manufacturer had contacted retailers with instructions to remove the impacted batch of Akin Fragrance-Free Mild and Gentle Hypoallergenic Shampoo 225mL from shelves. The company urged customers who purchased the product between 1 September and 11 October “to review the product label”. “Bottles that should be recalled can be identified by the AW1B01 batch number,” the statement read. “Customers in possession of this batch should immediately stop using the product and return it to the place of purchase for a full refund.” There is concern the product is contaminated with Enterobacter gergoviae, a bacteria sometimes found in cosmetics products that is resistant to several antibiotics, including penicillin. “Cosmetic products contaminated with Enterobacter gergoviae may cause significant infection or illness, especially if the user is immunocompromised,” Product Safety Australia said in a statement. McPherson’s said “the wellbeing and safety of customers is our first priority and in consultation with regulators we have issued a voluntary recall of 250 bottles from a single batch … as a precautionary measure”. “Through our routine quality assurance testing, it was found that one batch … did not meet our product standards as it may contain a level of microbial activity that is not acceptable. “Extensive testing has indicated that no other batches or products in the Akin range have been impacted and are safe for use.” Enterobacter gergoviae can cause a number of infections, including lower respiratory tract infections and UTIs. Product Safety Australia stated that anyone concerned about their health after using the product should seek medical advice. “We apologise for the inconvenience caused and are taking all measures to rectify the situation,” McPherson’s said. “Customers seeking additional information on the recall can call the McPherson’s customer service line on 1800 651 146.”That’s it from me, Samantha Lock, reporting to you from Sydney, Australia. Thanks for following along – this blog is now closed. We have opened a new blog here. It’s been a very busy day on the Covid front as countries swiftly respond to the emergence of the Omicron variant. Here’s all the main developments: Omicron is rapidly becoming the dominant variant of the coronavirus in South Africa less than four weeks after it was first detected there. Ministers in the UK have secured new contracts to buy 114m more Covid-19 vaccines for the next two years. The US will extend requirements for travellers to wear masks on aeroplanes, trains and buses and at airports and train stations through mid-March. Greek lawmakers approved legislation making vaccination for Covid mandatory for all residents aged over 60. Some 17% of Greeks aged over 60 have not yet been vaccinated. They have until 16 January to get their first jabs, or will be fined 100 euros for every month they remain unvaccinated. The United Arab Emirates announced its first known case of the new Covid variant Omicron. Moderna could have a Covid booster shot targeting the Omicron variant tested and ready to file for US authorisation as soon as March, the company’s president said. The EU must consider mandatory vaccination, European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen said. One-third of Europe’s 150-million population are not vaccinated. The US reports its first Omicron case identified in California and discovered in a traveler who returned from South Africa on 22 November and tested positive on 29 November. The World Health Organization urged countries to prioritise getting the unvaccinated vaccinated, both nationally and globally, rather than boosters. The UN condemned the travel bans implemented in response to Omicron as “unfair, punitive and ineffective”. Omicron is rapidly becoming the dominant variant of the coronavirus in South Africa less than four weeks after it was first detected there, Reuters reports. Early indications suggest Omicron may be markedly more contagious than previous variants. South Africa’s National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) said early epidemiological data suggested Omicron was able to evade some immunity, but existing vaccines should still protect against severe disease and death. It said 74% of all the virus genomes it had sequenced last month had been of the new variant, which was first found in a sample taken on Nov. 8 in Gauteng, South Africa’s most populous province. The number of new cases reported in South Africa doubled from Tuesday to Wednesday. World Health Organization (WHO) epidemiologist Maria van Kerkhove told a briefing that data on how contagious Omicron was should be available “within days.” Hello everyone, it’s Samantha Lock here taking over from my colleague Tom Ambrose and ready to take you through all the Covid news this Thursday. Let’s dive in with a snap shot of the Covid situation in Australia, where I will be reporting to you from today. Ministers in the UK have secured new contracts to buy 114m more Covid-19 vaccines for the next two years. The deals, for 2022 and 2023, were accelerated after the emergence of the Omicron coronavirus variant, officials said. Under the agreements, the UK will buy 54m more doses from Pfizer/BioNTech and 60m more doses from Moderna. These purchases are in addition to the 35m extra Pfizer/BioNTech doses ordered in August for delivery in the second half of 2022, officials said. The UK is also still expecting 60m Novavax and 7.5m GSK/Sanofi doses in 2022. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, said the new deals would “future proof” the UK’s vaccine programme and ensure protection for “even more people in the years ahead”. There remains uncertainty about further health programmes. Some experts have warned that Covid-19 will have to be kept at bay by repeated vaccine campaigns, while others have said it is too early to tell whether annual vaccine boosters will be needed. President Joe Biden’s administration will extend requirements for travellers to wear masks on aeroplanes, trains and buses and at airports and train stations through mid-March to address ongoing Covid risks, sources briefed on the matter told Reuters. A formal announcement extending the requirements until 18 March is expected on Thursday, the sources said. The White House and Transportation Security Administration (TSA) declined to comment. TSA in August extended the transportation mask order that runs until 18 January. In the United States, New York City’s troubled jail system is facing more turmoil with the suspension of hundreds of corrections officers for failing to meet a Tuesday night deadline to get vaccinated against Covid. The city’s Department of Correction reported 77% of its uniformed staff had gotten at least one vaccine dose as of 5pm on Monday. The Associated Press reported: Corrections Department Commissioner Vincent Schiraldi said Wednesday morning that about 700 jail workers who’ve applied for religious or medical exemptions can continue to work while their cases are reviewed. City Hall officials said Wednesday afternoon that 570 workers could be put on leave without pay for failing to comply with the mandate, but they would not know the precise number until those corrections officers show up for scheduled shifts and do not show proof of vaccination. The deadline for jail workers to be vaccinated was delayed a month because of existing staffing shortages. Workers who haven’t applied for an exemption and who failed to show proof of vaccination by 5pm Tuesday were to be placed on unpaid leave and surrender any city-issued firearms and protective gear, officials said. Mayor Bill de Blasio, who already imposed similar mandates for other city workers, said he expects the vaccination rate to rise as workers begin missing paychecks or their requests for an exemption are denied. “I expect those numbers to up in a very substantial way in the days ahead,” de Blasio told reporters at a virtual news conference on Wednesday. Brazil registered 283 Covid deaths on Wednesday and 11,413 additional cases, according to data released by the nation’s Health Ministry. The South American country has now registered a total of 614,964 total coronavirus deaths and 22,105,872 total confirmed cases. Greek lawmakers have approved legislation making vaccination for Covid mandatory for all residents aged over 60, to deal with an infection surge and the emergence of the Omicron variant. The draft law backed by the centre-right government and a centre-left opposition party — but rejected by all other opposition parties — targets the country’s age group that is most vulnerable to death or intubation from the coronavirus. Some 17% of Greeks aged over 60 have not yet been vaccinated. They have until Jan. 16 to get their first jabs, or will be fined 100 euros for every month they remain unvaccinated. Parties that opposed the measure said it was too harsh on low-income people who don’t want to be inoculated. The United Arab Emirates announced on Wednesday its first known case of the new Covid variant Omicron, state news agency WAM reported. The variant was detected in an African woman who had travelled from an African country and transited through an Arab country, WAM said. The woman had received both doses of the Covid vaccine. Public health authorities have placed her in isolation, as well as those who were in contact with her, WAM reported. The UAE is the second Gulf country to detect a case of the new variant, after Saudi Arabia announced its first case earlier on Wednesday. My colleagues Denis Campbell and Andrew Gregory have put together a helpful Q&amp;A about the new Covid vaccine booster drive. It’s well worth a read to get across what is happening right now and why. To see the full article, click the link below. Moderna could have a Covid booster shot targeting the Omicron variant tested and ready to file for US authorisation as soon as March, the company’s president said on Wednesday. Moderna President Stephen Hoge said he believes booster shots carrying genes specifically targeting mutations in the newly-discovered Omicron variant would be the quickest way to address any anticipated reductions in vaccine efficacy it may cause. “We’ve already started that program,” he told Reuters. The company is also working on a multi-valent vaccine that would include up to four different coronavirus variants including Omicron. That could take several more months, he said. Global airlines are bracing for more volatility due to the Omicron coronavirus variant that could force them to juggle schedules and destinations at short notice and rely more on domestic markets where possible, analysts say. Many travellers have already booked trips for the Christmas period, a peak season for airlines, but since news of the variant last week, there are growing industry concerns over a pause in future bookings and further delays to the already slow recovery in business travel. On Wednesday, United Airlines Chief Executive Officer Scott Kirby said the new variant will have a near-term impact on bookings, Reuters reported. Fitch Ratings has lowered its global passenger traffic forecasts for 2021 and 2022, saying the emergence of new variants like Omicron highlight the likelihood that conditions would remain volatile for airlines. “It feels a little bit like we are back to where we were a year ago and that’s not a great prospect for the industry and beyond,” Deirdre Fulton, a partner at consultancy MIDAS Aviation, said at an industry webinar. The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) called for a “more measured and evidence-based” response, saying “the costs of significantly restricted global air mobility affect all countries”. Airlines have been blaming a lack of consistent and stable health protocols as well as border restrictions for depressed international travel demand. The EU must consider mandatory vaccination in response to the spread of the ‘highly contagious’ Omicron Covid variant across Europe, the European Commission president has said. Ursula von der Leyen said one-third of Europe’s 150-million population were not vaccinated and it was ‘appropriate’ to discuss the issue. Good evening, I am Tom Ambrose and will be bringing you the latest Covid news from the UK and around the world this evening. Let’s start with some more reaction to that first Omicron case discovered in the United States earlier today. Dr Anthony Fauci told reporters that the person was a traveler who returned from South Africa on 22 November and tested positive on 29 November. Fauci said the person was vaccinated but had not received a booster shot and was experiencing “mild symptoms.” The Biden administration moved late last month to restrict travel from Southern Africa where the variant was first identified and had been widespread. Clusters of cases have also been identified in about two dozen other nations. “We knew that it was just a matter of time before the first case of omicron would be detected in the United States,” Fauci said. He said the person was improving and added, “I think what’s happening now is another example of why it’s important for people to get vaccinated. But also boosting. Boosting is very important.” Officials said they had contacted everyone who had close contact with the person and they had all tested negative. The first confirmed case of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 in the United States has been identified in California. The identification by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) comes as scientists continue to study the risks posed by the new variant of the virus. The Biden administration moved late last month to restrict travel from southern Africa, where the variant was first identified, and had been widespread. Clusters of cases have also been identified in about two dozen other nations. The CDC is moving to tighten US testing rules for travelers from overseas, including requiring a test for all travelers within a day of boarding a flight to the US regardless of vaccination status. It was also considering mandating post-arrival testing. Officials said those measures would only “buy time” for the country to learn more about the new variant and to take appropriate precautions, but that given its transmissibility its arrival in the US was inevitable. The dominant variant in the US is still the Delta strain, which emerged and spread across the country over summer. It’s been a very busy day on the Covid blog as countries respond to the emergence of the Omicron variant. Here’s all the main stories: A major World Health Organization press conference urged countries to prioritise getting the unvaccinated vaccinated, both nationally and globally, rather than boosters. Officials said data on the transmissibility of Omicron is expected “within days”, and urged caution in implementing extreme measures such as travel bans and lockdowns while the picture remains uncertain. The UN condemned the travel bans implemented in response to Omicron as “unfair, punitive and ineffective” The US, Norway, Ghana and South Korea identified their first Omicron cases President of the European Commision, Ursula von der Leyen, said the EU should consider making vaccines mandatory after Greece introduced a fine for those over 60 who refuse to get jabbed France and the US increased travel restrictions, while Vietnam said it would suspend flights from several southern African countries. Botswana, one of the first countries to detect Omicron, said nearly all the cases identified so far were mild That’s it from me for today, thanks for following the blog. I’m handing over to Tom Ambrose now who’ll keep watch on the latest Covid developments throughout the evening. CNN is reporting that Omicron has been detected in the US state of California. More to follow. Reuters reports that this has been confirmed by the California and San Francisco departmants of public health. The Omicron variant appears able to get around some immunity but vaccines should still offer protection against severe disease, according to the latest data from South Africa, where it is surpassing Delta as the dominant variant. Reuters reports that the daily number of reported cases in South Africa doubled to 8,561 on Wednesday. It was not known how many of those were Omicron, but an official presentation said Omicron was “rapidly becoming the dominant variant”. Omicron accounted for 74% of the 249 virus genomes sequenced in South Africa in November, according to the National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD). “(The) mutation profile and epidemiological picture suggests Omicron is able to get around some of our immune protection (to cause infection) but the protection against severe disease and death from vaccines should be less affected,” the latest report from the surveillance network said. The earliest sample in which the variant was detected was collected on 8 November in Gauteng, South Africa’s most populous province, where Johannesburg and Pretoria are located. Since then, it has been detected in Eastern Cape, KwaZulu Natal, Mpumalanga and Western Cape. United Nations Secretary-General Antonio Guterres said on Wednesday that travel restrictions imposed over Covid-19 that isolate any one country or region as “not only deeply unfair and punitive - they are ineffective.” At a press conference, Reuters reported that Guterres said the only way to reduce the risk of transmission while allowing for travel and economic engagement was to repeatedly test travellers, “together with other appropriate and truly effective measures.” The UK reported 48,374 new Covid-19 cases on Wednesday, a rise of 2% on the previous week, and 171 more deaths within 28 days of a positive test, a fall of 7.8%, according to official figures. The total number of deaths has now reached 145,140 while there have been 10.2 million positive cases, the figures showed. Cuban health authorities said that researchers would upgrade its homegrown Covid vaccines to ensure protection against the new Omicron variant. Reuters reports: Vicente Verez, director of Cuba’s Finlay Institute for Vaccines, said on Tuesday on state-run media it was clear that Cuba’s Soberana vaccine would continue to provide “a certain level of protection” against Omicron, but said the extent of that protection was still uncertain. “We decided as of last week to start developing a Soberana Plus variant having the Omicron RBD protein,” Verez said, referring to the receptor-binding domain (RBD), a key part of the virus located on its “spike”. “We have already started it, and that protein is being built at the moment.” Some global vaccine manufacturers, including BioNTech, have expressed guarded confidence that their vaccines would offer strong protection against Omicron. Others, like Moderna, have raised the prospect of a material drop in protection. The Biden administration intends to toughen testing requirements for international travellers coming to the US, including both vaccinated and unvaccinated people, Gloria Oladipo writes. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) announced in a statement on Tuesday that officials are working on a plan that would require international travellers to be tested for Covid-19 within a day before their flight to the US. Currently, fully vaccinated travelers can test for Covid-19 up to three days before their trip. South Africa’s daily reported cases of coronavirus doubled to 8,561 on Wednesday from the previous day, according to the country’s National Institute of Communicable Diseases (NICD). The rate of positivity, which means the number of positive results out of total tests, shot up to 16.5% on Wednesday from 10.2% a day before, NICD said. However the number of deaths and hospitalisations did not change much. Airline passengers arriving to Denmark from Doha or Dubai must take a mandatory Covid-19 test, a move aimed at delaying the spread of the new Omicron variant, Reuters reports. Temporary visa holders in Australia will be cut off from their families this Christmas despite the planned easing of border restrictions, causing further agony and uncertainty, writes Christopher Knaus. Restrictions are set to ease for some temporary visa holders in time for Christmas, including those on international skilled, student, humanitarian, working holiday and provisional family visas to allow them to leave and re-enter Australia without exemptions from 15 December. But for holders of other types of temporary visas there is still no end in sight. Peter Beaumont, a senior global development reporter, has provided a roundup of the international picture on the spread of Omicron. Underscoring the fast spread of the variant, the National Institute for Communicable Diseases in South Africa – where Omicron was first detected – said it had now been found in five out of nine provinces, and accounted for 74% of the virus genomes sequenced in November, he wrote. Italy reported 103 coronavirus-related deaths on Wednesday against 89 the day before, the health ministry said, while the daily tally of new infections rose to 15,085 from 12,764. Reuters reports that the count marks the first time Italy reported more than 100 daily coronavirus deaths since June 8. Reuters has compiled a breakdown of where Omicron cases have been detected, and how many, by region: Africa Botswana 19 Ghana (unspecified number) Mozambique 2 Nigeria 2 South Africa about 100 (reported on 26 Nov) Americas Brazil 3 Canada 7 Asia Japan 2 South Korea 5 Europe Austria 1 Denmark 5 Germany 4 Ireland 1 Italy 1 Netherlands 14 Norway 2 Portugal 13 Spain 2 Sweden 3 United Kingdom 22 Middle east Saudi Arabia 1 The press conference has just ended, and there’s a lot to take in. Here’s a handy summary to keep you up to date: The WHO expects data on the transmissibility of Omicron to emerge in the coming days There’s promising early evidence that Omicron doesn’t cause severe illness in many people and that it does not reduce vaccine efficacy Travel bans and lockdowns should be implemented with caution, since they have major economic and social consequences and aren’t necessarily the most effective restrictions The best way to tackle Omicron is to continue with measures targeted at tackling Delta, including mask wearing, social distancing and hand washing Boosters are unlikely to be helpful for most people and countries should instead focus on vaccinating the unvaccinated, both nationally and internationally The timeline for how and where the Omicron variant emerged is likely to change as countries step up sequencing of cases logged in November New variants will continue to emerge for as long as the virus remains in circulation, warned Van Kerkhove. “We need to increase vaccination coverage around the world” she said, urging that countries focus on the most vulnerable. Countries must take “proven measures” to drive transmission down rather than relying on lockdowns. She worried that travel bans could disincentivise countries from reporting the emergence of new variants. “We are in the middle of this pandemic,” she warned. France is stepping up its Covid-19 booster vaccination campaign and tightening entry rules for arrivals from outside the European Union in response to the spread of the Omicron variant. Reuters reports: Gabriel Attal also said flights from countries in southern Africa, where the variant was first detected last week, would remain suspended until Friday. From Saturday they would resume, but only for travellers returning to their main residences, he said. The government hopes eight million people in France will have received a third vaccine injection by the end of Wednesday, and 10 million by the end of this week. There are about 1,100 vaccination centers in operation and the government plans to open 300 more in coming weeks, he added. Meanwhile, all non-EU arrivals in mainland France, where the Omicron variant has yet to be detected, will henceforth have to show proof of a negative Covid-19 test regardless of their vaccination status, Attal added. Ryan said it’s a “luxurious position” for countries to be able to offer a third booster vaccine. Instead, he said our goal should be to protect those who haven’t received a first vaccine. “Right now there is no evidence I‘m aware of that suggests boosting the entire population is going to provide any greater protection” against hospitalisation or death. Swaminathan urged countries to focus on “vaccinating the unvaccinated first” before they think about boosters. Asked about whether European countries should prepare for a lockdown Christmas, Michael Ryan, WHO executive director, said we need to be patient while we wait to find out more about the Omicron variant. In the meantime, he encouraged governments in Europe to look at their epidemiological situation, introduce control measures, increase surveillance and testing and ensure and those who are vulnerable or at risk are offered the vaccine and that any concerns of hesitancy are addressed openly. He urgent governments to work closely with communities rather than blaming them and to apply public health, not political, measures. “This is not a time for governments to pass the full responsibility of containing the pandemic onto the shoulders of citizens,” he said. Van Kerkhove said that the timeline for the emergence of Omicron is likely to change as now it’s been classified as a variant of concern, surveillance, testing and sequencing will increase. She noted that there are a backlog of cases from November which need sequencing, which may mean that understanding of the countries in which the variant emerged, as well as when it first emerged, could change. Chief scientist Soumya Swaminathan said the greatest risk is faced by those over 45 who have co-morbidities. She said there was no evidence so far of reduced vaccine efficacy to Omicron. Asked about the profile of the Omicron variant in terms of transmissibility and severity, Van Kerkhove said: “We don’t have all the information on transmission though there is some suggestion it’s more transmissible”. She said we should expect to have more information in days, not weeks as anticipated earlier, and that the variant could become more transmissible in future. In terms of severity, she noted there are reports of cases that go from mild to severe disease. There’s some indication some patients are presenting with mild diseases. There’s a surveillance bias now in terms of cases reported. She added there are increased hospitalisations across South Africa but that could be a result of the increase in overall cases, which translates into more hospitalisations. Technical lead for Covid-19 Maria Van Kerkhove said the priority should be to “strengthen surveillance and genomic sequencing around the world” to detect the emergence of new variants. She praised the work of institutions in southern African countries in reporting the Omicron variant so honestly and quickly. Some modelling suggests travel bans can be helpful at beginning of outbreak to give countries more time to prepare, but they cannot stop outbreaks, according to Jaouad Mahjour, WHO assistant director general. Tedros said the emergence of the Omicron variant “should not surprise us, this is what viruses do” and that this pattern will continue so long as the virus is allowed to spread. There’s more to learn on its transmission, severity and the efficacy of tests, he said. On travel bans, he said: “It’s deeply concerning to me that those countries [that first reported the variant] are now being penalised for doing the right thing.” He warned: “Blanket travel plans will not prevent the international spread of Pmicron and they place a heavy burden on lives and livelihood.” Instead, he urged that all countries ensure that high risk individuals are fully vaccinated immediately and that all countries fund international efforts to distribute treatments and vaccinations since “globally we have a toxic mix of low vaccine coverage and very low testing”, which will continue to breed variants unless it is addressed. He said: “We must forget we’re already dealing with a highly transmissible, dangerous variant, the Delta variant, which currently accounts for almost all cases globally. We need to use the tools we already have to prevent transmission and save lives, and in doing that we will prevent transmission and save lives from Omicron.” World Health Organization director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said a global accord on pandemic preparedness is a sign that world nations have “made a strong statement that health security is too important to be left to change or goodwill”. He said the “significance of this cannot be understated” as it will strengthen cooperation between countries, similar to an earlier accord on tobacco control. The agreement will see an intergovernmental negotiating body establish a new accord. The first meeting will be no later than the first of March 2022, and an outcome will be submitted for consideration to the World Health Assembly in 2024. However he added there are still “differences of opinion” on what the accord should contain. The World Health Organization is holding an important press conference at 3pm. You can tune in through the video link at the top of the page, and I’ll keep you updated on key lines as they emerge. The Guardian’s correspondent for Greece, Turkey and Cyprus Helena Smith has more detail on the controversial new fine in Greece for citizens who refuse to be vaccinated. Greece’s prime minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis has defended a controversial decision to impose a €100 (£85) monthly fine on citizens aged 60 and over who refuse to be vaccinated. In an address to the Greek parliament ahead of a vote on legislation applying the penalty as of 16 January, the centre-right leader described the move as “absolutely constitutional.” “Compulsory vaccination already has the approval of the Council of State,” he told MPS referring to the nation’s highest administrative court. Greece is the first EU member to target a specific age group with Mitsotakis acknowledging that the decision had personally “tormented” him as a “profoundly liberal politician” who struggled with the concept of obligation. But the data, he said, had proved implacable in terms of deaths and the pressure on the nation’s health system. “Nine out of ten Greeks who die are over 60 years,” he told MPs, noting over half a million had resisted vaccination. “More than eight out of ten have not been inoculated.” The spectre of the fine, in addition to compulsory rapid tests twice a week, appears to have had a dramatic effect. In the first 24 hours since the drastic step was announced some 17,500 people in the demographic had registered for a first shot compared to an average inoculation rate among the 60 + of 2,600 a day, according to government statistics. Reuters has just reported that it has had exclusive sight of a US Center for Disease Control order for all airlines to turn over the names of any passengers who have been in the eight southern African countries subject to travel restrictions. Marcus Lamb, the co-founder of the leading US Christian TV network Daystar who railed against Covid-19 vaccines, has died of Covid-19 aged 64, Oliver Milman reports. Lamb, who was the chief executive of the conservative network that reaches an estimated 2 billion viewers worldwide, died on Tuesday, weeks after contracting the coronavirus. Under his leadership, Daystar aired repeated baseless anti-vaccine conspiracy theories and claims that vaccines were being used to take freedoms away from Christians. In July 2020, the network spent an hour of air time complaining about “censorship” around the pandemic and also gave an hour’s slot to Robert F Kennedy Jr, who has spread misinformation about the Covid vaccine. Covid vaccines have been repeatedly found to be safe and effective at preventing severe illness from the virus. Evangelical Christians have been getting the vaccines at lower rates than the general US population, however, and several prominent Christian broadcasters have died of the virus in recent months. The World Health Organization has published the full text of director general Tedros Adhanom’s speech at the world health assembly. As well as thanking member states for their support for a new international accord on pandemic preparedness and response, Adhanom urged all countries to achieve WHO targets of vaccinating 40% of the population by the end of this year, and 70% by the middle of next year. For those countries that have already reached 70%, he asked that they swap vaccine delivery schedules with programmes that deliver vaccines to poorer countries, such as Covax and AVAT, as Switzerland has just done. Adhanom also urged member states to remove “every barrier to scaling up vaccine production, by sharing technology and knowhow, and by supporting a waiver of intellectual property rights”. Several countries have confirmed further Covid cases of note. A 29 year-old traveller arriving from Ethiopia into Sao Paulo in Brazil is the country’s third known Omicron case. Organisers halted a music festival for young people on the South African coast on Wednesday after 36 people tested positive for Covid-19 at the site, however it was not known whether these were infected with Omicron. A fully vaccinated couple in South Korea tested positive for the variant after arriving last week from Nigeria, followed by two of their family members and a friend. An official at the World Health Organization’s eastern Mediterranean regional office said that seven countries in the region have not yet reached a threshold of 10% vaccination coverage. These countries represent a high-risk setting for the emergence of further variants, Dr Ahmed Al-Mandhari told a news conference. The region includes countries in south-east Europe, the Middle East and north Africa. We have corrected an earlier post that stated that Nigeria had identified the Omicron variant among a sample collected in October, suggesting that the variant has been circulating for longer than previously understood. However, this has now been confirmed to be incorrect. The sample in fact contained the Delta variant. Vietnam will suspend flights to and from seven African countries over concerns about the spread of the Omicron coronavirus variant, Reuters reports. The Civil Aviation Authority of Vietnam has approved the suspension, Lao Dong Newspaper reported, without saying when the move will come into effect. The health ministry on Sunday asked relevant authorities to suspend all flights to and from these countries, including South Africa, Botswana, Namibia, Zimbabwe, Eswatini, Lesotho and Mozambique. Denmark has reported 5,120 new coronavirus cases, the country’s highest daily tally for new infections during the pandemic so far. A top official in Botswana’s health ministry said on Tuesday that 16 out of the total 19 cases of the Omicron variant detected in the country were asymptomatic, and said it was unfair to treat the country as ground zero of the new variant. Pamela Smith-Lawrence, acting director of health in the ministry of health and wellness, told Reuters in an interview that the majority of the 19 people who were found to be infected with the new Omicron variant have already tested negative. While 16 people were asymptomatic, the remaining two had “very, very mild” symptoms. Reuters is reporting a World Health Organization press conference. There will be a full update shortly, but some initial lines are already emerging: 24 countries have detected Omicron variants so far. Most cases are mild. Countries already have a lot of tools at their disposal to curb its spread, including mask-wearing, hand-washing and social distancing. They should be aware that travel restrictions have consequences. Countries should increase disease surveillance to detect Omicron early. There is no need to develop a new vaccine, minor adjustments to existing formulas will suffice. There is no evidence so far that there is less vaccine efficacy for Omicron. Some mutations indicate a risk of faster transmission. There’s no reason to believe the Omicron variant has a longer incubation period than others. More to follow. The Guardian’s Madrid correspondent, Sam Jones, has an update on the situation in Spain: In Spain, where 89.3% of people over 12 are double-jabbed, questions are being asked over the benefits of vaccine passports, which are in use or due to be introduced in eight of Spain’s 17-self-governing regions. Experts on the interterritorial council of the national health service say that while they may help persuade people to get vaccinated, their knock-on effects may be less wide-reaching. Reports in El País and elDiario.es quoted the experts as saying Spain’s high vaccination rate may limit their contribution to fighting the pandemic: “In neighbouring countries where they’re being used, cases are rising at an important rate, even if it’s true that vaccine coverage is far lower than in Spain. It’s possible that the effects in Spain, where coverage is higher, could be lower. It would also be hard to measure the effectiveness of this measure.” Members of the council also point out that being vaccinated is not the same as being immune, and suggest the use of the passes may lend people a false sense of security – especially if preventative measures are not observed inside enclosed spaces such as bars and restaurants. However, the experts believe the use of Covid passports is more justified for people visiting hospitals and care homes, and for those working with people in vulnerable categories. On Tuesday, the Spanish government recommended limits on the number of people at festive gatherings given “the uncertainty associated with the Omicron variant”. Portugal’s government has said it will not hesitate to increase restrictions during the festive Christmas period if they are needed to control a recent surge in Covid-19 cases, Reuters reports. Prime minister Antonio Costa told reporters: “We all wish that these measures are not necessary, but if they become necessary, we will take these measures. “We must always be vigilant to take new measures, if necessary. That’s how we’ve been living for the past two years and we’ve managed to prevail, although it’s been hard for everyone.” Despite having one of the world’s highest vaccination rates, a recent uptick of infections and the emergence of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus has prompted the government to reimpose some restrictions since Wednesday. More from Daniel on the EU press conference: The EU must consider mandatory vaccination in response to the spread of the “highly contagious” Omicron Covid variant across Europe, the European commission president Ursula von der Leyen has said. In a call to arms to the member states, Von der Leyen said the EU’s 27 member states should rapidly deploy booster doses and backed countries who temporarily enforced pre-travel PCR tests even within the bloc’s borders. Asked whether she supported the Greek government in imposing a €100 (£85) monthly fine on those aged 60 and over who failed to get a Covid jab, Von der Leyen said that the spread of the disease and the lack of vaccine take up in parts of the EU meant it should be on the table as a policy response. Speaking to reporters in Brussels, Von der Leyen, who practised as a doctor before her political career, said: “We have the vaccines, the life-saving vaccines, but they are not being used adequately everywhere. And this costs … This is an enormous health cost coming along.” She added: “How we can encourage and potentially think about mandatory vaccination within the European Union? This needs discussion. This needs a common approach, but it is a discussion that I think has to be met.” The Guardian’s Brussels bureau chief, Daniel Boffey, is at an EU press conference this afternoon. He reports that European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen has said mandatory vaccination in the EU should be considered as Europe is desperately battling to control the spread of the Omicron Covid variant. The commission also backed pre-travel PCR tests for travel within and outside the EU. Ghana’s health ministry said it had detected the country’s first cases of the novel Omicron variant of Covid-19 on passengers who arrived at the Kotoka International airport in Accra on 21 November. Chosun Ilbo newspaper reported that health authorities in South Korea had confirmed the country’s first cases. Confusion over Covid rules and lax enforcement of mask-wearing on two KLM flights between South Africa and Europe may turned them into “super spreader events” that accelerated the distribution of the Omicron variant around the world, according to the New York Times. In a piece trending on their site, Rome bureau chief Jason Horowitz writes that once passengers on flight KL592 and another plane arrived in Amsterdam following the detection of the Omicron variant, they endured “hours spent breathing stale air as their planes sat on the tarmac, then fighting exhaustion in crammed waiting rooms, awaiting swab results in close quarters with fellow travellers who would turn out to be infected with the new and possibly more dangerous variant”. Possibly owing to the airport’s indecision about how to handle the arrivals, more than 60 people on that and another KLM flight from South Africa tested positive for the virus, of which 14 had Omicron. All those who tested negative were permitted to enter the Netherlands, or take connecting flights around the world. The piece quotes an Italian virologist, Fabrizio Pregliasco, who argues that all those passengers should have been quarantined, isolated or closely monitored for 10 days. He said: “If this variant is very contagious, this flight is an explosive bomb.” Masks, vaccines, boosters, rapid tests and anti-Covid pills will all be essential in the months ahead, writes Eric Topol, a professor of molecular medicine, who argues that many wealthier countries already have the tools they need to contain the spread of omicron. The AFP has published its daily tally of global coronavirus cases, based on data from official sources. The figures show: The novel coronavirus has killed at least 5,214,847 people since the outbreak emerged in December 2019. At least 262,269,390 cases of coronavirus have been registered. On Tuesday, 8,951 new deaths and 749,945 new cases were recorded worldwide. Based on latest reports, the countries with the most new deaths were the US, with 1,809 new deaths, followed by Russia with 1,226 and Poland with 570. The US is the worst-affected country with 780,233 deaths from 48,557,723 cases. After the US, the hardest-hit countries are Brazil with 614,681 deaths from 22,094,459 cases, India with 469,247 deaths from 34,596,776 cases, Mexico with 294,246 deaths from 3,887,873 cases, and Russia with 276,419 deaths from 9,669,718 cases. The country with the highest number of deaths compared with its population is Peru with 610 fatalities per 100,000 inhabitants, followed by Bulgaria with 408, Bosnia-Herzegovina with 384, Montenegro with 367, Republic of North Macedonia with 364, Hungary with 357 and Czech Republic with 310. Latin America and the Caribbean overall have 1,540,938 deaths from 46,680,781 cases, Europe 1,524,902 deaths from 84,715,929 infections, and Asia 898,262 deaths from 57,244,647 cases. The US and Canada have reported 809,913 deaths from 50,349,521 cases, Africa 222,850 deaths from 8,652,693 cases, Middle East 214,684 deaths from 14,315,007 cases, and Oceania 3,298 deaths from 310,819 cases. Norway has identified its first two cases of the new Omicron coronavirus variant, according to the west coast municipality of Oeygarden and the health ministry. Reuters reports: The two people who were infected had been on a trip to South Africa. Both of them were recovering from the infection, Oeygarden mayor Tom Georg Indrevik said in a statement. The municipality of close to 40,000 people had recently seen a rise in infections of other variants of Covid-19, and would now further tighten its local restrictions to control the outbreak, it said. Rachel Hall here taking over from Martin Belam on the blog for the rest of the day. I’ll be updating you on all the latest and most important global coronavirus developments, but please do get in touch if there’s anything we’ve missed, or with tips and thoughts. You can reach me at rachel.hall@theguardian.com. Nigeria had confirmed its first cases of the Omicron variant. Germany’s state infectious disease agency reported 67,186 new cases on Wednesday, up 302 from a week ago, and 446 deaths. That is the country’s highest daily deaths figure since 18 February. Gernot Marx, the president of the DIVI association for intensive care medicine, warned that Germany could still have 6,000 people in intensive care by Christmas regardless of what measures are now decided by politicians. The European Union-wide rollout of Pfizer and BioNTech’s Covid-19 vaccine version for five- to 11-year-old children will begin 13 December, one week earlier than previously planned, Germany’s health ministry said. The World Health Organization (WHO) has said those not fully vaccinated who are vulnerable to Covid-19, including over-60s, should delay travel to areas with community transmission, as more countries imposed curbs to combat the spread of the new Omicron variant. WHO has also agreed to launch negotiations on an international treaty to prevent and control future pandemics. A progress report will be presented at the regular World Health Assembly annual gathering in 2023. Saudi Arabia has reported its first Omicron case, as has Brazil. They are the first recorded cases in the Middle East and in Latin America respectively. Prof Andrew Hayward, from University College London and a member of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) in the UK, said there was a need to keep an eye on Omicron growth as “small numbers can turn to big numbers quite quickly”. Amid accusations that prime minister Boris Johnson broke Covid rules over Christmas parties last year, the UK’s health secretary Sajid Javid has said people should take a lateral flow test before going to Christmas parties this year, but said “People should continue to behave in the way they were planning to behave over Christmas. I don’t think there’s any need to change those plans.” The US is set to toughen testing requirement for all international travellers, including returning Americans and both vaccinated and unvaccinated people Some US Republican states are expanding unemployment benefits for employees who have been fired or quit over vaccine mandates, a move critics say in effect pays people for not getting vaccinated. Slovenia has halted use of Johnson &amp; Johnson’s Covid-19 vaccine after experts confirmed a death was related to an extremely rare blood-clotting condition. In contrast to travel restrictions being raised elsewhere, Fiji has reopened its border to international travellers for the first time in nearly two years. The Pacific Island country is seeking to revive its dominant tourism industry. Malaysia and Uzbekistan are among countries to add new travel restrictions over Omicron today. France has decided to extend until at least Saturday its suspension of flights from southern African countries. It is a very busy day of coronavirus news again today. If you are after UK news, then Andrew Sparrow has a combined politics and live blog today, which will take in PMQs, you can find that here: Rachel Hall will be here shortly to take over from me, and she will continue to bring you the latest developments with Covid from around the world. A quick snap from Reuters here that Uzbekistan has said it would suspend flights with Hong Kong, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Lesotho, Madagascar, Mozambique, Namibia, Eswatini, Tanzania and South Africa from 3 December to curb the spread of Omicron. The central Asian nation’s health ministry said residents of those nations and people who have recently visited them would be unable to enter Uzbekistan, while those arriving from Egypt, Israel, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Great Britain, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, and Czech Republic would be quarantined for 10 days. Russia on Wednesday confirmed 32,837 Covid-19 infections and 1,226 deaths. The figures remain on a gentle downward trajectory, but have not fallen to the levels authorities must have hoped for when they ordered a firebreak of a week’s paid leave for non-essential workers at the start of November to break the transmission chain in the country. Yesterday, in light of the emergence of the Omicron variant, Anna Popova, the head of Russia’s consumer and health department advised Russians not to travel abroad for New Year holidays. President Vladimir Putin said yesterday that the government will create an updated action plan to deal with Omicron next week. The European Union-wide rollout of Pfizer and BioNTech’s Covid-19 vaccine version for five- to 11-year-old children will begin 13 December, one week earlier than previously planned, Germany’s health ministry said. Reuters reports Germany is due to receive 2.4m doses for use as a two-dose regimen, the ministry said, adding it has commitment on the new date from the manufacturer. “Given the current pandemic situation, this is good news for parents and children. Many are awaiting this eagerly,” acting health minister Jens Spahn said in the statement. A BioNTech spokesperson confirmed the earlier launch, adding it was contingent on the production batch passing quality control checks early next week. The rollout will be brought forward without an impact on agreed delivery volumes thanks to “a massive effort”, the company added. Some US Republican states are expanding unemployment benefits for employees who have been fired or quit over vaccine mandates, a move critics say in effect pays people for not getting vaccinated. Four states – Iowa, Tennessee, Florida, and Kansas – have changed their rules on unemployment to include people who have been terminated or who have chosen to leave their jobs because of their employers’ vaccine policies. The partisan divide is striking, Anne Paxton, staff attorney and policy director for the Unemployment Law Project in Washington state, told the Guardian. “It’s very hard to regard this particular move as being based on anything much more than political reasons.” The development also comes as the new Omicron variant has emerged, triggering concern that the strain could already be inside the US. If so, it would likely see a new rise in infections in America. There are 30 states with Republican-led legislatures that could follow suit. “I would be very surprised if it stopped at this four,” Paxton said. Missouri is contemplating similar laws, while states like Maryland are considering “mitigating factors” around unemployment and vaccine rules. Read more of Melody Schreiber’s report here: Republicans boost benefits for workers who quit over vaccine mandates There is more detail on the World Health Organization (WHO) agreement from Agence France-Presse. It reports that the 194 countries have agreed to establish an intergovernmental negotiating body “to draft and negotiate a WHO convention, agreement or other international instrument on pandemic prevention, preparedness and response”. The body’s first meeting must be no later than 1 March next year to elect two co-chairs and four vice-chairs. A progress report will be presented at the regular World Health Assembly annual gathering in 2023, with the final outcome presented for consideration at the 2024 WHA. “We need a game-change in our global health architecture, so that the international community can respond to future pandemics collectively, effectively and immediately,” said Lotte Knudsen, the EU’s ambassador in Geneva, in a statement. “Today’s decision of the World Health Assembly will therefore make history. The situation and our citizens demand it: we need to strengthen pandemic prevention, preparedness and response if we do not want to find ourselves in a similar situation in the future.” An update from Geneva that the World Health Organization (WHO) has agreed to launch negotiations on an international treaty to prevent and control future pandemics. Reuters reports the decision was adopted by consensus at WHO’s special ministerial assembly of its 194 member states, drawing applause from delegations at the end of a three-day meeting. “The text before us is the product of extensive discussions, of frank exchanges and of compromises,” said Australia’s ambassador Sally Mansfield, who co-chaired the working group. “Let us move forward together in solidarity to do the hard work that we have ahead of us.” Andrew Sparrow has launched our combined UK Covid and politics live blog for today. You can follow the latest news there. I will be continuing here with the latest coronavirus developments from around the world. Bosses of pubs, bars and restaurants across the UK are warning they are already receiving cancellations of bookings for Christmas parties amid fears about the Omicron variant and following mixed guidance over socialising during the festive season. “We are seeing that some of the people in large organisations who organise bigger events are taking the cautious view because I guess they feel some overriding responsibility. We are not seeing that in young people,” said Hugh Osmond, the founder of Punch Taverns. “Social interaction is, after food and water, the most important thing for a human being’s mental health,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. Christmas trading is vital for hospitality venues, many of whom rely on making enough money in the festive period to get them through the leaner months at the start of the new year. The loss of a second Christmas season in a row would be extremely damaging for many businesses. Read more of Joanna Partridge’s report here: UK hospitality firms hit by Christmas party cancellations over Omicron fears The Robert Koch Institute, Germany’s state infectious disease agency, reported 67,186 new cases on Wednesday, up 302 from a week ago, and 446 deaths. That deaths figure is the country’s highest daily figure since 18 February. Gernot Marx, the president of the DIVI association for intensive care medicine, warned that the country could still have 6,000 people in intensive care by Christmas regardless of what measures are now decided by politicians. That compares with a previous high of 5,745 coronavirus patients in intensive care on 3 January. Germany also has fewer beds available now due to a shortage of nursing staff. “The situation is really becoming increasingly tight,” Marx told ZDF television, calling for the government to consider a temporary lockdown. “We need to save the clinics from collapse.” Associated Press report that four people in southern Germany have tested positive for the Omicron Covid-19 variant even though they were fully vaccinated against the coronavirus, the public health office in the state of Baden-Wuerttemberg said. Nigeria has confirmed its first cases of the Omicron Covid-19 variant among two travellers who arrived from South Africa last week, the Nigeria Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) said. Although initial reports suggested that the NCDC had also identified the Omicron variant among a sample collected in October, Reuters confirmed that this is incorrect. The NCDC said retrospective sequencing of previously confirmed cases among travellers to Nigeria had identified the Delta variant among a sample collected in October. As a confirmed Grinch, I wasn’t that fussed when we couldn’t have office Christmas parties last year, but it does seem to be an absolute obsession with media questioning at the moment. One of the latest to give their view in the UK is Saffron Cordery, deputy chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents NHS trusts. She told Sky News that some NHS organisations had asked staff “not to mix in big groups” in the run-up to Christmas. She said this year was “very different” to last year when “it was absolutely clear that nobody was going to a Christmas party last year”, adding: “This year, we are in in a slightly different place – people will be taking their own decisions.” PA Media quotes her going on to say: We know that many NHS trusts, for example, are asking their staff not to mix in big groups in the run-up to Christmas because of the potential threat to their health and what they will be available to do. So they are setting one example there. I think, at the moment, without that advice from government, I think it’s for individuals and individual organisations to think about what they will be doing in the run-up to Christmas. But it’s a really challenging and difficult one. The thing we can encourage everyone to do is to go out and get their booster when it’s made available to them ,and to book in for that because that’s one of the best defences that we’ve got alongside wearing masks, washing your hands and also making sure you’re in ventilated rooms. Those are really, really important factors which will help stop the transmission. A very quick snap from Reuters here that state media in Saudi Arabia are reporting that the country has detected its first Omicron case, in a traveller that they say came from a north African country. There are a couple of more quotes here from UK health secretary Sajid Javid’s media round this morning, this time on government ambitions for the booster jab programme – including an appeal for volunteers. PA Media quotes him telling BBC Breakfast: In the last week we had about 2.4m jabs across the UK. We are going to need to do around a million more, but I think it can be done. Existing national vaccination centres and the hospital hubs, many of them will open for longer. Some of the people there are already committed to doing extra hours or they know where they can find the volunteers they want. We are also going to have more pharmacies than ever before – 1,500 pharmacies across the country -– and more GPs will be involved as well. In terms of volunteers, we do absolutely need more volunteers. Prof Andrew Hayward, from University College London and a member of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) in the UK, said there was a need to keep an eye on Omicron growth as “small numbers can turn to big numbers quite quickly”. PA Media quotes him telling Times Radio: The speed of increase of Omicron in South Africa was pretty extreme, particularly in the areas around Johannesburg, so we need to obviously keep an eye on it. Certainly, a number of the mutations are such that you might well predict that they would evade immunity to a certain extent and potentially be more transmissible as well. So, nothing is certain and I think that’s why it’s very hard to really work out what a proportionate response is, because whilst we’re gathering information on this, if it is a very highly transmissible strain that escapes immunity, and doesn’t have a reduction in severity, then sort of waiting until we’ve got all the information might turn out not to be the right thing, and we might think that we should have been more intense later. In contrast to most of the updates today about countries throwing up further barriers to international travel, Fiji has reopened its border to international travellers for the first time in nearly two years. The Pacific Island country is seeking to revive its dominant tourism industry. With about 90% of all Fijian adults fully vaccinated, the Pacific Island reopened its border to tourists from a small number of countries – much to the relief of tourism operators. “To see the Fiji Airways plane full up and for us to welcome those tourists today was so amazing. It was a great, great feeling and I’m glad to have been there personally,” James Sowane, director of the Fiji tourism company, Tewaka, told Reuters. Tourists arriving will have to stay three nights in an approved resort and undergo rapid testing. They can move around designated areas, including bars and restaurants within the hotels, while they can embark on some day trips and activities. Fiji shut its border to all foreign nationals in March 2020 to curb the spread of Covid-19 in a bid to stop its limited medical facilities being overrun. Fiji prime minister Frank Bainimarama hailed the return of tourists. “Today, we are proud and most importantly prepared to welcome the first tourists to fly to Fiji in almost two years. Our message to every fully vaccinated, Covid-tested traveller who arrives to our shores is simple: Welcome Home,” Bainimarama said in a post on Facebook. In the UK, opposition party Labour has called for more stringent testing of international travellers. Appearing on BBC Breakfast was newly appointed shadow health secretary Wes Streeting. PA Media quotes him saying: I don’t want people to have to change their plans for Christmas and they shouldn’t need to if the government does everything within its power to make sure that we are tackling the virus. The booster campaign announced this week is something we welcome – we think the government can achieve around half a million booster jobs a day, especially if they use services like community pharmacies, pop-up clinics, really redoubling their effort. But there are other things that government can do too – we don’t think it’s right that people arriving into the UK from overseas are not being tested before they leave the country of origin – it’s possible for people to travel to the airport, get on a plane, arrive in busy, crowded departure halls, get on a train or a tube or a bus back home without having had a test for a couple of days. That doesn’t make sense. Politico’s London Playbook newsletter this morning includes some grumpy behind-the-scenes briefing from the government that everybody else involved is slowing down the rollout of the UK’s booster programme. They write: Every minister who ever appears in public will tell you that the booster campaign is a heroic and valiant effort by the brilliant NHS to give out doses at an extraordinary rate, and so on. In reality, ministers and Whitehall officials are far less effusive behind the scenes. Playbook is told by one government insider that there is “extreme frustration” among senior ministers that the independent Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation took so long to reduce the gap between second and third jabs from six to three months. There are also frustrations that for all the talk of the rollout being ramped up, it hasn’t actually happened yet. Johnson announced on Saturday that he wanted the booster campaign expanded to millions more people. We are told that the decision was taken on Friday. It took until Monday for the JCVI to approve the request. Five days on from Johnson signalling the campaign would be ramped up, as of this morning NHS England still hasn’t called any new age group to come forward. A government official tells us: “Us having no control over JCVI and NHSE has cost lives over the past year.” Another says: “We should have fixed the roof while the sun was shining and boosted everyone weeks ago. Instead we’ve waited for a new variant to come and now it’s panic stations.” There is a little more detail here on the news of a travel ban in Malaysia. Reuters reports that the travel ban applies to eight African countries, including South Africa, Zimbabwe, Mozambique and Malawi, but could be extended to other nations where the variant has been detected, such as Britain and the Netherlands, health minister Khairy Jamaluddin has said. Malaysia will also delay plans to set up so-called Vaccinated Travel Lanes (VTL) with the affected countries, and reimpose quarantine requirements for Malaysian citizens and long-term residents returning from those nations, regardless of their vaccination status. “These are just temporary measures until we find out more about the Omicron variant,” Khairy said. “The moment we believe it is safe, we will lift these measures.” France has decided to extend until at least Saturday its suspension of flights from southern African countries, said French European affairs minister Clément Beaune. “As of this morning, we have extended the suspension of flights from seven southern African countries until Saturday,” Reuters reports Beaune told RTL radio. There have been mixed messages in the UK over how people should behave during the festive season. Yesterday UK Health Security Agency exec Dr Jenny Harries suggested everybody should try to reduce their social contacts to slow the potential spread of the new variant. Prime minister Boris Johnson very much had other ideas and was totally gung-ho for Christmas. Health secretary Sajid Javid is very much in the latter camp. He told Sky News this morning: People should continue to behave in the way they were planning to behave over Christmas. I don’t think there’s any need to change those plans. The only changes that have been made in the last few days are the ones that might affect your international travel plans. So if someone had plans to travel, then there can be an impact there. Of course, there’s the need to self-isolate if you come into contact with someone with Omicron. At this point in time the case numbers are very low. I think for the UK we’ve got 22 confirmed cases. That will certainly go up. I’m not worried about a “pingdemic”-type situation. But we’ve always said, even before we knew about the variant, our “plan A”., we’ve always been clear that as you get into deeper winter, the colder darker days, the virus likes that. Not just this virus, the flu virus, they like that. And so as we do that, people should just be careful to try and figure can they ventilate the room, and just follow the current guidance. Sajid Javid has hinted this morning on Sky News that the UK government might reassess their Omicron variant rules earlier than the three-week timescale previously set out. The health secretary told Sky News: We were confident that actually, maybe within two weeks, we can know a lot more about this. We might not even need to wait three weeks, but three weeks was I think a sensible date to set for the review, because that now that we have live samples of the virus, they’ve gone to our labs in Porton Down. UK health secretary Sajid Javid has been on Sky News this morning. On the Omicron variant he said: We are trying to learn more about it. And in the meantime, in the next few weeks, we want to build our defences. And our best form of defence still remains our vaccines. It’s possible of course it might be less effective. We just don’t know for sure yet. But it’s also very likely that they’ll remain effective against serious disease. He again appealed for the UK public to take booster shots when offered, saying “We’ve all got a role to play in this, and any of your viewers, if they get the call from the NHS, then please step up, roll up your sleeves and protect yourself. This has become from a health point of view the most important thing that we can do to protect ourselves. to protect the progress that we’ve made.” Javid also praised the response of South Africa, saying he had spoken to his counterpart there, and “I think the way South Africa has behaved is exemplary in being open and transparent about what they discovered.” Hello, it is Martin Belam here taking over the live blog from Samantha Lock in Sydney. I’ll be bringing you the latest Covid news from around the world. In the UK it is health secretary Sajid Javid who is doing the UK media round. I’ll have the key lines from his appearances in due course. Here’s a reminder of how things stand in the UK at the moment. Over the last seven days there have been 300,554 new coronavirus cases recorded in the UK. Cases have increased by 1% week-on-week. There have been 832 deaths recorded in the last week. Deaths have decreased by 14.9% week-on-week. Hospital admissions have decreased by 7.1% week-on-week. At the latest count on the UK government’s own dashboard, there were 7,631 people in hospital in total, of whom 916 are in ventilation beds. The World Health Organization has said those not fully vaccinated who are vulnerable to Covid-19, including over-60s, should delay travel to areas with community transmission, as more countries imposed curbs to combat the spread of the new Omicron variant. The moves came as the WHO said “blanket bans” would not contain the strain of the virus which it previously warned presents a “very high” risk globally. The United States will require stricter coronavirus testing at borders for all travellers, including returning Americans, amid Omicron variant concerns. US officials will require everyone entering the country to be tested one day before boarding flights, regardless of their vaccination status or country of departure. Administration officials are also considering a requirement that all travellers get retested within three to five days of arrival. Currently those who are fully vaccinated may present a test taken within three days of boarding. The move is part of an enhanced winter Covid strategy that the Biden administration plans to announce on Thursday. Asian stock markets have mostly rallied in Wednesday’s session after a couple of days of shaky trade. But fears that the Omicron variant would lead to more shutdowns across the world appear to have abated a little and given a boost to investors. The Nikkei in Tokyo is up 0.4%, the Hang Seng has lifted 1.1% and the Kospi in Seoul has soared 2.1%. Brent crude oil is also up 2.6% at $71.05. With exchanges soon to open in Europe futures trade points to the FTSE100, German Dax and France’s CAC all opening up more than 1%. Wall Street’s S&amp;P500 is also set to bounce by almost 1%. The Ukraine has recorded another 11,960 new cases of Covid-19 on Tuesday, the nation’s health ministry reported. Almost 7 million vaccinations were given during November, the health body added. Japan has found a second person who has tested positive with the Covid-19 Omicron variant, broadcaster FNN reported on Wednesday. The first case of the variant was discovered in a person arriving from Namibia on Tuesday. In case you’ve just joined us, here is a detailed summary of the key Covid developments from the past day. Summary The WHO advises vulnerable, unvaccinated and over 60s, against travel in a new travel warning. South Korea reported a new daily record of 5,123 new Covid cases for Tuesday, the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency (KDCA) said. Germany reported a daily rise of 67,186 Covid cases and 446 deaths, according to data from the Robert Koch Institute of public health. All eligible adults in the UK should be offered a Covid booster jab by the end of January, British prime minister Boris Johnson said. Austria has extended its lockdown to 20 days after lawmakers voted to extend a nationwide lockdown by 10 days on Tuesday. Greece is set to fine people over the age of 60 who have not received a first Covid-19 shot €100 per month from 16 January. Slovenia has halted use of Johnson &amp; Johnson’s Covid-19 vaccine after experts confirmed a death was related to an extremely rare blood-clotting condition. An expert committee voted to recommend the US Food and Drug Administration authorise Merck’s molnupiravir Covid pill for high-risk adults, the first of a new class of antiviral drug that could tackle Omicron and other variants. The Philippines is mulling over whether commercial establishments and employers should be required to wear face shields on top of currently mandated face masks. A northern Chinese city bordering Russia has halted rail imports on Wednesday over fears of a fresh cluster of Covid-19 infections as the nation records a jump in daily Covid cases. Latest new travel curbs: The US is set to toughen testing requirement for all international travellers, including returning Americans and both vaccinated and unvaccinated people, entering the country. US officials will reportedly require everyone entering the country to be tested one day before boarding flights, regardless of their vaccination status or country of departure. The Biden administration is expected to make an official announcement on Thursday. Singapore also introduces tougher testing for all arrivals and will require mandatory PCR testing for all travellers and additional antigen rapid tests for travellers on vaccinated travel lanes. Hong Kong adds non-residents from Japan, Portugal and Sweden to the list of travellers unable to enter the city due to concerns over the Omicron variant. Canada’s mandatory vaccination for travel within and out of the country took effect from 30 November. Japan is set to expand its travel ban on foreigners entering the nation even further, preventing those with resident status from ten African nations including South Africa. Malaysia is set to temporarily ban entry of travellers from countries that have reported the Omicron variant, the health ministry has said. New Omicron cases: Brazil reported its first Omicron case in Latin America. Japan also confirmed its first case of the Omicron variant, believed to be a Namibian diplomat in his 30s. Nigeria has confirmed its first cases of the Omicron variant among travellers from South Africa. Nigeria has confirmed its first cases of the Omicron variant among travellers from South Africa, according to the centre for disease control. “Through case and genomic surveillance at the Nigeria Centre for Disease Control through its National Reference Laboratory, Nigeria confirmed its first case of the Omicron variant, also known as the B.1.1.529 lineage,” the health body said in a statement on Wednesday. “Samples obtained for the stipulated day two test for all travellers to Nigeria were positive for this variant in three persons with history of travel to South Africa.” Nigeria recorded 105 new cases of the coronavirus o Tuesday. Malaysia is set to temporarily ban entry of travellers from countries that have reported the Omicron variant, the health ministry has said. The announcement was made during a press conference about 1pm local time. The country will also delay plans to set up so-called Vaccinated Travel Lanes with those countries, health minister Khairy Jamaluddin told reporters. We will have more on this development shortly. Patients who survive severe Covid are more than twice as likely to die over the following year than those who remain uninfected or experience milder virus symptoms, a new study has revealed. The research, published in Frontiers in Medicine, suggests that serious coronavirus infections may significantly damage long-term health, showing the importance of vaccination. The increased risk of dying was greater for patients under 65, and only 20% of the severe Covid-19 patients who died did so because of typical Covid complications, such as respiratory failure. “We conducted a previous study that showed that patients with severe Covid-19 who recovered were at significantly greater risk of being hospitalised in the subsequent six months,” said ProfArch Mainous of the University of Florida, the lead author of the study. “This new study extended that to investigate mortality risk over the next 12 months.” Read the full story here. Singapore is close to vaccinating all eligible people against Covid-19, ministry of health data shows. The city-state’s vaccination rate has risen to 96% of the eligible population with 86% of the total population having received two jabs and 87% of the total population having received at least one jab. Authorities are now racing to administer booster shots amid concerns over the Omicron variant. Singapore has one of the highest vaccination rates in the world. India has recorded a daily rise of 8,954 in Covid cases, according to recently released health ministry data. The nation also saw another 267 deaths from Covid, taking the total death toll to 469,247. The Philippines is mulling over whether commercial establishments and employers should be required to wear face shields on top of currently mandated face masks. Acting Presidential Spokesperson, Cabinet Secretary Karlo Nograles, made the remark after President Rodrigo Duterte said he recognised face shields would provide an additional layer of protection against Covid-19. “Right now, the question is will there be any changes? I don’t know. Let’s wait. (There’s) Omicron, we will have to see where it goes. We will have to monitor developments. But right now, (the) status quo is voluntary,” acting presidential spokesperson, Cabinet Secretary Karlo Nogralessaid, in an interview. The mandatory face shield policy remains in areas under alert level 5 and in areas that are closed, crowded, and where close contact (3Cs) is likely to occur, such as hospitals and other medical facilities, the Philippine News Agency reports. “Based on our latest IATF resolutions, employers and establishments may require face shields for the protection of customers, or their clientele, or their employees,” acting presidential spokesperson, Cabinet Secretary Karlo Nogralessaid, in an interview. The WHO advises vulnerable, unvaccinated and over 60s, against travel in a new travel warning. South Korea reported a new daily record of 5,123 new Covid cases for Tuesday, the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency (KDCA) said. Germany reported a daily rise of 67,186 Covid cases and 446 deaths, according to data from the Robert Koch Institute of public health. The US is set to toughen testing requirement for all international travellers, including returning Americans and both vaccinated and unvaccinated people, entering the country. US officials will reportedly require everyone entering the country to be tested one day before boarding flights, regardless of their vaccination status or country of departure. The Biden administration is expected to make an official announcement on Thursday. Singapore also introduces tougher testing for all arrivals and will require mandatory PCR testing for all travellers and additional antigen rapid tests for travellers on vaccinated travel lanes. Hong Kong adds non-residents from Japan, Portugal and Sweden to the list of travellers unable to enter the city due to concerns over the Omicron variant. Canada’s mandatory vaccination for travel within and out of the country took effect from 30 November. Japan is set to expand its travel ban on foreigners entering the nation even further, preventing those with resident status from ten African nations including South Africa. A northern Chinese city bordering Russia has halted rail imports including coal and timber on Wednesday over fears of a fresh cluster of Covid-19 infections. Health authorities reported 91 new cases in or close to Manzhouli - a city of 231,000 in Inner Mongolia that handles more than 65% of China-Russia trade - after seeing dozens in recent days, forcing leaders to impose localised lockdowns and travel restrictions. All of the 91 local symptomatic cases were reported in the region and marks the highest daily count since 2 November, data from the National Health Commission showed. It is also a significant jump from 21 cases a day earlier. The aim is to “strengthen prevention and control” of the outbreak at ports and “effectively block the spread of overseas epidemics through imported goods”, the notice added. Japan is set to expand its travel ban on foreigners entering the nation even further, preventing those with resident status from ten African nations including South Africa from entering the country “for the time being.” The new rules will apply to foreign residents from South Africa, Eswatini, Namibia, Zambia, Malawi, Mozambique, Lesotho, Angola, Botswana and Zimbabwe. The border closing will be in effect for at least a month. “From the view of prevention, we won’t just restrict new entry by foreigners but also returning foreigners with resident status, unless there are special extenuating circumstances,” chief cabinet secretary Hirokazu Matsuno told a news conference. “We will maintain a sense of urgency and keep track of the situation in various countries to be able to respond quickly and flexibly.” On Monday, Japan closed its borders to all newly entering foreigners in light of the emergence of the Omicron variant. On Tuesday, Japan’s first Omicron case was discovered. The emergence of the Omicron variant means that the Covid-19 pandemic remains the “chief source of uncertainty to the global economy and a driver of financial market volatility”, according to the ratings agency Moody’s. Hopes that businesses might be able to return to normal operation in the coming months could be dashed by Omicron and the subsequent restrictions on travel and other freedoms already imposed by many countries around the world, the analysts said. It could therefore increase pressure on supply chains and worsen existing shortages of labour and materials that have helped push inflation up across the world, most recently seen with Tuesday’s 4.9% inflation figure in the eurozone. The emergence of the new variant also comes during a period of fragile economic recovery, with stretched supply chains, elevated inflation and labor market shortages,” Moody’s said. “Business disruption resulting from the spread of the new variant could prevent supply chain stresses from easing, dampening productive capacity and stoking further cost pressures in sectors with exposure to global supply chains. On the demand side, fear of infection could prevent a large proportion of individuals from engaging in economic activity that requires close contact. Thus, demand could diminish for services ranging from hospitality to travel, at a time when holiday-related spending would usually ramp up.” Germany is reporting a daily rise of 67,186 Covid cases and 446 deaths, according to data from the Robert Koch Institute of public health. The figures bring the nationwide tally to 5,903,999 confirmed coronavirus cases and 101,790 deaths. Three people who escaped an Australian Covid quarantine facility have been arrested. Our reporter Cait Kelly from Melbourne, Australia, has the story. Northern Territory Police arrested the trio who escaped from Darwin’s Howard Springs Covid-19 facility on Wednesday morning. All three tested negative for Covid and have been taken into custody. Earlier, police said the trio allegedly jumped the fence at the Centre for National Resilience just before 4.40am. “Police and staff at the Centre for National Resilience are currently confirming the absconder’s identities prior to releasing further information,” police said. Read the full story here. Hong Kong will ban non-residents from entering the city from Japan, Portugal and Sweden from Friday due to concerns over the Omicron variant. Non-Hong Kong residents who have been in the three countries in the past 21 days will not be allowed to enter the global financial hub. Residents can only board flights if fully vaccinated and will have to undergo 21-days of quarantine in a hotel at their own cost. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) confirmed late Tuesday it is working to impose stricter Covid-19 testing rules for air travellers entering the United States amid concerns about a new Covid-19 variant, Reuters reports. The CDC confirmed in a statement it is working to revise its current Global Testing Order “for travel as we learn more about the Omicron variant; a revised order would shorten the timeline for required testing for all international air travellers to one day before departure to the United States.” Effective from today, vaccination will be required for travel within and out of Canada. A valid Covid-19 molecular test will no longer be accepted as an alternative to vaccination unless travellers are eligible for one of the limited exemptions, such as a medical inability to be vaccinated. As of 15 January, certain groups of travellers, who are currently exempt from entry requirements, will only be allowed to enter the country if they are fully vaccinated with one of the vaccines approved for entry into Canada. These groups include individuals travelling to reunite with family (unvaccinated children under 18 years of age will retain exemption if travelling to reunite with an immediate or extended family member who is a Canadian, permanent resident, or person registered under the Indian Act); international students who are 18 years old and older; professional and amateur athletes; individuals with a valid work permit, including temporary foreign workers (outside of those in agriculture and food processing); and essential service providers, including truck drivers. After 15 January, unvaccinated or partially vaccinated foreign nationals will only be allowed to enter Canada if they meet the criteria for limited exceptions, the government of Canada said in a statement. Singapore has announced it will require mandatory PCR testing for all travellers and additional antigen rapid tests for travellers on vaccinated travel lanes. “To step up detection and containment of the Omicron variant until more information is available, we will enhance our testing protocols for travellers arriving in Singapore after 2 December 2021, 2359 hours (Singapore time). These enhanced measures will apply for four weeks in the first instance, and will be reviewed and extended if necessary,” the ministry of health said in a statement. All travellers entering or transiting through Singapore, after 2 December, must undergo a pre-departure test within 2 days of their departure for Singapore and obtain a negative result. All travellers entering Singapore must undergo a Covid-19 PCR test on-arrival. Those with confirmed cases or suspected cases of Covid-19 will no longer be able to undergo home recovery and will need to undergo quarantine at the National Centre for Infectious Diseases. Stock markets in Asia are mixed this morning after some big losses in Europe and Wall Street on Tuesday thanks to ongoing Omicron concerns and signals from the US Federal Reserve that it is going to wind up its massive monetary stimulus more quickly than expected. The ASX200 in Sydney was first out of the blocks and it is down 0.83% thanks to the macroeconomic concerns, and despite a better than expected 1.9% fall in GDP in the third quarter. Forecasts had pointed to 2.7%. The Kospi is up 1% in Seoul, however, boosted by strong exports in the third quarter, and the Nikkei is also up in Tokyo. The Hang Seng is tracking to shed 0.8%at the opening shortly so it’s a score-draw on the bourses so far. Oil prices have also suffered because of the Omicron scare, which traders fear could jeopardise the recovery of the global economy and hurt demand. Brent crude is standing at $70.57 after falling 3.91% on Tuesday. The US will require stricter coronavirus testing is set to be required for all travellers, including returning Americans, entering the country amid Omicron variant concerns. The Biden administration is expected to take steps in the coming days to toughen testing requirements for international travellers to the US, including both vaccinated and unvaccinated people, the Associated Press reports. The move is part of an enhanced winter Covid strategy Biden plans to announce on Thursday, the publication added. US officials will require everyone entering the country to be tested one day before boarding flights, regardless of their vaccination status or country of departure. Administration officials are also considering a requirement that all travellers get retested within three to five days of arrival. Currently those who are fully vaccinated may present a test taken within three days of boarding. Authorities are reportedly debating a controversial proposal to require all travellers, including US citizens, to self-quarantine for seven days, even if their test results are negative. “CDC is evaluating how to make international travel as safe as possible, including pre-departure testing closer to the time of flight and considerations around additional post-arrival testing and self-quarantines,” Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Dr Rochelle Walensky said on Tuesday. South Korea has reported a new daily record of 5,123 new Covid cases for Tuesday, the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency (KDCA) said today. On Monday, the government shelved plans to further relax Covid-19 curbs due to the strain on its healthcare system from rising hospitalisations and deaths as well as the threat posed by the new variant. The country is currently battling to contain a sharp rise in patients with severe Covid symptoms. The World Health Organization has issued a new travel warning to those thinking about heading abroad this holiday season. Covid-vulnerable people, including the over-60s, should postpone plans to travel, the WHO said in a statement on Tuesday as more than 50 countries rush to implement travel measures aimed at delaying the spread of the new Omicron variant. “Persons who are unwell, or who have not been fully vaccinated or do not have proof of previous SARS-CoV-2 infection and are at increased risk of developing severe disease and dying, including people 60 years of age or older or those with comorbidities that present increased risk of severe COVID-19 (e.g. heart disease, cancer and diabetes) should be advised to postpone travel to areas with community transmission,” the WHO advised. Hello and welcome to our live coverage of the coronavirus outbreak. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be giving you a rundown of the latest updates as they happen. The World Health Organization has issued a new travel warning to those thinking about heading abroad during the holiday season. Covid-vulnerable people, including the over-60s, should postpone plans to travel, the WHO said in a statement on Tuesday as more than 50 countries implement travel measures aimed at potentially delaying the importation of the new variant. “Persons who are unwell or at risk of developing severe Covid-19 disease and dying, including people 60 years of age or older or those with co-morbidities (e.g. heart disease, cancer and diabetes), should be advised to postpone travel,” said the WHO. Greece has become the latest European nation to take a strict new stand against those who are unvaccinated by imposing a €100 per month fine for people over the age of 60 who have not received their first Covid-19 shot. The measures are set to take effect from 16 January. Here’s a summary of all the key developments so far: Stricter coronavirus testing is set to be required for all travellers to the US amid Omicron variant concerns, the Washington Post reports. All eligible adults in the UK should be offered a Covid booster jab by the end of January, British prime minister Boris Johnson announced. The Omicron variant was present in Europe at least 10 days ago, according to health authorities in the Netherlands. Austria extends lockdown to 20 days after lawmakers voted to extend a nationwide lockdown by 10 days on Tuesday, bringing the total lockdown ending on 11 December to 20 days. Germany’s constitutional court has ruled that sweeping restrictions to stem Covid infections such as curfews, school closures and contact restrictions were lawful, in a decision that could pave the way for further curbs. Greece has said it will fine people over the age of 60 who have not received a first Covid-19 shot €100 per month from 16 January. All travellers entering Ireland will now have to show negative Covid tests. An expert committee voted to recommend the US Food and Drug Administration authorise Merck’s Covid pill for high-risk adults, the first of a new class of antiviral drug that could tackle Omicron and other variants.The drug, molnupiravir, is likely to be approved for older and more vulnerable people at greater risk of severe illness. Brazil reports first Omicron cases in Latin America after detecting two cases of the Omicron Covid strain on Tuesday, the country’s health regulator, Anvisa, said. Slovenia has halted use of Johnson &amp; Johnson’s Covid-19 vaccine after experts confirmed a death in September was related to an extremely rare blood-clotting condition. Poland records highest Covid deaths since April with 526 deaths in the past 24 hours. Israel’s health minister says boosters may protect against Omicron. The US Food &amp; Drug Administration says it is evaluating the effectiveness of authorised Covid vaccines against the Omicron variant and expects to have more information in the next few weeks. Japan confirmed its first case of the Omicron variant. A Namibian diplomat in his 30s is thought to have tested positive for the variant.The Queensland Council of Civil Liberties says the state government must release public health directions to end confusion and uncertainty about plans to reopen state borders and bar unvaccinated people from public spaces. The premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, announced Queensland’s plan to “unite families” and “give certainty” more than three weeks ago. But those measures are just a guide until the state makes formal public health directions. With just days until Queensland is due to hit its 80% double-dose vaccination target, the council says the delay in releasing even draft directions is problematic. “The premier cannot make law by press release,” council president Michael Cope said. “No lawyer will be able to properly advise their client, particularly their small business clients, without access to the actual terms of the law. A press release is no substitute for the actual direction.” The Queensland human rights commissioner, Scott McDougall, told Guardian Australia last week that the commission had been flooded with inquiries due to confusion about the reopening plan. “We’re very much aware of the confusion and the lack of clarity for people trying to make sense of our border reopening plans,” McDougall said. “Because we don’t have the detail about how the requirements will be applied, whether there will be exceptions and how people might seek them out, and what obligations will fall on business.” Australians attempting to return to Queensland from overseas say they have cancelled flights due to the way the announced plans would apply different quarantine rules to members of the same family. Amid the uncertainty, Queensland health said two weeks ago the plans were “only a guide” and that “the relevant direction, once it is released, will aim to ensure families arriving into Queensland remain together”. People stuck outside Queensland still have no certainty. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “It is entirely inappropriate that almost two weeks out from these complex rules (restricting unvaccinated people) coming into place, businesses and individuals in this state cannot plan properly for the new laws,” Cope said. “No matter what the police commissioner says, for practical purposes the enforcement of these laws will fall on businesses because the police will not be able to be everywhere. “Those businesses are entitled to know now what their obligations are.” Cope said the government should immediately publish the public health direction, prior to its implementation. “At the very least, a draft of the proposed direction should be released immediately. “It is a fundamental premise of the rule of law that people are entitled to certainty in conducting their lives and businesses. A draft of this proposed direction must exist. “Too often in this pandemic, these directions have been released either just as they start or on occasions after they came into force. “There is no possible reason to delay the release of the direction given that the government’s policy was announced three weeks ago.”What will it cost to get greenhouse gas emissions down to net zero by mid-century, and are people around the world prepared to pay it? This was a question posed by the Danish thinktank head Bjørn Lomborg for a column in the Australian on Saturday. In the wake of the Glasgow climate summit, Lomborg argued that asking voters to “pay for these draconian climate policies” was proving difficult for politicians. Versions of Lomborg’s op-ed have been run in publications around the world including the Herald in Scotland and the Economic Times in India. But a key claim made in these columns – and one that appears in other Lomborg articles going back to October in the likes of the Wall Street Journal and the New York Post – has frustrated scientists, who are accusing him of taking their modelling work about climate policies in the US out of context. Lomborg wrote in the Australian that a study “in the renowned journal” Nature, “shows that reducing emissions 95% by 2050 – almost Biden’s promise of net zero – would cost 11.9% of gross domestic product, or more than $US11,000 ($15,300) for each American citizen every year”. That seems like an eye-watering figure, or in Lomborg’s words “spectacularly costly”. The cited figure does appear in a supplementary section of the paper. But the authors of the study (which actually appeared in Nature Climate Change, not Nature) have told Temperature Check they have been asking Lomborg since early November to stop making that claim. Prof David Victor, of University of California San Diego, said Lomborg’s summary “took the results out of context and used them for a purpose that we explicitly said they were not to be used, and which he was reminded of when he asked for the underlying data”. The study used models to examine the methods and costs of reducing emissions through state-based policies compared with nationwide approaches. But the authors say that as they model different levels of ambition, the dollar numbers produced by the model become less reliable. They say that’s why the model’s outputs for beyond 80% were only placed in the supplementary section of the paper as a way to show the sensitivity of the modelling, rather than to deliver a genuine cost estimate. Dr Wei Peng, of Penn State university and lead author of the study, said she and her colleagues were “frustrated with Lomborg’s misinterpretation of our study”. In late October Peng emailed Lomborg saying the modelling results for emissions cuts at 95% “was not well calibrated, and the cost number is likely to be off”. “I hope people won’t take the high mitigation cost out of context,” she told Lomborg. Victor said Lomborg’s use of the figure was “obscenely reckless” in the context of “serious scientific analysis” and wrote to him in early November. In that email, seen by this column, Victor asked Lomborg to “please correct the record and avoid any further misinformation on this front”. Temperature Check asked Lomborg why he had continued to use the figure after being contacted by the study’s authors. Lomborg defended his use of the figure, saying it had appeared in the supplementary section of the paper under a heading “Mitigation costs for 95% decarbonization” and that material in supplements was also peer reviewed. He said: “My sentence in the op-ed faithfully summarises just that. It is possible that the authors now feel that their result is politically inconvenient or undesirable, but that is no argument against communicating it.” To pay or not to pay Also in the op-ed, Lomborg gave examples of where voters around the world had rejected new policies to lower emissions because of their cost. He cites a survey, also from the US, where he says “most respondents were unwilling to spend even $US24 a year”. The survey is from September 2019 – right in the middle of the presidency of Donald Trump, who thought climate change was a hoax and pulled out of the Paris climate agreement because he said it was costing Americans too much. Yet the same survey also found 60% of people would support raising taxes on companies that burned fossil fuels “even if it may lead to increased electricity and transport prices”. Lomborg wrote that people in Switzerland had “said no to a new carbon tax” without outlining that the country already has a price on greenhouse gas emissions of $180 a tonne. He was referring to a referendum in June where Swiss voters narrowly rejected raising the cost to $320 a tonne, by a margin of 51.6% to 48.4%. In emerging economies, Lomborg said, leaders saw demands to reach net zero by 2050 as “unjust because it stopped poor countries from developing their economies”. Lomborg then quoted the president of Uganda, Yoweri Museveni, from an article he wrote in the Wall Street Journal, saying African nations should be allowed to move more slowly away from fossil fuels, without mandates on solar and wind power. He quoted Museveni as saying: “Africans have a right to use reliable, cheap energy.” But the full stop came too early. What Museveni actually said was: “Africans have a right to use reliable, cheap energy and doing so doesn’t prevent the development of the continent’s renewables.” Not a net zero plan In the words of Angus Taylor, Australia’s emissions reduction minister, this week: “The Government’s Long-Term Emissions Reduction Plan outlines how Australia will harness low emissions technologies to meet its 2050 net zero goal.” The Morrison government keeps saying this. But its own report on the modelling into its “technology not taxes” plan to get to net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 shows it won’t get Australia to net zero. According to that report, the technology plan will leave the government about 226m tonnes short of net zero. That’s almost half Australia’s current annual footprint. To make up for that huge shortfall, the government’s modelling report says Australia will buy 94 megatonnes from international offsets, save an unlikely 38Mt from controversial negative-emissions technology not mentioned in its plan, and then reach into the unknown to find another 94Mt from other future technological breakthroughs. So the government’s plan outlines how it will get a little over halfway to net zero. Emissions up Taylor made his remarks as the government released its latest quarterly statement on greenhouse gas emissions. He talked of a “continuing decline” in emissions, even though over the last quarter, emissions went up slightly. Over a 12-month period to June, emissions were down by 10.8Mt. But thanks only to a glaring error that found its way on to page one of the Australian on Tuesday, Australia’s emissions were “almost 500m tonnes lower in the year to June compared with the previous year”. If only getting to net zero were that easy.The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack recommended on Wednesday the criminal prosecution of the former Trump justice department official Jeffrey Clark, over his refusal to comply with a subpoena in the inquiry into the 6 January insurrection. The select committee approved the contempt of Congress report unanimously. The resolution now heads to the full House of Representatives, which could refer Clark for prosecution in a vote that could come as soon as next week. Bennie Thompson, the chairman of the select committee, said at the vote to report Clark in contempt that the panel was seeking his criminal prosecution to demonstrate their resolve in enforcing subpoenas, and to warn other Trump aides about the penalties for non-compliance. “The select committee has no desire to be placed in this situation but Mr Clark has left us no other choice. He chose this path. He knew what consequences he might face if he did so. This committee and this House must insist on accountability,” Thompson said. But the select committee gave Clark one final opportunity to escape a referral to the justice department for prosecution by appearing at a new deposition on Saturday, after his attorney said in an 11th-hour letter that Clark now intended to claim the fifth amendment. “The committee would certainly consider that we will not finalize his contempt process if Mr Clark genuinely cures his failure to comply with the subpoena this Saturday,” the vice-chair of the select committee, Liz Cheney, said at the vote. The reprieve for Clark means that the select committee may ultimately take no action against him, even if he claims the fifth amendment – his right to protect himself against self-incrimination – for almost every question put before him at the deposition on Saturday. “The fifth amendment is part of the constitution. Our committee is here to defend the constitution against a violent assault,” said the select committee member Jamie Raskin. “So we’re not going to begrudge anyone an honest invocation of the fifth amendment.” “If he thinks that his communications with Trump or anyone else reveal criminal activity, and he has a reasonable fear that that can be used against him, then he’s got an opportunity to exercise the fifth amendment,” Raskin said. That could mean House investigators learn nothing more about Clark’s role in Trump’s scheme. But if Clark testifies under immunity, he would then have to respond truthfully to all questions asked by the select committee. Raskin told reporters after the vote that the contempt report would next go to the House rules committee, which would prepare it for a full House vote, which remains on the table should Clark not cooperate to a satisfactory degree at his new deposition. The select committee’s recommendation could bring grave consequences for Clark: if the report is passed by the House, the justice department is required to take the matter before a federal grand jury, which last month indicted the former Trump adviser Steve Bannon over his subpoena defiance. A successful contempt prosecution could result in up to a year in federal prison, $100,000 in fines, or both – although the misdemeanor offense may not ultimately lead to his cooperation, and pursuing the charge could still take years. The select committee subpoenaed Clark last month as it sought to uncover the extent of his role in Donald Trump’s scheme to subvert the results of the 2020 election and stop the certification of Joe Biden’s election win on 6 January. Thompson said at the time that the subpoena, which followed a Senate judiciary committee report detailing Clark’s efforts to abuse the justice department for Trump, also sought to identify who else in the Trump administration had been involved in the scheme. But after Trump issued a directive to former aides to refuse to cooperate with the investigation, even though Clark agreed to appear before investigative counsel at a deposition, he declined to answer questions broadly citing attorney-client and executive privileges. The select committee on Tuesday rejected those arguments, saying Clark had no basis to refuse his subpoena on grounds of privilege because Trump had never formally asserted the protections – but also because Clark tried to use executive privilege for non-privileged material. “Mr Clark refused to answer questions regarding whether he used his personal phone or email for official business, when he met a specific member of Congress, and what statements he made to media,” the contempt report said, “none of which involve presidential communication.” The contempt report added that even if the select committee had accepted his executive privilege claim, the law made clear that even senior White House officials advising sitting presidents don’t have the kind of immunity from congressional inquiries being claimed by Clark. The select committee also objected to the argument by Clark’s counsel that he could not respond to the panel’s questions until the courts resolved whether Trump could use executive privilege to block the National Archives from turning over White House documents. “This is not a valid objection to a subpoena, and the select committee is not aware of any legal authority that supports this position,” the report said. “The issues raised in the National Archives litigation are wholly separate and distinct from those raised by Mr Clark.” Ahead of the select committee’s vote to recommend prosecution, Clark’s attorney, Harry MacDougal, disagreed and told Thompson in a letter that Clark could not testify until the National Archives case was decided. “He is duty-bound not to provide testimony to your committee covering information protected by the former president’s assertion of executive privilege,” MacDougalsaid of Clark in the letter. “Mr Clark cannot answer deposition questions at this time.” The Senate report found Clark had played a leading role in efforts to overturn the results of the 2020 election, leveraging his role at the justice department to do Trump’s bidding and pressure the then acting attorney general, Jeff Rosen, to avow debunked claims of fraud. It detailed, for instance, a 2 January confrontation during which Clark demanded that Rosen send Georgia election officials a letter that falsely claimed the justice department had identified fraud – and threatened to push Trump to fire him if he refused. The move to recommend the criminal prosecution of Clark for contempt marks the second such confrontation, after the select committee last month voted unanimously to hold Bannon in contempt of Congress for also ignoring his subpoena in its entirety. Bannon also cited Trump’s directive, first reported by the Guardian, for former aides and advisers to defy subpoenas and refrain from turning over documents, in his refusal to cooperate with the select committee’s investigation. Bannon was indicted on two counts of contempt of Congress by a federal grand jury earlier in November. He has pleaded not guilty and vowed to “go on the offense” against Biden and the select committee.In mid-October Dr Clement Malau, a Harvard-educated public health specialist and former secretary of the Papua New Guinea health department, was alarmed to discover he had gone viral. Only he hadn’t. Someone had posted a 20-minute audio clip as a “speech from Dr Clement Malau regarding the vaccine”, the orator sliding between English and Tok Pisin – PNG Pidgin – to deliver an eloquent, tub-thumping rant against Covid-19. By the time Malau was alerted, the clip was super-spreading across Facebook and WhatsApp groups, propelled by high-profile PNG figures. It’s still there, feeding into anti-Covid and anti-vaccine zealotry. Access to social media remains relatively low in PNG – Pacific communications expert Dr Amanda Watson says there are only around 600,000 smartphones in circulation in a population of nearly 9 million, and most households aren’t online. But the online maelstrom is quickly broadcast into communities via the “coconut wireless”, or word of mouth. It fuels the distrust underwriting the nation’s disastrously low vaccination rate, with less than 4% of the adult population fully vaccinated despite the availability of jabs in all provinces. Meanwhile, a third wave of the pandemic overwhelms hospitals and overflows morgues. Malau tracked his impersonator, forwarding details to authorities. “And they have done nothing.” So he’s using Facebook to try to counteract the lies “all by myself”. He has acquired nearly 5,000 followers, many desperate for reliable information which they will, in turn, share with their wantoks (communities). With respect, empathy and lots of “God Bless PNG!”, he goes toe-to-toe with the angry and the fearful. Malau understands the landscape and the stakes all too well. He was director of PNG’s National Aids Council in the 1990s when many of his compatriots didn’t believe in HIV. His team had to devise clear, simple messaging that would resonate across a diverse nation of 800 languages and low literacy. While he encourages Covid-19 vaccination, and posed for cameras in Port Moresby when he got his first jab in May, Malau argues that jabs alone won’t cut it in PNG. “If we do not understand our own setting, we will be bulldozed down the track of just vaccine alone.” ‘Not a rational issue’ Echoing other medical and social science specialists who know PNG, Malau sees crippling failures in the messaging and strategy of the nation’s pandemic response. Confusion and distrust from the earliest days spiralled out of Australia’s shifts on AstraZeneca, which Papua New Guineans were told they must take even as younger Australians were told it wasn’t safe. The continuing failure to tailor pandemic campaigns to local conditions risked “a disaster if we don’t manage it properly”. Some say it’s already disastrous. The obstetrician Prof Glen Mola has spent 50 years in PNG trying to claw back staggeringly high maternal mortality rates, only to see them blow out five-fold at Port Moresby general hospital as the virus has struck pregnant women. The first casualty was just 18 years old, the latest 27. “I’ve never had to watch people die because they are just too exhausted to take the next breath.” PNG’s official pandemic death toll is 546, but a lack of data and testing means the true casualties are unclear. At Port Moresby hospital there were 40 or 50 Covid deaths a day in early November, dropping lately to around 10, but Mola wonders if people are not presenting “because the perception might be that if you go, you die”. Even as families mourn mounting casualties in their Facebook posts, “with all the vaccine phobia and people who have provoked this fear of vaccination … it’s getting worse”, Mola says. At home in the evenings, he hears anti-vaccine proselytisers spread the word across the surrounding settlements on loudspeakers. “The fear of this vaccine is real,” says Dr Fiona Hukula, a Port Moresby-based anthropologist with the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat. In Madang, on the other side of the country, the Divine Word University president, anthropologist and Catholic priest Dr Philip Gibbs has had countless conversations with staff and students trying to persuade them to get jabbed. “It’s an emotional issue, not a rational issue,” he says. “I got the impression that students here are more afraid of the vaccine than they are of catching the virus.” In the absence of clear, strategic information, dangerous rumours ignite. As cases surged and the highlands town of Goroka suffered a spike in deaths in October, high-profile locals were among those who lined up for their first jabs. But before immunity could kick in, several got Covid and died, Mola says. “And so then the deaths are blamed on the vaccine.” Social media has supercharged fears, but Hukula argues that it has been made worse by the absence of good, locally attuned information. “From the very beginning of the pandemic … we didn’t have a clear communications strategy.” The importance of the familiar Back in April 2020, as PNG recorded its second confirmed case of coronavirus, Hukula, Gibbs and their Australian colleague Dr Miranda Forsyth co-wrote an appeal to national and international health authorities to ensure that they recognised local contexts – social and cultural as well as practical considerations like access to soap and water and the feasibility of social distancing – in crafting pandemic messaging for the people of PNG. They warned: “The government and society at large needs to act fast to prevent the spread of fear that is a catalyst for violence and social unrest.” In PNG, “education/messaging about causes of sickness and death based on science alone are not sufficient to quell doubts about the root cause of harm and why it occurs and impacts some people and not others”. They also insisted that all information be translated not only into widely spoken Tok Pisin and Motu, but where possible into local vernacular. But 18 months on, other than a multilingual pamphlet written by Mola, which he’s lobbying authorities to circulate, there’s little evidence that has happened. “They’ve hardly put out any messages in Tok Pisin,” says Paul Barker, the director of the PNG thinktank the Institute of National Affairs. “They’ve got an army of Australian high-powered consultants around the Covid centre [in Port Moresby], but they’re not knowing how to communicate.” Other key planks of the response are similarly far short of the mark. Centralised vaccine hubs where people wait many hours “are not practical for people – for elderly, for mums with babies, the disabled”, Hukula says. Fearful people want the reassurance of familiar health workers from their local clinics. “They should have gone out to the markets, to explain to people clearly that this is a vaccine that’s going to help.” The Guardian sought comment from the department of health but received no response. Conspiracy theories and religion The lessons of local responses to epidemics of HIV, tuberculosis and, in 2018, the colossal operation to extinguish a potentially devastating polio outbreak – blamed on the breakdown of the health system and eroding childhood vaccination rates – are grounded in awareness campaigns enlisting trusted figures and targeting community leaders, in sending health workers and specialists deep into urban and rural communities to deliver programs. Hukula and her colleagues also drew insight and warnings from their years investigating attacks against individuals accused of sorcery and witchcraft, which have risen in some parts of PNG. There’s an enduring belief that bad magic, rather than disease or misadventure, is to blame for an untimely death. This has become entwined with Christian evangelical and Pentecostal beliefs. It was inevitable that coronavirus would be caught in that web. “In a society where we have those very firm beliefs, that misfortune can happen because of the supernatural, this just feeds really well into this whole [religious] narrative,” Hukula says, referring to widespread conspiracies that the vaccine causes infertility and death. Fear and faith dominate PNG Facebook discussions around Covid-19, according to a recent report by ABC International Development, analysing more than 100,000 posts and comments logged on popular public news pages in the six months to 30 September. Lately the conversation is preoccupied with false claims of long-term, debilitating side-effects from the jabs. “That fear is driving the vaccine hesitancy in a big way,” says research leader Vipul Khosla. In terms of faith, a strong thread of posts reflects what Barker hears from colleagues in his office who say they don’t need the vaccine because “Jesus Christ is my saviour”. But he and other experts caution that the influence of extremist social media posts can easily be exaggerated. An analysis of Covid commentary on one popular, public Western Province page on Facebook by two University of Melbourne anthropologists with decades of experience in PNG, Dr Monica Minnegal and Dr Peter Dwyer, found people were engaging with the material critically and selectively. “Most participants did not take either religious tropes or conspiracy theories as primary sources of comfort or explanation.” The forum had played a positive role in the health emergency, they said, arguing that better, cheaper internet access for people in remote regions would enhance the spread of crucial information and engagement with health programs. Lately the researchers have become concerned by the tenor of responses to “no jab, no job” policies and perceived mandates for vaccinations. Dwyer says: “They feel their autonomy is being assaulted, and they are much more concerned by that [than] they are by vaccination.” This is cultural, not a question of “silly beliefs”, says Minnegal. “It’s too easy to say social media is spreading misinformation. This is about a social movement.” The argument that social media has untapped useful potential is echoed by Watson, who says even townspeople with internet access struggle to find credible information. Meanwhile, they’re relied on to convey news to family and friends. “The vast majority of people live in rural villages where they don’t receive daily newspapers. In many places they don’t even have radio signal.” One theme in the ABC analysis is “a lot of discussion on the role churches should play in advocating for vaccine uptake”, says Dr Prashanth Pillay, who co-wrote the report. People are questioning whether they should be involved in the Covid discussion at all. “There’s the idea that the church is the place for biblical teachings, and it should not veer from that.” This plays out as the mainstream churches dial up their vaccine advocacy, with the Catholic cardinal Sir John Ribat declaring he put his trust in God and got vaccinated. For some this was comforting, says Gibbs, but others “say that vaccines are a sort of weakness, because it means that you don’t trust that God is going to protect you”. Martyn Namarong, a political activist and writer, has just spent weeks at the bedside of his mother in Port Moresby general hospital, where she’s being treated for Covid-19. The Christian apocalyptic views swirling around Covid are nothing new, Namarong says. Vaccine advocates need to tone down the noise rather than shout louder. “When it comes to people’s religious views, you cannot change them. It’s like telling PNG Christians that Buddhism might be a good idea – it’s not going to happen.” Covid campaigners “need to try to actually engage more … see us as human beings and friends as opposed to opponents on a particular issue”. And they must recognise the daily struggles of life in PNG. “Most people live a very cyclical existence. The view of time is you just wake up in the morning, you go to sleep, and the next day you wake up, everything’s new again. It’s about survival.” Like Malau, Namarong urges more regard for variables people can control – good diet, air quality. “So you’re not seen as just ‘vaccine, vaccine’. You are seen to address a public health issue as opposed to pushing out the vaccine agenda … Let’s co-opt some of the message from the people who have reservations.” Namarong says his mother is recovering. But describing what he’s observing in the hospital, and in the capital, he says: “It’s scary. That’s the word I would use. We can see the system is trying to adjust to cope, but it is just at the edge … one spike and everything collapses.”Reams of black wiring suspended between poles, haphazardly bundled into nest-like knots, and often hanging at head height are a common sight in Bangkok, which has become almost synonymous with the city. “If you walk around my area, there are many wire bundles hanging down to human height or sitting on the ground along the pedestrian walkway,” says Kullapa Sakkaravech, a language teacher from Bangkok. She lives in what is considered “the new central business district” of Bangkok yet says “clouds of wire bundles” still hang in front of her apartment. “Apart from being unappealing, this can potentially be dangerous for kids and especially hazardous during flood or raining season.” However, following a tweet by actor Russell Crowe, that could be about to change. In a post captioned “Bangkok dreaming”, Crowe, who was in Thailand throughout September and October filming a Vietnam war movie, The Greatest Beer Run Ever, shared a photo of the city’s much-reviled communication and electrical wires. The tweet spurred others to share similar images, along with questions as to why they were in such a state. Now, Thailand’s prime minister Prayuth Chan-o-cha has called for electrical and communications cables to be better organised and put underground. Many wires may no longer be needed but cannot be removed because they’re so entangled, says Dr Napong Rugkhapan, assistant professor in urban planning at Thammasat University in Bangkok. “When an internet service provider wants to add in a new line for a new condominium being constructed, they add to that because it’s not their responsibility to take [any] out.” However, given the numerous previous calls for the webs of wires to be moved underground, some are sceptical as to whether this latest push – even one inspired by a Hollywood actor – will change anything. The fact that no one has died as a result of the wires means it is not at the top of the agenda, Rugkhapan says. Yet people stumble over fallen cables daily, he added. Sakkaravech says: “There was a time when we had heavy rain, a tree fell and pulled down a bundled wire causing an electricity outage to residents.” Thus far, a lack of coordination between the various agencies and limited political will has been to blame for the slow progress, Rugkhapan says. Celebrity involvement in the issue can be traced back to 2016, when Microsoft co-founder-turned-philanthropist Bill Gates commented on Thailand’s “tangled wires” on Facebook. The post was deleted after Gates wrongly identified the wires as power lines rather than communication wires. Historically, electrical authorities have blamed the telecommunications industry for the increasing number of lines and messy wires. Following Gates’ post, the Provincial Electricity Authority reportedly produced a graphic making the distinction. In response to Crowe’s picture, Bangkok’s Metropolitan Electricity Authority released a statement clarifying that the wires depicted were not power lines but communications lines. Despite the confusion, shortly after Gates’ comment, authorities committed to putting 127 kilometres of both power and communication cables underground. Prayuth urged the agencies to speed up the first phase which focused on 39 roads in and around the capital. In 2019, Bangkok’s governor, Aswin Kwanmuang, launched another initiative, committing the Bangkok Metropolitan Administration to moving communications lines underground within two years. Progress has been made in certain areas, including on major thoroughfares such as Silom and Sukhumvit, but navigating hazardous wiring is still a part of daily life in much of the city. Trees are often casualties too, aggressively pruned to make way for the wires, says Oraya Sutabutr, co-founder of Bangkok-based environmental advocacy group Big Trees Project. For example, three years ago when the sky train was being extended around Kasetsart University, instead of moving the utility lines to make way for the construction, workers instead opted to cut all the branches off the trees to make space, causing public upset, Sutabutr says. “Without public outcry over this kind of situation, then the authorities will think what they’re doing is OK,” she says. Yet Crowe’s tweet, and his status as Thailand’s “accidental ambassador” could help to accelerate the mission to move the wires out of sight. Kanchanaphan Vanichkul, a business owner in Bangkok, says ultimately Crowe’s intervention will speed up completion of the project. “I have to thank him very much for making many people around the world pay more attention to our country.”The Morrison government insists it is negotiating with the states about “future uses” for its troubled Covidsafe app despite it not being used during the outbreaks that prompted lockdowns in Victoria, New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory. The government is also refusing to release how many Australians continue to use the app, with one tech expert accusing the government of trying to avoid disclosing embarrassing data rather than admit it had failed to achieve its purpose. Since vaccination rates reached more than 90% of the eligible population in most states, contact tracing is slowly being scaled back, with health authorities limiting the number of people contacted and asked to test and isolate. Even when contact tracing played a critical role in reducing the number of cases, the app was of little assistance. Almost none of the contacts were identified through the federal government’s CovidSafe contact tracing app despite well over 7 million people in Australia downloading it last year and the prime minister, Scott Morrison, declaring it the ticket out of lockdown. Since launching in April last year, just 17 “close contacts” in NSW were found directly through the app that were not otherwise identified through manual contact tracing methods. Guardian Australia has been engaged in a year-long freedom of information battle with the Digital Transformation Agency to reveal how many people continued to use the app after installing it. This month the agency said releasing the information would hurt negotiations with the states over the app’s future uses. “The Commonwealth is engaged in ongoing consultations and discussions with the states and territories on a framework around the use of Covidsafe data and data derived from Covidsafe data as a key tool for contact tracing,” DTA’s chief technology officer, Anthony Warnock, told the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner in a letter provided to Guardian Australia. When asked about these discussions, both NSW and Victoria said the app had not been used at all in 2021. “To date, it has not been necessary to use the Covidsafe app with any case clusters in 2021,” a NSW Health spokesperson said. “NSW Health’s contact tracing team has access to a variety of information to contain the spread of Covid-19 and keep the community safe.” The ACT also said the app had never been used in the capital and, as of September, Queensland said it had used the app twice, with one contact identified but no positive cases identified. It’s also unclear what future uses the federal government is considering. Electronic Frontiers Australia’s chair, Justin Warren, who has been involved in complex FOI battles with the government, suggested the only reason the the release of the information would be damaging was if it showed far fewer people continued to use the app. “The DTA appears to be trying to argue that we can’t learn the truth about just how big a lemon the Covidsafe app is because then people might know it’s a lemon and act accordingly,” he said. “It’s clear to me that they wouldn’t try to make this argument if the app was useful.” The app costs around $75,000 a month to run, and a spokesperson for the federal health department said there were “no plans” to shut it down until the health minister determined it was no longer required. Experts in the tech community last year called for the app to be modified using the Apple-Google exposure notification framework, which would work similarly to the UK’s NHS app and alert people when they had been in contact with a confirmed Covid-19 case. A study published in Nature in May about how effective the NHS app in England and Wales had been between September and December last year found that for every positive case who agreed to alert their contacts, one case was averted. The government has long argued against switching to an NHS-style version of the app, arguing that it left it up to users to contact the health department and get tested and isolate, rather than giving contact tracers a list of those exposed to follow up. But a ministerial brief prepared by the DTA in May 2020, released this week on the transparency website Right to Know, reveals that the government believed it would require massive changes to the app and privacy laws to accommodate the change. “The app would need to be significantly redesigned and rebuilt,” the agency said. “The ENF cannot simply be embedded into the current app. The health portal would also need to be redesigned and rebuilt.” The DTA warned that a new privacy assessment would need to be undertaken, legislation might need to be amended, all current users would need to download and re-register through the app, and contact data could not be transferred. The briefing also noted that the alerts people received through the app “may cause alarm” if contact tracers were not involved in the process. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning But the agency said a change to the Apple/Google version would improve connectivity between devices and might encourage people who had hesitated to download the original app. “Certain users who have avoided the app may perceive that the ENF provides stronger privacy protections through this largely decentralised non-government-controlled model.” Victoria now automatically alerts people who were at high-risk venues through the Service Victoria app, and advises them to test and isolate, but does not do any further contact tracing except when someone tests positive. NSW is planning to ditch QR code check-ins from all but high-risk venues from 15 December, or when the state reaches 95% of the eligible population having two doses of the vaccine.The federal education minister, Alan Tudge, will stand aside while an investigation into allegations made by his former staffer is carried out. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, on Thursday announced an investigation – to be carried out by the former bureaucrat Vivienne Thom – into the allegations Rachelle Miller made regarding her 2017 relationship with Tudge. “These issues are obviously deeply concerning and I know deeply distressing – for Ms Miller, minister Tudge and the families affected by these events,” Morrison said in parliament. “I have discussed Ms Miller’s statement with Mr Tudge, who refuted the allegations made. Given the seriousness of the claims made by Ms Miller, it’s important these matters be resolved fairly and expeditiously. “To this end, the minister has agreed to my request to stand aside while these issues are addressed by my department, through an independent and fair process.” The prime minister said the process would “enable my department to provide me with any further advice regarding any implications for the ministerial standards”. “But I wish to stress that this action in no way seeks to draw a conclusion on these matters,” he said. Morrison said Tudge had “welcomed” the process and looked forward to participating. He asked his chief of staff to tell Miller of the investigation. Miller, who worked as Tudge’s press secretary while he was human services minister in the Turnbull government, first admitted to an extramarital affair with her boss in the November 2020 Four Corners episode Inside the Canberra Bubble. On Thursday, just days after the release of the Jenkins review into parliamentary culture, Miller revealed her relationship with Tudge was “more complicated”, saying it was defined by a power imbalance. She alleged it was at times “abusive”. Tudge has denied the allegations. Tudge said “given the immense personal impact” of the allegations he would take a period of leave between now and Christmas. But he said he “completely and utterly rejected” the accusations. “Both of us have acknowledged publicly we had a consensual affair in 2017,” he said in a statement. “This is something that I regret deeply. We were both married at the time and it was wrong. It contributed to the end of my marriage. “Ms Miller and I worked closely together in 2017. It involved constant travel, long hours and often we were under pressure. We became attracted to each other and on a small number of occasions that attraction was acted upon. It should not have happened.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Tudge, in a statement, said he had not seen Miller since 2017. “I have accepted responsibility for a consensual affair that should not have happened. But Ms Miller’s allegations are wrong, did not happen and are contradicted by her own written words to me,” he said on Thursday. “I regret having to say these things. I do not wish Ms Miller ill but I have to defend myself in light of these allegations, which I reject. “The contradictory written evidence will be referred to a full, independent review. I welcome such a process and will make available both myself and all materials, and cooperate in every way. “I would note that a previous set of claims were also considered and rejected through an independent investigation.” Miller called on Australia’s leaders to commit to implementing all of the recommendations contained in the Jenkins report as soon as possible. “The Liberal party doesn’t have a women problem,” she said. “It has a men problem. Labor have stayed quiet because they have just as many skeletons. The two major parties will work together when they’re protecting each other. “I’m not here because I want to be but because speaking through the media is the only way this government will listen. All of us who have survived awful experiences in this workplace tried to reach out and seek change many, many times before we went to the media. This is our last resort. “The Jenkins review showed the perpetrators are mostly male parliamentarians with immense power over their junior victims. As the PM reminded us all on Tuesday, they know they can only be held accountable by the Australian people at the ballot box.” In a press conference in Canberra on Thursday, Miller said “it took a long time to face the truth about what happened but the memories are clearly etched in my brain”. “This relationship was defined by significant power imbalance. It was an emotionally and on one occasion physically abusive relationship,” she said. Miller said she was “fully aware that the text messaging between the minister and I over many years can at times look like I was a willing participant”, adding “he may use that” against her. But she said she could only tell her truth. Miller alleged she had been “kicked” out of bed, naked, during a work trip with the minister one morning after a drinking session, when her phone began ringing at 4am with media calls. “I felt someone kicking me on the side of my hip and leg as I tried to sit up in bed,” she said. “It was the minister. He was furious, telling me to get the fuck out of his bed. I quickly told the producer I’d call her back. Then I realised I was completely naked. He continued to kick me until I fell off the side of the bed and ended up on the floor. “I searched around in the dark for my clothes. He was yelling at me that my phone had woken him up. He needed to get some more sleep. He told me to get the fuck out of his room and make sure that no one saw me.” Miller said she did her job and prepared the minister for his interviews. She said it was only later “when I had a moment to think” that she “could not remember a single thing from the night before”. “I don’t remember how we ended up in the room, I don’t remember leaving the bar, I don’t remember if we had sex, I don’t remember if we used protection. I still don’t. And I was too afraid to ask if he remembered.” She has previously alleged she was humiliated and belittled over her work and then believes she was later “blacklisted” from further jobs. She alleged she was prevented from carrying out her duties, and later made redundant, once rumours of her previous relationship with Tudge began circulating. On Thursday, Miller said she felt compelled to come forward once more in support of the women who had spoken to the sex discrimination commissioner, Kate Jenkins, for her report. “All I ever wanted was to the government to listen and to acknowledge our experiences in this building,” she said. Miller said when she first spoke of her relationship with Tudge, she “wanted to spark a debate, but I was too unwell to continue to publicly advocate”. She said she had been inspired by women like Brittany Higgins, Chelsey Potter and Catherine Marriott in coming forward once again. “I’m fully aware that a year ago I said that my relationship with minister Alan Tudge was a consensual relationship but it’s much more complicated than that,” she said. “I was so ashamed, so humiliated, so scared. I was exhausted. I told a small part of the story I was able to manage. I was very scared. The prime minister said it didn’t happen on his watch. Still not his problem.” The prime minister declined to investigate Miller’s claims at the time, saying they occurred under Turnbull’s government, and no issue had been raised with him during his tenure as prime minister. “These things happen in Australia,” Morrison said in November 2020. “People do things and they regret them, they do damage to their lives and the lives of many others, and I know there would be deep regrets about that.” Tudge admitted to the relationship in a brief statement released following the Four Corners broadcast. He also published a further statement on Facebook titled “Mistakes, regret and forgiveness”, saying his mistake was having an affair with a married woman with children. Miller said she had nowhere to turn at work when she was at her lowest and said she felt under siege. “There were times when he was kind,” she said. “We had great conversations. We did a lot of work together that was really, really good.” But she said she was fearful about people finding out. “I was completely under his control. He war-gamed lines with me, telling me to stay silent, that we’re in this together, people were trying to destroy us, his career, my career, creating a bubble of isolation around me that took me away from all my family and friends.”Australian charities have warned “fundamentally unfair” laws rushed through parliament will muzzle them and silence dissent during elections. The government, with Labor’s support, passed amendments to electoral laws on Wednesday that will force charities to declare their donors with retrospective effect. The changes will require charities that participate in Australian democracy to register as a “significant third party” and declare their donors if their electoral expenditure rises above a threshold of $250,000. That is a halving of the current $500,000 threshold. The changes are also being applied retrospectively, forcing charities to disclose donations associated with past activities. The sector fears the changes will dissuade charities from advocating on political issues during election campaigns. Charities have warned the concept of “electoral expenditure” is vague and broad, and fear it will apply to their advocacy on political issues, rather than activities related to voting and elections. The amendments were passed on Wednesday after Labor negotiated changes, including raising the disclosure threshold from the proposed $100,000 to $250,000 and describing organisations captured by the rules as “significant third parties” instead of political campaigners. The latter change was hoped to avoid compromising an organisation’s charity status, which can be affected if they engage in political advocacy. But Hands off Our Charities, a major alliance of charities, says the amendments do not go far enough. The group’s coordinator, Ray Yoshida, said Labor had not consulted with the sector before agreeing to pass the bill. “Overall we are disappointed in the outcome,” he told the Guardian. “It was a really unnecessary attack from the Morrison government on the charity sector and the capacity of civil society voices and community voices to engage in important political debates during election periods.” Yoshida said the changes would also impose a significant new administrative burden on already stretched charities. The Australian Conservation Foundation, which is expected to be captured by the new threshold, said the legislation “unfairly and incorrectly conflates advocacy with running for political office”. “As it reduces the expenditure threshold and applies it retrospectively, ACF and other organisations will now be assigned to this onerous category for past lawful, non-partisan activities,” chief executive Kelly O’Shanassy said. “I have not seen another piece of legislation that has the potential to so severely muffle community voices as this one.” The Australian Council of Social Service fears the changes will stifle community voices and prevent them from advocating for policy change. “Everyone across the country benefits when charities are able to advocate for systemic policy reform,” chief executive Cassandra Goldie said. “It strengthens the decisions made by the government, improves the services delivered and ensures transparency, accountability and integrity.” Labor appears to have agreed to the amended legislation after the government agreed not to introduce the highly controversial voter ID laws. The shadow assistant minister for charities, Andrew Leigh, told Guardian Australia that Labor opposed the bill but had done a deal because “it was clear that crossbench members were refusing to block the government’s attacks on our democracy”. But key crossbenchers Stirling Griff, Rex Patrick and Jacqui Lambie dispute that, citing their opposition to retrospective changes, suggesting numbers were sufficient to block the bill. Leigh said the changes would “mean that fewer small charities and not-for-profits are caught up in disclosure requirements” and Labor had also defeated “the attempt to introduce Trump-style voter identification laws”. “While the Senate amendments we’ve secured are the best achievable outcome for charities, a Labor government would revisit this framework.” The bill returned to the lower house on Thursday, but passed easily despite Greens MP Adam Bandt lambasting Labor and the Coalition for “this dodgy deal”. The Australian Democracy Network’s executive director Saffron Zomer said the process had been “rushed” and the failure to send it for inquiry was “a blow to good governance”. Zomer said the sector was in “shock” and could not believe Labor had supported the legislation. “This legislation makes significant changes to the Electoral Act and applies those changes retroactively,” Zomer said. “It’s bad law making and is fundamentally unfair. “It is beyond disappointing that our government would spend its time on stifling civic participation when it could be focused on important reforms that would really make democracy work better for all, such as political donation caps and a strong federal ICAC.” It’s not the first time the Morrison government has been accused of attempting to silence charities in recent months. The government had attempted to give the charity regulator new powers to investigate and de-register charities on the mere suspicion of minor offences committed by its members, including trespass. The sector feared that would deter charities from engaging in protest and advocacy. The Senate scuttled the changes last week.The Omicron variant has fuelled a “worrying” surge in coronavirus cases in South Africa and is rapidly becoming the dominant strain, local health officials have said, as more countries including the US detected their first cases. The United Arab Emirates and South Korea – which is already battling a worsening outbreak and record daily infections – also confirmed cases of the Omicron variant. Dr Michelle Groome of South Africa’s National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) said there had been an “exponential increase” in infections over the past two weeks, from a weekly average of around 300 new cases per day to 1,000 last week, and most recently 3,500. On Wednesday, South Africa recorded 8,561 cases. A week earlier, the daily tally was 1,275. “The degree of increase is worrying,” Groome said. The NICD said 74% of all the virus genomes it had sequenced last month had been of the new variant, which was first found in a sample taken on 8 November in Gauteng, South Africa’s most populous province. While key questions remain about how transmissible the Omicron variant is, which has been detected in at least two dozen countries around the world, experts are rushing to determine the level of protection afforded by vaccines. World Health Organization (WHO) epidemiologist Maria van Kerkhove told a briefing that data on how contagious Omicron was should be available “within days”. The NICD said early epidemiological data showed Omicron was able to evade some immunity, but exisiting vaccines should still protect against severe disease and death. BioNTech’s chief executive, Uğur Şahin, said the vaccine it makes in a partnership with Pfizer was likely to offer strong protection against severe disease from Omicron. As governments wait for a fuller picture to emerge, many continued to tighten border restrictions in the hope of stopping the virus spread. South Korea imposed more travel curbs as it detected its first five Omicron cases and fears grew about how the new variant could affect its ongoing Covid surge. Authorities halted quarantine exemptions for fully vaccinated inbound travellers for two weeks, who now require a 10-day quarantine. Daily infections in South Korea hit a record on Thursday of more than 5,200, with concern growing over the sharp rise in patients with severe symptoms. Earlier this month restrictions were eased in the country – which has fully vaccinated nearly 92% of adults – however infections have surged since and the presence of Omicron has fuelled fresh worries about pressure on the already strained hospital system. In Europe, the president of the European Union’s executive body said there was a “race against time” to stave off the new variant while scientists established how dangerous it is. The EU brought forward the start of its vaccine rollout for five-to-11-year-olds by a week, to 13 December. “Prepare for the worst, hope for the best,” Ursula von der Leyen, president of the European Commission, told a news conference. Britain and the United States have both expanded their booster programs in response to the new variant, while Australia is reviewing its schedule. Top American infectious diseases specialist Anthony Fauci stressed that fully vaccinated adults should seek a booster when eligible to give themselves the best possible protection. Still, the WHO has noted many times that the coronavirus will keep producing new variants for as long as it is allowed to circulate freely in large unvaccinated populations. “Globally, we have a toxic mix of low vaccine coverage, and very low testing – a recipe for breeding and amplifying variants,” said WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, reminding the world that the Delta variant “accounts for almost all cases”. “We need to use the tools we already have to prevent transmission and save lives from Delta. And if we do that, we will also prevent transmission and save lives from Omicron,” he said. With Reuters and Agence-France PresseWestern Australia is pitching itself to travellers as the “safest place” in the world from the Covid-19 pandemic, in a move that has frustrated expats stuck outside the state’s controlled border arrangements. Premier Mark McGowan said that WA’s position on controlling its border had been “vindicated … on health, social and economic grounds, over and over again”. He cited the emergence of the Omicron variant, which prompted the federal government to reintroduce quarantine for some international travellers, as further vindication of his closed border strategy. McGowan unveiled the $185m transition plan to reopen WA to the world at a state address on Wednesday. He said WA was now in the position to market itself internationally as the safest place from the Covid-19 pandemic. “The virtue of our careful and cautious approach, means Western Australia now has a new brand – of safety, stability and strength, and we will use that brand to market ourselves to the world,” he said. It follows the launch of a Christmas-themed local tourism campaign earlier this month, where tourism minister David Templeman rode a segway in a Christmas jumper and shook hands with a skydiving Santa as part of a push to encourage West Australians to book or buy vouchers for local tourism experiences to support the struggling industry. The premier has yet to give a date for opening the borders with other states in Australia or allowing international travel, saying that WA will be in a position to ease its border controls “in around a couple of months’ time” when the double dose vaccination rate hits 90%. That is tipped to be late January or early February. The transition plan makes allowances for borders opening up later than anticipated, but not earlier. Should an outbreak occur before the 90% target is reached, it says, WA would aim to eliminate the virus through lockdowns and other measures before opening up. At the moment, 76.2% of people aged 12 and over in the state have received two doses of a Covid vaccine. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The WA border is currently open to travellers from Queensland and Tasmania. People from South Australia and the Northern Territory are allowed to travel if they show their vaccine certificate and undergo 14 days self-quarantine, and approved people from NSW and the ACT – such as officials or those travelling on compassionate grounds – can enter the state if they are fully vaccinated and do 14-days self-quarantine. Victorians are not even allowed into WA on compassionate grounds. The state is classified as an extreme risk, meaning the only people allowed to travel are fully vaccinated MPs, diplomats, government officials or a limited list of specialists, and even they must show a negative PCR test within 72 hours of travel and undergo 14 days of hotel quarantine at their own expense. Once the 90% target is reached, the borders will only be open to vaccinated travellers who have completed a negative PCR test within 72 hours before travelling, and been tested again on arrival in the state. McGowan’s announcement of the transition plan was met by a mix of support from resident West Australians and frustration from those who are trying to return home. McGowan’s transition plan included a specific pitch to international investors. “If you’re in business, don’t you want to invest in the state that sensibly managed the pandemic and kept the economy operating?” he said. “If you’re a tourist, don’t you want to come to the safest destination, with a vaccination rate over 90% and the lowest levels of restrictions on venues and experiences? “If you’re the parent of a student, don’t you want them to study in a jurisdiction that’s safe and your child is less likely to catch a potentially deadly virus?” One rural healthcare worker told Guardian Australia they were concerned that WA was putting more effort into marketing itself to tourists and business than it was to shoring up regional hospitals against the inevitable arrival of Covid once the borders open up. The vaccine rate in regional areas, particularly in the Pilbara, is lagging behind Perth and the more densely populated and affluent south-west. Visitors are currently banned from most remote Aboriginal communities in WA due to low vaccine rates. McGowan said the government would roll out targeted vaccination campaigns to increase uptake in regional areas. A pop-up clinic will be held in Kalgoorlie this week, as well as pop-up clinics at supermarkets across Perth and regional areas.Non-Indigenous people came to my stall and glanced over my creations. Many curiously asked about my upcycled jars on the shelf with bold black letters: “I’m not busting my ring for you”, “Big noting your black hole”, “Bigges Doris”. Some laughed. Most looked even more curious. All went on their way without purchasing. When mob came, they picked up the jars and laughed out loud. Told stories around the phrases, the stories got bigger and the laughs got louder. It was my first Meeanjin Markets as a stallholder in Christmas 2019. I’d been a journalist and communications specialist all my working life, after graduating with a journalism degree in 1994. But I’d wanted to have a creative, mostly fashion business since I was a teenager. My business Flashblak is a childhood nickname given to me by Murri kids growing up in Cairns. I loved op shopping and would buy one-off pieces and add my touch of eclectic style. I dressed differently to other blackfellas. They called me “uptown Murri” and “flashblak”. I wasn’t offended. I thought it quite funny that my outfits cost $5 – probably heaps less than theirs. I just liked to, well, dress flash. I worked the May 2019 Meeanjin Markets as part of the organising team, looking after communications and media. I saw stallholders at various levels – beginner, emerging and more advanced. This is the purpose of the markets. Established in 2018 during the Commonwealth Games, they showcased 57 Indigenous businesses, with more than 10,000 visitors spending more than $60,000 on handmade Indigenous products. It was deadly to see such diversity, from T-shirts with political statements, to alcohol-free beer and beauty products, all showcasing Indigenous culture through creativity. Meeanjin Markets is really more a festival, with musicians, performers and panels. I was excited to see so much creativity, passion, humour, tenacity and community in one small space, and felt encouraged to bring my dreams to life. I had a stall for the summer markets, as well as being part of the organising team. Selling at markets is damn hard. You have to have enough stock; work out prices so that you’re not paying yourself $5 an hour (or less); have clear marketing; and be able to tell your story to potential customers hundreds of times over the two days. I learnt A LOT at that market, about my businesses and about consumers. That’s one critical element of Meeanjin Markets. I also got so much #BlakLove and encouragement from other stallholders. Blackfellas love to see each other succeed. I got so much advice, tips on selling, marketing and a new network to lean in to for guidance when I needed. Meeanjin Markets really is a family. The following year Covid hit and the Meeanjin Markets team were forced to “pivot” (how many times did we say that last year?). We went online. HUSTLE! Websites were developed in weeks. We filmed amid Covid restrictions and pulled off more than 30 hours of programming showcasing First Nations’ stallholders and musicians. Blackfellas adapt pretty damn quickly (OK, I was a little bit slower and got my website up on the second day). But I was promoting like crazy online. People interstate were hyped. A captive audience and supporters were ready to #BuyBlak. For some stallholders, markets are their only income. Others work full time in the day and design at night on messy kitchen tables, chasing their creative dreams in the hope of it one day becoming a full-time job. Nikki from Blakbird Designs was considering closing her business, fearing the impact of Covid. She works full time and creates late at night, after kids are fed, showered and put to bed. The majority of stallholders are women. This Meeanjin Markets 29 of the 35 stalls are run by First Nations women. REPRESENT! Nikki smashed it, and expanded her customer base to interstate. Other stallholders including Culture Weave pivoted (again) and held workshops online. Yes, Covid has hit small Blak businesses hard. But we are weathering the storm. Consumers are starting to understand that #BuyBlak is more than just a hashtag. It is about supporting First Nations people’s sovereignty to express our identity, our culture, our community and our connections. It is supporting First Nations people’s sovereignty to build wealth and be active participants in the economy. It is a privilege to #BuyBlak from Blak businesses knowing each purchase is upholding, protecting and promoting First Nations sovereignty. I know consumers are getting this message, because the Meeanjin Markets held in November smashed everyone’s expectations. Most stallholders like me almost sold out. Some businesses sold more in the one day than over two-day markets. We’re still going: you can #BuyBlak this Christmas, with many stallholders selling online. Our website lists all the businesses. What I’m most looking forward to is seeing those stallholders, just like me two years ago, grow and become mentors to other Blak businesses around them. There are small First Nations businesses in every community, town and city – please seek them out and support them. Not just at Christmas but all year round. • Kerry Klimm is a Kuku-yalanji and Koko Lamalama woman from far north Queensland who runs the creative agency Flashblak and is head of communications and media at Meeanjin MarketsThe competition watchdog says it will closely monitor the pork industry after approving the takeover of Australia’s biggest producer, Rivalea, by Brazilian beef behemoth JBS. JBS, which is controlled by powerful Brazilian business brothers Wesley and Joesley Batista, is buying Rivalea as part of a $700m spending spree in Australia that also includes taking over Tasmanian salmon farmer Huon. The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission investigated concerns that JBS might stop allowing other pork producers to kill pigs at Rivalea’s Diamond Valley abattoir in Melbourne. It also investigated whether allowing the takeover could mean Rivalea cut off the supply of fresh pork to companies that compete with Australia’s biggest smallgoods manufacturer, Primo, which is owned by JBS. ACCC deputy chair, Mick Keogh, said the pork industry was already very concentrated but allowing the takeover would not cause a substantial lessening of competition – the threshold required for the watchdog to knock back a merger. He said JBS had no financial incentive to stop service kills at Diamond Valley, which slaughters about 17,000 pigs a day. “The only way for that to remain profitable is to maintain that throughput or increase that throughput,” he told Guardian Australia. He said that while he could “see a scenario where it would advantage Primo, for example, if other smallgoods manufacturers couldn’t get competitive product”, about 80% of the meat used for smallgoods such as ham and salami was imported from overseas. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Most of the imported meat comes from Denmark and the United States, where pig farmers are supported by generous agricultural subsidies. “So even if JBS for example, stopped importing pork for Primo and moved to domestic pigs, other manufacturers could simply convert to imports and imports are typically substantially cheaper than domestic pigs for that purpose,” Keogh said. Issues relating to whether the Batista brothers, who have been at the centre of a storm of bribery allegations in Brazil, fall outside the ACCC’s jurisdiction and were not investigated by it. A US$362m loan that helped fund JBS’s entry into the Australian market in 2007 was part of a “sequence of reckless and/or fraudulent acts” that demonstrated “a fraudulent management of the public institution with the sole purpose of giving privileged treatment” to J&amp;F Participações, the Brazilian company through which the Batistas control JBS, Brazilian prosecutors said in a criminal complaint against Joesley Batista. The allegations never went to trial. In 2017, the brothers entered into a plea deal that saw them avoid prosecution in return for Joesley’s cooperation in the bribery investigation. The Rivalea deal requires approval from the Foreign Investment Review Board to go ahead. Firb approved JBS’s takeover of Huon in October and Huon shareholders voted overwhelmingly in favour of the sale last month. Chief executive of JBS Australia, Brent Eastwood, said the company would continue to provide service kills at Diamond Valley “and also grow the customer base”. “We have provided this assurance directly to all DVP customers in writing, to local pork groups including the Victorian Farmers Federation and to the ACCC,” he said. “JBS has a long and proud history of supporting and growing its Australian businesses – investing heavily in its local operations and domestic brands, while at the same time providing employment opportunities and supporting the regional economies in which we operate. “We will employ this same locally minded approach at Rivalea.”Angela Merkel will ceremonially bow out of office on with a military tattoo held in her honour on Thursday evening, before she is expected to formally hand over her seat of power to Olaf Scholz in the first half of next week. Featuring torch-carrying soldiers in full military regalia, precision choreography and three songs of the outgoing chancellor’s own choosing played by a marching band, the event will mark the high point of Merkel’s leaving tour after 16 years of holding office. Due to coronavirus restrictions the ceremony will be more low-key than those that honoured her predecessors Gerhard Schröder and Helmut Kohl when they left office. Broadcast live on German television from 7.20pm, the ceremony in the courtyard outside the defence ministry in Berlin will start with a short speech by the chancellor and wrap up after just over an hour, without a reception. The custom of the Großer Zapfenstreich ceremony dates back to the 16th century, but the German military’s highest honour has only been bestowed on chancellors since the departure in 1998 of Helmut Kohl, whose farewell was held in front of the Speyer Cathedral in his home state of Rhineland-Palatinate. While Schröder’s Großer Zapfenstreich was attended by 600 guests, Merkel is reported to have invited only about 200, including the 52 ministers that have served under her tenure. Ursula von der Leyen, the current president of the European Commission and a former family and defence minister under Merkel, is unlikely to attend due to a meeting with South American heads of state scheduled for the same day. As the soundtrack for her leaving ceremony, Merkel has reportedly chosen the Christian hymn Großer Gott, wir loben Dich (Holy God, we praise thy name), Hildegard Knef’s chanson Für mich soll’s rote Rosen regnen (It should rain red roses for me), Nina Hagen’s Du hast den Farbfilm vergessen (You forgot the colour film) – the latter pick a GDR pop hit of the 1970s that pays tribute to Merkel’s East German upbringing in a way she has rarely done while in office. For Merkel to formally hand over power to her successor-in-waiting Olaf Scholz next week, the incoming government’s coalition agreement will need to be approved by the three parties involved. Scholz’s Social Democratic party (SPD) will hold a party congress on Saturday, where its delegates are expected to ratify the deal under which the centre-left will return to the chancellery for the first time since 2005. Unlike in 2013 and 2018, the SPD won’t give a vote on the future power-sharing agreement to its entire membership. The liberal Free Democratic party (FDP) will hold a vote at a digital congress the day after, while the Green party’s members have until 6 December to approve or reject the agreement. While many members of the ecological party have voiced criticisms of the environmental aspects of the deal, a rejection is seen as unlikely. Once the document has been approved by all three parties, Scholz could be sworn in as Germany’s next leader as soon as Monday 6 December and no later than the end of Wednesday. On Thursday, a German chancellor will have to represent the country at the “summit for democracy” hosted by the US president, Joe Biden. Merkel will most likely hand over the chancellery on the same day as Scholz’s swearing in.Beijing has urged US business groups with interests in China to “speak out” and lobby the US government in its defence, warning that as bilateral relations deteriorate they cannot make money “in silence”. The vice-foreign minister Xie Feng, in charge of managing China’s relationship with the US, also urged against political boycotts of the upcoming Beijing Winter Olympics, saying it harms the interests of athletes and was “unpopular”. Key business groups including the American Chamber of Commerce in Shanghai and the US-China Business Council, met Xie at a virtual forum on Tuesday, according to a transcript of his address. In his address, published by the ministry of foreign affairs, Xie urged the US business representatives to “speak up and speak out, and push the US government to pursue a rational and pragmatic policy towards China, stop conducting wars in trade, industry and technology, and stop creating … ideological and geopolitical confrontations and conflicts”. The meeting’s warning added to letters sent by China’s embassy in Washington directly to US businesses last month, making similar threats and urging them to lobby against US bills that would affect Chinese interests. Xie praised the recent meeting between the US president, Joe Biden, and China’s leader, Xi Jinping, in seeking to restore the relationship, and said that when bilateral relations were good, economic and trade cooperation was smoother. “It’s good to enjoy the shade under the big tree,” he said. “Conversely, if the relations between the two countries deteriorate, the business community cannot ‘make a fortune in silence’. “We hope that our friends in the business community will clearly oppose the politicisation of economic and trade issues and the abuse of the concept of national security, push the Biden administration to lift the tariffs imposed on China, stop the suppression and sanctions against Chinese enterprises and provide a level playing field for enterprises of both countries.” The US is among several countries in recent years to issue sanctions against the Chinese government, officials and entities in response to human rights abuses against Uyghurs in Xinjiang and other minorities, the crackdown on Hong Kong and its growing regional aggression. Beijing has rejected claims it is abusing human rights. Several world governments and human rights groups have declared the systematic oppression of Uyghurs in Xinjiang to be a genocide, or crimes against humanity. Beijing has also been sanctioned over its intervention in Hong Kong and crackdown in Tibet, and criticised for its aggression towards Taiwan. However, Xie told the Americans these issues were all areas where China “has no room for compromise”. The meeting came as China seeks to head off growing calls for boycotts of the February Winter Olympics. Biden has confirmed the White House is considering a diplomatic boycott of the Games over China’s human rights abuses. Xie said: “Boycotting the Olympics for political reasons harms the interests of athletes, violates the common ideals and pursuits of the international community, and is unpopular.”More than two decades after an asylum seeker boat bound for Australia sank, drowning more than 350 people, a man has been committed to stand trial in Brisbane over his alleged part in the people-smuggling operation that put them on board. Iraqi national Maythem Kamil Radhi is accused of being part of a syndicate that put 421 people on an overcrowded and dilapidated fishing vessel, later known as Suspected Illegal Entry Vessel X (Siev X), in October 2001. The boat, which left from Bandar Lampung in south Sumatra, Indonesia, capsized and sank about 70km south of Java – 353 people, 146 of them children, drowned. While about 120 people survived the initial sinking, only 44 were ultimately rescued by a fishing boat, after spending more than 20 hours in the sea. A 45th survivor was rescued another 12 hours later by another boat. Radhi, now aged 45, has not been charged over the deaths, but has been committed in the Brisbane magistrates court to stand trial on one charge of bringing groups of non-citizens into Australia. The case against Radhi argues he played a “facilitation” role before the ill-fated voyage left Indonesia, commonwealth prosecutor Daniel Caruana said during the committal hearing. Witnesses report he was present when money was negotiated, but they “more consistently” remembered him as an organiser, Caruana told the court. The court heard Radhi organised logistics, such as buses taking asylum seekers between accommodation and beaches. Fawzi Al Majid, who met the Siev X organisers but did not ultimately board the boat after being warned not too, said hundreds of people were taken by bus to a hotel in Sumatra where they spent four days waiting for the boat. Al Majid said he paid $1,000 to Radhi and another man to take part in the operation. But after the boat sank some money was paid back to him by a third man. “They assumed if they give us the money we won’t talk … to the police,” Al Majid, testifying by video link, said through an interpreter. “Many people died from that accident and they want to shut the people’s mouth with this money.” The committal hearing was told some of those who had paid to be smuggled refused to board, fearing the boat would never make the journey. Others got off the boat during the voyage, choosing to disembark on the Krakatau islands between Sumatra and Java, out of concern the boat would sink. But others urged the captain to continue, threatening and hitting him, even attempting to bribe him to keep going. Raad Zubari, who was on the boat until its water pump broke and a smaller boat took him and others to shore, told the hearing the captain stopped the dilapidated fishing vessel several times before it ultimately broke down about 13 hours into the journey. But each time the captain stopped, people tried to “convince him [with] money or sometimes they threatened him and hit him,” Zubari said. “The captain didn’t want to continue the journey because he knows about the boat and the condition of the sea and the waves.” Another witness, Quasy Al Majid, said when people offered the captain money, he replied that he did not want it and the boat would not make it to Australia. Two men were convicted over the Siev X tragedy 15 years ago: Egyptian national Abu Quassey, the organiser of the venture, was jailed in Egypt, and his accomplice Khaled Doaed, arrested in Sweden and extradited, was jailed for five years in Brisbane. An arrest warrant for Radhi was issued in a Brisbane court, a decade ago, in 2011. But the process was delayed while his eligibility for extradition was argued in courts in New Zealand, where he had been living with his wife and three children since 2009. Radhi surrendered two years ago, and agreed to discontinue his appeals against extradition. He remains in custody and will stand trial in the Brisbane district court on a date yet to be set. The Siev X was one of the worst asylum seeker boat disasters in Australia’s region in history. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning It was also acutely politically contentious in Australia. The boat sank during the 2001 federal election campaign in Australia, and the issue of asylum seekers arriving by boat became a key electoral issue – tragically reinforced, all within three months, by the Tampa affair, the children overboard scandal, and the Siev X tragedy. The Siev X sank in international waters, but within Indonesia’s designated zone of search and rescue responsibility. But it also sank within Australia’s border protection surveillance area around the Australian territory of Christmas Island, a common destination for asylum seeker boats. A parliamentary inquiry into ‘A Certain Maritime Incident’ – the children overboard affair but which also examined Siev X – said: “the committee finds it extraordinary that a major human disaster could occur in the vicinity of a theatre of intensive Australian operations, and remain undetected until three days after the event, without any concern being raised within intelligence and decision making circles”. The parliamentary committee said it could not find grounds “for believing that negligence or dereliction of duty was committed in relation to Siev X”. “The committee, nevertheless, finds it disturbing that no review of the Siev X episode was conducted by any agency in the aftermath of the tragedy. No such review occurred until after the committee’s inquiry had started and public controversy developed over the Australian response to Siev X.” • Australian Associated Press contributed to this reportShortly before Steve Simon was appointed chair of the WTA Tour in 2015, he orchestrated the end of one of the great boycotts in tennis. In brokering the return of Serena Williams to Indian Wells, a tournament he served as chief executive for more than a decade from 2004, Simon did tennis a significant service. The incident demonstrates the character of a leader who has stunned the world by placing principle ahead of profit in suspending tournaments in China in 2022 due to the extreme concern the WTA holds for Peng Shuai. When returning to Indian Wells, the biggest tournament outside the majors, in 2015, Williams praised Simon’s professionalism, noting “he cares about the opinions of the players”. The boycott was sparked when the American superstar was subjected to booing she is certain had racial undertones after her triumph in the Coachella Valley in California in 2001. “He is a good listener and he has our best interests in mind,” Williams said. This is a leading trait for a man who started off in the sport industry as a tennis coach and is now considered a skilled, innovative administrator capable of deft leadership. Maria Sharapova benefited from his support, rightly or wrongly, during and after her return from a doping sanction in the infancy of his leadership of the WTA Tour. During the initial Covid-19 storm, he spoke regularly to players including Ash Barty and Simona Halep to gauge their reactions, placing an emphasis on the health of participants. American tennis journalist Peter Bodo recently described Simon, who played mixed doubles at Wimbledon in the 1980s after a collegiate career at Long Beach State University, as appearing more like an accountant than a field general. The level of leadership he has shown in dealing with an authoritarian regime on a matter of principle and player safety is very much in keeping with the latter. A social media post from Peng on 2 November, accusing a senior Chinese Communist Party leader of sexual assault, has sparked a remarkable intervention from Simon. By suspending all WTA tournaments in China and Hong Kong in 2022, the American has demonstrated again that he will listen to and put the interests and welfare of his players’ first. “None of this is acceptable, nor can it become acceptable,” he said. “If powerful people can suppress the voices of women and sweep allegations of sexual misconduct under the rug, then the basis on which the WTA was founded – equality for women – would suffer an immense setback. I will not and cannot let that happen to the WTA and its players.” The price is significant. It has the potential to cost the WTA what is estimated to be more than $1bn in revenue. It also effectively upends years of investment in building relationships in the Asia-Pacific. Simon said the WTA could return to China in 2023 if a transparent investigation into Peng’s allegations occurs and if it is completely satisfied for her safety. But it is difficult to see China viewing the extraordinary protest with anything other than anger. It is also at odds with the actions of other sporting bodies, with the candour of the WTA chief executive casting in ordinary light some fellow tennis partners and other sporting organisations. There are other risks for current members of the WTA Tour and administration to consider. What does the touring future hold for the six Chinese women currently ranked inside the world’s top 200 players, for example? It continues to be an extremely stressful time for Simon and the entirety of the WTA. Many in the tennis world stand with them. Billie Jean King said the WTA is “on the right side of history in supporting our players”, while Martina Navratilova, who defected from Czechoslovakia, called it a brave and principled stance. The ATP Tour provided an initial statement of support for the WTA and Peng in November, although it is yet to clarify its commitment to tournaments through the October swing in China. Australian John Millman, who is on the ATP Players Council, said there are “far bigger things in the world than a game of tennis” to consider, while the USTA described the leadership as courageous and what is needed to “ensure the rights of all individuals are protected”. In the WTA’s 2021 media guide, Simon was hailed for his globalisation of the WTA and its expansion into the Asia-Pacific. The challenge now will be to find new markets to thrive in. The pandemic, despite its challenges, has provided a template. The WTA Tour Finals held in Guadalajara in November had a fraction of the prize money offered by Shenzhen, which has a contract worth A$210m extending through to 2030, but proved successful given the attendances and atmosphere on site. There has also been no shortage of countries seeking temporary Covid-19 licences. The inaugural WTA event in Nur Sultan, Kazakhstan in September is an example. Existing markets including the United States, Europe and Australia have also provided more playing opportunities for women over the past two years. While it continues to fight for human rights as a core objective, the WTA will look to convert other opportunities under Simon’s stewardship.It’s the hour before sunset and the last chance to feed before the cold night ahead. There are hundreds of small birds in the field, attracted by a mix of seeding plants sown in the spring to provide winter food for finches and other seed-eaters, including yellowhammers and corn buntings. A flock of bramblings (Fringilla montifringilla) makes swirling forays, their reddish undersides rosy in the westering light. Goldfinches skip over the hedge, yellow wing stripes twinkling like handfuls of thrown gold coins. Somewhere out in the middle of the crop, a jay squawks, hidden in a tangle of stems. There’s a continual chattering babble of birdcalls, all seemingly in conversation with each other. It ceases only when a hunting sparrowhawk drops out of the trees and skims fast along the field edge, flying about a foot from the ground, tilting and angling, before flipping over the hedge to its kill. Sound returns, but the bramblings stay perched high in an ash tree, plump and round as knitted Christmas tree decorations. They are winter visitors from Scandinavia, here to escape the first snow. Some years more than a million of them migrate to the UK, congregating in towns as well as the countryside. This field is ideal for them, with its abundant forage and nearby woodland. It’s part of 30 acres planted under the countryside stewardship scheme to sustain insects and farmland birds. In summer it was a bright yellow wash of flowering sunflowers, whose brown seedheads now stand like rows of desiccated showerheads among tall, thin spears of reed millet. Nearer to the earth, the knobbled, pointy pods of fodder radish are ripening. Its long taproots will help to improve the soil structure by breaking up compacted areas and scavenging nitrogen. There are also fat ears of triticale, a cross between wheat and cereal rye, plus glaucous kale leaves, gleams of mustard and bobbles of linseed. This is the third year the land has been cultivated for conservation purposes. As the sun sets, the air snaps with frost over the darkening field. Rooks fly in to roost, settling loudly in the north hill coppice, and the sated finches fall quiet. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryIn the wake of Wednesday’s supreme court hearing in which a majority of justices appeared willing to significantly curb abortion rights, reproductive rights advocates said they would continue to fight in statehouses and lower courts for the right to choose. The supreme court heard oral arguments in Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization, widely regarded as the most important abortion rights case in nearly five decades. The case before the court pits Jackson Women’s Health Organization, Mississippi’s last abortion clinic, also known as the “Pink House”, against the state health director, Dr Thomas Dobbs. A decision is expected in June 2022. Mississippi intends to ban abortion after 15 weeks of pregnancy, a move blocked so far by lower courts. While a significant blow to abortion rights is far from a foregone conclusion, questions from the supreme court’s conservative justices on Wednesday appeared to show a willingness to allow restrictions on abortion at 15 weeks and perhaps earlier in a pregnancy. The case also requests the court overturn Roe v Wade, the landmark 1973 supreme court decision that established a constitutional right to abortion and is the only safeguard for such rights in dozens of conservative US states. Under present law, pregnant people have a right to terminate a pregnancy up to the point a fetus can survive outside the womb, widely regarded as 24 weeks gestation. A full-term pregnancy is considered 39 weeks gestation. In a consensus shared across the political spectrum, at least five justices appeared divided over whether to significantly curb or overturn Roe v Wade. Six of the nine justices lean to the right, with three of them nominated by Donald Trump during his one-term presidency. “Congress could fix the issue right now,” said Nancy Northup, president and CEO of the Center for Reproductive Rights (CRR), the organization that represented abortion providers in the supreme court on Wednesday. Although abortion was legalized in 1973 and has been relied upon by women nationally since then, Congress has never affirmed the right to abortion in legislation. That left the Roe v Wade precedent as the principal protection of the option for termination, while anti-abortion campaigners have brought many legal challenges and also pushed laws undermining access to the procedure. “All these bans and undue burdens in abortion care would be addressed by the Women’s Health Protection Act,” Northup said, referring to a bill recently passed by the US House of Representatives. “That would make sure women can access abortion without unnecessary bans.” Thus far, the bill has been viewed as highly unlikely to pass into law because it would need to overcome the Senate filibuster rule, requiring a 60-vote majority in the evenly divided chamber, where the Republicans would oppose it. Joe Biden said on Wednesday: “I support Roe v Wade. I think it’s a rational position to take.” Julie Rikelman, CRR’s litigation director, who argued before the justices, said campaigners would continue to fight if the supreme court went against reproductive choice. “We will continue to make every argument we can in the federal courts, we will continue to litigate in the state courts … we will not stop fighting, because it is just too important,” Rikelman said. Shannon Brewer, the director of the Pink House, said the coming months would be tough, with her providers “sitting and waiting and twiddling our thumbs” in anticipation of a decision. “It was a difficult day for everybody [but] I listened to the arguments and I think they did a great job at representing women today,” Brewer said. Following what was widely viewed as a hearing favorable to anti-abortion forces, conservatives chimed in. “What we want to see is the court do the right thing and overturn Roe,” said Chip Roy, a Republican US representative from Texas. He decried fears over a threat to choice as a “wailing and gnashing of teeth from the left”. Sam Brownback, the former US ambassador at large for international religious freedom under Trump, said it was time to overturn Roe “and let states address the issue”. Overturning Roe v Wade would effectively return the issue to be decided at state level, where much of the south and midwest would be “certain or likely” to ban most abortion. Already, several states have banned abortion at six weeks, though all those laws have been blocked by courts, with the prominent exception of Texas. Some reproductive rights advocates remained optimistic. Schaunta James-Boyd, co-executive director of Trust Women, an organization dedicated to providing abortions in underserved states, said her group “look[s] forward to a positive outcome later in 2022”. The pressure to legislate an affirmative right to abortion in states not openly hostile is likely to increase as a supreme court decision nears. While 26 states are “certain or likely” to outlaw abortion if Roe v Wade were overturned, states such as New York and Illinois have worked to protect abortion rights. Polling shows about six in 10 Americans believe abortion should be legal in “all or most” circumstances. Meanwhile, the House speaker and California Democrat Nancy Pelosi said: “The House is committed to defending women’s health freedoms and to enshrining into law our House-passed Women’s Health Protection Act, led by Congresswoman Judy Chu, to protect reproductive health care for all women across America.” She added that the supreme court “has the opportunity and responsibility to honor the constitution, the law and this basic truth: every woman has the constitutional right to basic reproductive healthcare”.The US supreme court heard oral arguments on Wednesday in the most significant abortion rights case since the landmark 1973 supreme court ruling in Roe v Wade, which effectively legalized abortion in the US. The case, Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization, pits the leadership of Mississippi against the state’s last abortion clinic. The state seeks to ban abortion after 15 weeks gestation and asks the highest court to overturn Roe. Here are five key takeaways from the crucial court session. Conservative justices signal support for Mississippi abortion restrictions Some conservative justices signaled a readiness to back Mississippi and threaten Roe. Justice Brett Kavanaugh appeared to challenge the principle of precedent and listed numerous landmark cases where the court overturned previous decisions, such as Brown v Board of Education on school segregation. Justice Amy Coney Barrett, nominated by Donald Trump like Kavanaugh, suggested adoption services could nullify the need for abortion, by removing the burdens of “forced parenting”. Veteran justice Clarence Thomas challenged the notion that there is a constitutional right to abortion, saying that it is not clearly laid out the way the second amendment is on “the right to bear arms”. Conservatives question fetal viability line, unclear on overturning Roe Chief justice John Roberts asked what the effects would be of moving the Roe limit – allowing termination until a fetus is viable outside the womb, around 24 weeks – earlier in the pregnancy. “If you think that the issue is one of choice ... viability … doesn’t have anything to do with choice. If it really is an issue about choice, why is 15 weeks [Mississippi’s limit] not enough time?” he said. Justice Samuel Alito questioned whether fetal viability is even an appropriate line for the court to have drawn. “If a woman wants to be free of the burdens of pregnancy, that interest does not disappear the moment the viability line is crossed,” he said. Liberals defend precedent, test religious motive Justice Elena Kagan said a major goal of precedent is “to prevent people from thinking that this court is a political institution that will go back and forth depending on what part of the public yells the loudest ... usually, there needs to be a strong justification in a case like this, beyond the fact that you think the case is wrong.” Justice Sonia Sotomayor, nominated by Barack Obama like Kagan, signaled she believes Mississippi’s motive in restricting abortion is religious. She feared a further threat to precedents that protect rights to birth control access and same-sex marriages. And Justice Stephen Breyer quoted from the 1992 ruling in Planned Parenthood v Casey which reaffirmed Roe. “To overrule under fire in the absence of the most compelling reason to re-examine a watershed decision would subvert the court’s legitimacy beyond any serious question,” he said. “What exactly is new here?” Liberal justices asked what is novel about the Mississippi case when so many others have not changed precedent. “Not much has changed since Roe and Casey,” Kagan said. “The reason people agree or not are the same reasons they’ve always had … aren’t we in the exact same place, except that we’ve had 50 years of women relying on this right?” Sotomayor added: “Fifteen justices over 30 years have reaffirmed that basic viability line … 15, of varying political background.” Liberals warn public trust in the institution is shaky Sotomayor suggested reversing Roe v Wade could hit public confidence in the court as a nonpartisan body – after Trump’s three traditionalist nominees (Neil Gorsuch, Kavanaugh and Coney Barrett) tilted the majority sharply right. She said to Scott Stewart, Mississippi’s solicitor general: “The sponsors of this bill ... in Mississippi are saying ‘We’re doing this because we have new justices on the supreme court.’ Will this institution survive the stench that this creates in the public perception that the constitution and its reading are just political acts?” She continued: “If people believe it’s all political … how will the court survive?” Breyer added that the risk in a “super case” like this is that the American public will regard justices as “just politicians”. “That’s what kills us,” he said.Cancelled 10pm, Channel 4 Richard Bacon – he of a memorable “cocaine scandal” – leads this examination of the rise in cancel culture. At a time when lives and reputations can be ruined in the blink of an eye, all at the whim of a keyboard warrior, Bacon asks: is free speech under threat? He speaks with so-called “cancelled” people, including Jimmy Carr, to find out. Hollie Richardson Tonight: How to Complain and Win! 7.30pm, ITV The British are a nation known for being way too uncomfortable to ever complain about anything. But there’s an art to complaining, and reporter Adam Shaw is about to deliver a lesson in how to air your grievances to get your money back. Helpful television. HR Mary Berry: Love to Cook 8pm, BBC Two To Carmarthen Bay, where Mary and her daughter Annabel meet forager Craig Evans, a man with an encyclopedic knowledge of edible plants. Then it’s off to the Cumbrian hills, where a local fellwalker (nicknamed the “Fell Foodie”) rustles up roast seabass on a tiny camping stove, followed by lemon and blueberry cake. Ali Catterall Luxury Christmas for Less 8pm, Channel 4 Following retail shortages and 2020’s festive lockdown, it’s hard to know exactly what Christmas will look like this year. Over two episodes, Sabrina Grant and Sophie Morgan hope to find out how the season can at least be luxurious – from budget-friendly perfumes to sourcing smoked salmon. A useful guide or wake-up call, depending on your Christmas prep so far. Henry Wong Nadiya’s Fast Flavours 8.30pm, BBC Two This week is all about feeling good with fresh and healthy recipes. Take notes on how to make: warming squash and saffron soup; a cake full of “appley goodness”; a Thai salad inspired by Nadiya’s travels; and a salmon alternative to the traditional Sunday roast. HR 24 Hours in A&amp;E 9pm, Channel 4 The brilliant hospital obs-doc, where what happened to the patients before they got sick or hurt is as important as their treatment, returns its cameras to St George’s in south-west London. A broken leg, an infected scalp and a smashed toe are just the gateways to touching stories about bigger obstacles and surprises already overcome. Jack Seale Film choice The Power of the Dog (Jane Campion, 2021), Netflix Writer-director Jane Campion’s first feature-length film since 2009 is a sensuous, psychosexual western, adapted from Thomas Savage’s novel, about the unspoken, sometimes unacknowledged emotions that can sway people’s actions. Benedict Cumberbatch and Jesse Plemons play ranching brothers in 1920s Montana – charismatic alpha male Phil and taciturn, decent George. After George brings home new bride Rose (Kirsten Dunst) and her teenage son Peter (Kodi Smit-McPhee), Phil’s initial jealousy ebbs as he mentors the boy in the ways of the cowboy. An undercurrent of homoerotic tension – underused in the genre – persists in a deep, dark tale. Simon Wardell Live sport Premier League Football: Tottenham Hotspur v Brentford 7.30pm, Amazon Prime Video. Coverage of Arsenal v Man United is also available at 8.15pm.Noomi Rapace – the original Lisbeth Salander, AKA The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo – is sitting in the hotel bar with her sunglasses on top of her head. They disappear at some point during our conversation, though I don’t see them go. I do notice, however, when her black jacket, which has been draped around her shoulders, falls to the floor while she is flapping her arms pretending to be an eagle. This happens shortly after she has told me how she once wore a strap-on dildo in public. She really is a lot of fun and quite naughty. We were due to meet in a windowless room upstairs but she wanted a window. “They’d put us in a little prison cell,” she huffs, now looking out on to the back streets of London’s Mayfair. “I was like, ‘I can’t be stuck in there!’ It’s all about flows and energies.” The double espresso she asked for when she first got here has yet to arrive, so she orders another from a passing staff member, who brings it in a flash. Rapace, who is 41, does a quick inventory: “Window. Coffee. Ryan. Perfect.” Then her original order arrives. She looks up at her server in astonishment. “Is this ours? I love your lipstick, by the way, it’s really pretty.” She turns to me. “Do you want this? Let’s have it.” The next time I look down, both cups are empty. This is all worlds away from the forceful minimalism she brings to the unsettling new indie thriller Lamb. She plays Maria, who lives with her husband on a farm in the Icelandic countryside. It’s just the two of them, their sensible knitwear, their animals, and the unspoken pain of the past. “It’s like a family drama,” she says. “But with one obstacle that is a bit strange.” That’s putting it mildly. When a sheep on the farm gives birth to a half-human, half-lamb hybrid, the couple name her Ada, rock her like a baby, and adopt her as their own. Meanwhile, Ada’s birth mother stands outside, bleating sinisterly, refusing to budge. “I had nightmares about her,” gasps Rapace. “We had this strange energy between us. She was always looking me straight in the eye, ‘Baaaa, baaaa.’ Enough! The noise got in my dreams. I went outside to try to connect with her and she was stomping on the ground. It felt like she was a direct threat to my happiness. I hated her.” The director, Valdimar Jóhannsson, worried sometimes that Rapace had gone a bit too deep. “He said I was more Maria than Noomi.” No kidding. This film, an elemental human-against-nature struggle, means more to her than most. “I feel like I’ve been waiting for it for as long as I can remember,” she says. “My body was telling me, ‘This is what you need. To dig down into the soil and lava of Iceland.’” Although born in Sweden, Rapace spent three years on a farm in Iceland from the age of five: her mother and stepfather worked there in a community for young adults with Down’s syndrome. When the family moved to another farm back in her home country, she pined for Iceland. “I had a very strong love story with it from the first time I set foot there. I was always an outsider in Sweden: I was too much, too emotional, too passionate.” She started acting while still in Iceland, getting her first film job there at the age of seven, in the medieval saga In the Shadow of the Raven. “I felt like I’d been invited to paradise. There was freedom on set. I didn’t have to be cute. I’ve always revolted against cuteness and the need to be likable, because I’m not.” A few minutes later, she corrects herself: “Actually, I’m desperate to be liked. That’s the problem. My need to be accepted into the nice sophisticated rooms was so strong that I had to make a conscious decision, ‘OK, I don’t want to be liked.’ Otherwise I would be a slave to that. I’ve even written a manifesto to myself as a reminder that I can’t do things just to be liked.” She emails it to me later: this punchy, 500-word pep talk is the sort of thing one might read to get psyched up before stepping on stage or into the ring. If ever there was a role designed to prove that she was nobody’s poppet, it was Lisbeth Salander, the snarling, punky, motorbike-riding, golf-club-wielding avenger from Stieg Larsson’s Millennium novels. Arthouse audiences already knew that Rapace meant business from films such as Daisy Diamond, where she plays a young mother who drifts into sex work. But it was Swedish-language adaptation of The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo (2009) and its two sequels that introduced her to the world. Mention this and she grimaces at how people still confuse her with Salander. “I don’t want to be the badass,” she groans. “I even hate the word. People are always pitching things to me, ‘She’s so badass, she’s so you.’ I’m like … ” She puts her head in her hands. Making those films, she says, was “like drowning in trauma. It meant that the first connective tissue between me and the world was pain for many years. Pain and sadness was like my identity card. Now I’ve healed a lot. Maybe I’m not lighter but I would say I allow more colours in me. I feel looser. The veneer, the shield I’d built up since childhood, is slowly peeling off. I’m alive now rather than surviving.” She accepts that the word “badass” can still be applied to some of her actions: aborting her own alien baby in Ridley Scott’s Prometheus, before leaping off the operating table as if she had just enjoyed a quick disco nap, was about as badass as it gets. “That I like,” she laughs. “Look, I really don’t take myself as seriously as people think. My friends all know I’m stupid and nerdy.” Like how? “Well, I’m always doing this.” She folds her top lip under itself and sticks out her front teeth. “My friends are like, ‘Can you please stop?’” Anything else? “A director and producer came over to work with me and I took them to a club where the theme was cross-dressing. I put them in wigs and long dresses, and I was a full-blown man. I was wearing this dildo, this big strap-on, and I was walking round like a man the whole night. I loved it!” Since she associates Salander with suffering and trauma, it’s no wonder she wants to move on. Each of her movies, she explains, represents a clear chapter in her life, whether it’s 2014’s The Drop, an impressively tender crime drama with Tom Hardy, or the Will Smith’s 2017 fantasy thriller Bright, in which she played an evil elf whose minions eat babies. She need only watch a few seconds of one of her old films to remember her state of mind: “What my fears were, what I was struggling with.” In 2011, she starred with Robert Downey Jr and Jude Law in Guy Ritchie’s Sherlock Holmes reboot. “If I watch that now I can see I was in the middle of my divorce. I can see it in my face, hear it in my voice. I can see my chest is locked. I can see that was a day where we had a big argument that morning, or I hadn’t slept the entire night. Making both Sherlock Holmes and Prometheus, I was coming out of my divorce, and life was really chaotic.” Her ex-husband, and the father of her 18-year-old son, is the Swedish actor Ola Rapace, formerly Pär Ola Norell. They both changed their surnames when they married; hers was Norén. Is this a Swedish custom? “No. I just didn’t feel connected to my name and I wanted to start something new and beautiful.” Rapace, she says, means “bird of prey”; the choice can be traced back to an experience she had in Iceland when she was seven. “I was playing with ice rocks and I felt this presence. I look up and this huge eagle is sitting close by, staring at me with golden eyes. I thought either he was going to take me or attack me or bless me for life. And then – ba-boom, ba-boom – he took off and flew away.” She flaps her arms. Her jacket hits the floor. “I felt like it was a god. Later, I did some research and found out that eagles are incredibly loyal. That’s like me – and that’s something I tapped into on Lamb. I have this primal animal side. If I go to battle for you, I promise I’ll fight until I die!” I believe her. I have no doubt she would make a formidable ally. But for now: no more coffee. • Lamb is released in the UK on 10 December. • This article was amended on 2 December 2021 to clarify that it was the 2009 Swedish language version of The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo (and its two sequels) that “introduced Rapace to the world”. An earlier version gave the year of the first film as 2011. It was in that year that the English language remake came out.This year, out of nowhere, my left heel has started hurting. Is it the onset of some degenerative condition, a normal byproduct of ageing, or simply pandemic life, I wonder. After all, living through this period has had surprising health consequences – even for people who have not caught coronavirus. It has recently emerged, for instance, that the Covid era has been a global hair-loss event – a clear manifestation of the stress everyone has been under. What else have these unprecedented times written on our bodies? Hair When the UK’s Institute of Trichologists (IoT) – a professional association for those who treat hair and scalp disorders – surveyed its members this summer, 79% said they had seen cases of “post-Covid hair loss” in their clinics. Eva Proudman, consultant trichologist and chair of the IoT, puts it down to the high temperatures and loss of appetite that are common with having the virus. “Both of these factors reflect in the hair, usually between four to six weeks after the virus has started to resolve, and the hair will start to shed excessively.” But mental stress alone can also lead to hair shedding. Richard Spencer, a trichologist working in central London, says other reasons for hair falling out can be “the anxiety of having the virus and not knowing how badly one might suffer from it, as well as the stress of lockdowns”. While Proudman has seen cases in men and women, it can be more obvious in women, “as they tend to wear their hair longer than men, and you see a higher volume of hair coming out in the shower, brush and generally shedding”. Pandemic-induced hair loss is most likely a condition known as telogen effluvium, “a disruption to the hair’s normal growing and shedding cycle,” says Proudman, “causing there to be less hair in the growing phase, and more in the resting and shedding phases”. The good news, says Spencer, is that whether the loss is due to physical or emotional stress, “most or all of the hair is recoverable”. In some cases, adds Proudman, “the body will recover from this disruption on its own. In other cases, we may need to help with dietary changes, specific hair supplements or treatments.” Eyes Pandemic eyes are dry and, frankly, shattered from so much screen time. This makes them scratchy, sore and blurry, and it’s hard not to blame this on some perceived malignant force in the screens, such as blue light. Ditto for the boom in childhood myopia that was shown in a Chinese study to coincide massively with increased screen use (and time indoors, without distant vistas) during lockdowns. This study is now held up around the world as a warning, triggering universal parental guilt and worry, while in practical terms being extremely hard to heed. But blue-light-blocking glasses are unlikely to be the solution. There is no evidence that screens themselves are damaging eyes. Myopia is caused by focusing continuously on something close to the face (it’s just that children tend to do this more with screens than books). And it is not screen glare that is drying out our eyes. It is our natural tendency to blink around five times less frequently when doing screen work (or, again, when reading books), and to blink incompletely during screen work (less so with books, so books win). Teeth Having had all routine dental checkups cancelled during the Covid crisis, my family didn’t see a dentist for almost two years. According to the British Dental Association (BDA), safety measures have meant that more than 35m appointments have been lost across England since Covid struck. Tooth decay was already the most common cause of hospitalisation in children (because many are too young to cooperate with treatment without a general anaesthetic). Mick Armstrong is chair of the BDA’s health and science committee, and has come out of retirement to help with the backlog in West Yorkshire. “I treated a tooth the other day,” he says, “that required root canal therapy.” If he had seen it six months earlier, it would have been salvageable, he says, but: “When I did see it, it was too far gone.” He says there was already a crisis in access to NHS dental care, and this is one of the many areas in which existing health inequalities have been exacerbated by Covid. But those whose teeth haven’t quietly rotted beyond repair may have inadvertently ground them to smithereens instead. When the American Dental Association surveyed its members in February, it found that 71% of almost 2,300 dentists around the country reported seeing an increase of bruxism – teeth grinding and clenching – among their patients during the pandemic. This can also lead to temporomandibular disorder, which more than 60% of the dentists also saw rise, with symptoms including jaw clicking and pain, and headaches around the temples. There was a similar rise in cracked and chipped teeth, which can result from tooth grinding. Heart Cardiologists have seen a rise in chronic heart conditions during the pandemic, says Sonya Babu-Narayan, associate medical director at the British Heart Foundation. For some, diet and exercise have suffered (more on which later), while it has become harder to access medical help. “Each delay adds to a snowball effect,” she says, “which ultimately puts lives at risk. Cancelled procedures, missed appointments and growing waiting lists have likely already contributed to thousands more deaths from heart attacks and strokes during the pandemic than we would expect to see otherwise.” Stomach Philip Smith, consultant gastroenterologist at Royal Liverpool hospital and trustee of the charity Guts UK, has noticed that irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) flareups have grown more common. “We have seen an increase in disorders which can be linked to stress and anxiety, such as IBS,” he says. “The brain and the gut interact very closely.” “My entire job is ‘embarrassing bodies’,” he says. “People don’t want to talk about breaking wind and diarrhoea and there’s a lot of stigma with the conditions that I look after.” Lockdowns have made seeking help more off-putting, for conditions such as Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis and inflammatory bowel disease, “and by the time that people are actually diagnosed, and have their treatment, their disease is flaring a lot more severely than it would have done in ordinary circumstances. We might have caught it when it was moderate rather than severe.” Liver Alcohol-related hospital admissions dropped in the years preceding the pandemic, says Smith, but, since Covid, cases “have massively skyrocketed. They may present with alcoholic hepatitis and jaundice. They can present with weight loss, or withdrawal symptoms such as shakes, tremors, sweating and agitation. They can present with gastrointestinal bleeding, because when you’ve got cirrhosis of the liver, your blood vessels swell up in your gut.” It’s not that everyone is drinking more – in fact, one-third of those surveyed by the charity Alcohol Change UK in 2020 said they had stopped or reduced their drinking. However, one in five – an estimated 8.6 million adults – have been drinking more. Skin As you would expect, says Emma Craythorne, consultant dermatologist at Guy’s and St Thomas’ hospital in London, inflammatory skin conditions such as rosacea, eczema and psoriasis have been worsening over this stressful time, because stress equals flareups. And frequent handwashing can take its toll on anyone’s skin. In fact, Craythorne’s department had to set up a clinic for staff at the hospital because, as she says, doctors have to wash their hands about 100 times a day. “When you cleanse your hands, immediately, the outer layer starts to lose water because you’ve disrupted its bricks-and-mortar protection.” If you don’t moisturise afterwards, or use a hand sanitiser with added moisturiser such as glycerin, the constant drying, “starts to cause cracks in the skin. And then the pathogenic bacteria can get in and cause inflammation.” The term “maskne” has been jovially mooted during the pandemic – referring to skin problems due to mask-wearing – but Craythorne doesn’t see this as a big problem. Some people might develop perioral dermatitis, she says, “a condition where the barrier of the skin isn’t working quite so well, and you develop these tiny bumps around the mouth that can be itchy – and people often confuse it with acne, but it’s not”. While wearing masks does change the environment in that area, which could trigger the condition, Craythorne suspects that blame might more lie with the specialist skincare acids. Feet According to Emma McConnachie, spokeswoman for the Royal College of Podiatry, who practises in Stirling, my dodgy heel may well be pandemic-related. “We have been seeing more tendon strains and types of heel pain such as plantar fasciitis,” she says. One hypothetical cause could be that while we are working from home, feet are deprived of their usual supportive footwear. “Not all foot types cope well with walking barefoot or in flimsy footwear,” she says. “Some are also reporting that their feet have ‘spread’ and that their shoes no longer fit. Although, it could be argued that their shoes may not have fit properly before and that they are more aware after the time out of them. Like when you first put on your jeans after spending lockdown in jogging bottoms.” She says podiatrists are also seeing increases in painful arch areas, ankles and the achilles area at the back of the ankle. The assumption, she says, is that many of these injuries have resulted from “changes in activity type, or taking up new activities, such as running”. If you have had pain in your feet for longer than two weeks without improvement, she advises, “you are best to seek professional assessment, diagnosis and treatment”. Diet and fitness Tim Spector at King’s College London, whose Zoe Covid Symptom Study app has been a mine of epidemiological data throughout the pandemic, says that the app’s survey on diet and exercise showed, overall, little change in the nation’s weight and fitness. But, behind these averages, he says, “quite a lot of people shifted their behaviour. They either got healthier, or they got much less healthy, but on average, they sort of balanced out.” This data was published this year in the journal Nature Food. While the survey found that overall, weight gain averaged at just 0.8kg (1lb 12oz), an NHS study this year showed that people seeking help with weight loss were on average 2.3kg heavier than those in the previous three years. Meanwhile, the Zoe survey showed that, while just over a quarter of people did less exercise over the pandemic, a slightly larger proportion became more active. And, when it came to diet, Spector says, about one-third rediscovered cooking and ate more healthily, while another third did the opposite, and the final third made no changes. “What will they revert back to?” asks Spector. “Will they miss the KFC – or the quinoa salad?”Farmers will be paid for looking after England’s soils for the first time from next year, when the first stage of the government’s new support payments begins. Environmental groups criticised the measures as puny and accused ministers of failing in their promises to use the UK’s departure from the EU to strengthen environmental protections and reduce the damaging impacts of farming. Farmers will be paid between £20 and £58 per hectare in England for basic measures to protect and nurture their soils, and nearly all farmers are likely to be eligible to apply for the payments, which will cover arable soils for crop cultivation as well as grassland, moorland and other soils. The payments, along with others to come in future for further conservation measures, are set to reach £900m a year by the end of 2024, to meet the government’s pledge to phase out the old taxpayer subsidies based on the amount of land farmed – under the EU’s common agricultural policy (CAP) – and replace them with payments of “public money for public goods”. Soil protection has been chosen as the first such payment after repeated government promises to prioritise the UK’s soils, which are a vital store of carbon. Some of the measures farmers will be required to undertake in return for the payments would be routine for many farmers anyway, such as planting cover crops on bare soil over winter. Bare soils are prey to erosion and runoff, so ensuring fields are covered in a crop that can return nutrients to the soil is key to its preservation. George Eustice, the environment secretary, will announce the measures at the Country Land and Business Association (CLA) rural business conference in London on Thursday. Mark Tufnell, the president of the CLA, which represents 28,000 farmers and rural businesses, said: “UK soil contains 10bn tonnes of carbon. There is no path towards net zero without better soil management … [These payments] are a good start, and show clear intent to support and reward farmers in their environmental delivery.” But the leaders of three of the UK’s biggest green and conservation groups: the Wildlife Trusts, the RSPB and the National Trust jointly accused the government of failing to take seriously the urgent need for nature-friendly farming. They pointed to the sharp declines of native wildlife over the past three decades and said the government’s plans would do little to remedy that. Hilary McGrady, the director general of the National Trust, said: “Nearly four years has passed since the government set out its vision for the future of food, farming and the environment … But the future of wildlife and climate now looks uncertain as today’s announcement falls short of the ambitious reforms promised. Farmers need a clear path to a future where nature is at the heart of sustainable and secure food production, not the short diversion this new scheme creates.” Craig Bennett, the chief executive of the Wildlife Trusts, added: “There’s so much that farmers could be rewarded for doing, such as restoring peatlands and employing ambitious measures to prevent soil and pollutants from washing into rivers – to help wildlife and store carbon. It’s an absolute scandal that the government has failed to seize this unique and important opportunity to improve farming.” Under the old CAP, farmers received between £2bn and £3bn a year. Subsidies were at first maintained at £2.4bn a year after Brexit but will be reduced to £900m by the end of this parliament. Basic payments allotted on the amount of land farmed will be phased out altogether by 2027, but in the meantime farmers who received most under the old scheme face the steepest cuts – 25% of their old subsidies – while smaller farmers will have their basic payments cut by 5% next year. The shift will eventually lead to farmers signing environmental land management contracts, committing them to take measures to protect air and water quality and provide habitats for wildlife, in return for payments yet to be set out in detail. In the interim, the sustainable finance initiative – of which the soils scheme is the first part – will provide payments for basic environmental measures. Farmers are facing an uncertain future due to the impacts of the Covid pandemic combined with Brexit, which is leading to sharp declines in farm exports amid reams of new red tape, the end of the old subsidy regime and the government’s new trade deals, which some fear could unleash a flood of cheap imported food produced at lower standards than are allowed in the UK. Farming groups cautiously welcomed the new measures – which the government said had been designed to be flexible, to allow tenant farmers to apply easily, and to avoid “punitive” conditions in case of accidental breaches – but some are concerned they will not go far enough. Lynette Steel, farm policy adviser at the Tenant Farmers Association, said the payments offered were “attractive enough” when combined with other government incentives, such as the stewardship scheme which rewards farmers for meeting basic environmental conditions. But she added that current high prices for food would discourage farmers from applying: “Given today’s commodity markets, many farmers will take the view that it is more financially beneficial to farm for [food] production rather than for soil protection, under the cost structure announced.”Eight months ago, the events that shattered the life of Richard Amoah, a 58-year-old upholsterer from south London, were condensed into a series of succinct, emotionless paragraphs, typed into boxes on an 18-page form, scanned and emailed to a government office in Sheffield. Everyone knows you can’t put a price on happiness, but it is now the Home Office’s job to assess the cost of Amoah’s unhappiness, after a series of disastrous government mistakes left him destitute on the streets of Ghana’s capital, Accra, for two and a half years. As they process Amoah’s claim for compensation, staff in Vulcan House, the Home Office’s riverside headquarters in Sheffield, will need to address a number of difficult questions. How should the government compensate someone for carelessly wrecking their life? What is the correct payment for rupturing family bonds? Can the loss of a stable, happy existence be remedied with a methodically quantified pay out? Amoah is one of at least 13,000 victims of the Windrush scandal, in which retirement-age UK residents who had been born in the Commonwealth and travelled, legally, to Britain as small children, were misclassified as immigration offenders. Hundreds of victims of the scandal were wrongly deported or held in detention centres, and thousands more lost homes, were sacked from their jobs or were denied benefits, pensions and NHS treatment because of the error. As it became clear how much damage had been caused to this cohort, a major compensation scheme was promised. The scheme, which was launched in March 2019, was meant to offer swift payments to anyone affected. Initial estimates by civil servants suggested that anywhere between £200m and £570m would be paid out. But in the nearly three years since it launched, the compensation programme has been ridden with controversy and delays. Many claimants object to the fact that the programme is run by the same department that caused their problems in the first place. The Home Office has, effectively, been allowed to mark its own homework. Claimants have expressed dismay at meagre compensation offers, which they feel do not reflect the harm they suffered. At least 23 people have died waiting for a decision. Last year, the most senior black employee in the Home Office’s Windrush team resigned, telling the Guardian that the scheme was “racist and unfit for purpose”. Three separate inquiries have investigated what is going wrong with the scheme. How the compensation team responds to Amoah’s claim, and to the more than 3,000 other applicants, should be seen as evidence of how committed the Home Office really is to its mantra that it wants to right the wrongs done to the Windrush generation. “It’s been a car crash,” said Anthony Browne, a lawyer, who as co-founder of Windrush Defenders has advised dozens of people trying to make claims. For the past year he has been on a committee appointed by Priti Patel, advising the Home Office on what has been going wrong, but he has now stopped attending. “I’ve become disenchanted with the Home Office. They listen but they don’t hear; they don’t seem to want to do the right thing. It’s really critical now that the whole ethos changes.” * * * In late September 2020, when the Windrush compensation scheme was developing into a scandal in its own right, I met Amoah in an otherwise deserted pub in south London, to hear about his attempts to claim compensation. Like most people affected, Amoah arrived in the UK, entirely legally, as a child. His parents met in the early 1950s, when his Ghanaian father was studying architecture in London and his Irish mother was working as a seamstress. They married and settled in Ghana, where Amoah was born, but in 1964, after the marriage collapsed, his mother returned to London with Amoah, who was still a baby. He travelled to Britain on his mother’s passport. (At the time she returned to Britain, Amoah’s mother was pregnant with another son, who was born in the UK a few months later.) Amoah grew up in Britain and never saw his father again. But in April 2016, when his brother told him of their father’s death, Amoah felt moved to attend the funeral in Ghana and finally meet his family there. “I wanted to have a look around and see where I came from,” he said. He had not travelled abroad since arriving in the UK 52 years earlier, and he had no passport. He flew using temporary Ghanaian travel documents because they were simpler to get than an emergency British passport. From the airport in Accra, Amoah got on a coach, arriving at his father’s town just as the funeral was beginning. Relatives Amoah had never met made him change out of his black suit into a black-and-red cloth robe and sandals. “I’d never worn clothes like that before,” he recalled. “Absolutely everything was strange. I didn’t speak the language, nothing was familiar to my life – the heat, the mosquitoes, the food.” Before he left London, Amoah had thought he might spend time getting to know his Ghanaian family, but in the days after the funeral he struggled to connect. He found being in rural Ghana – surrounded by siblings he had only just met, most of them speaking a language he didn’t understand – an unhappy, unsettling experience. After two weeks, he was more than ready to return home to London. He travelled to the British high commission in Accra to get the documents that would allow him to fly back. During his rushed travel preparations, he had been assured by an official that this would be a simple matter. “My thinking at the time was that I’d get a Ghanaian document to go there, and an English one to go back home,” Amoah told me. “I’d never travelled before. I was a bit naive about the whole situation.” At the high commission, Amoah took a ticket from a machine on the wall, and waited more than an hour for his number to come up. Eventually he was called to a desk, but the conversation was brief. He was told that unless he could prove to staff that he was a British citizen, he had no right to board a plane to the UK. Amoah had attended primary and secondary school in Battersea, south London. He had worked and paid taxes in the UK throughout his adult life. He had helped bring up his five children and grandchildren in the same part of the city where he had grown up. When he tried to explain all this, the official behind the counter cut him off. “There’s nothing we can do for you,” he was told. Amoah demanded to see someone more senior. Eventually the vice-consul was brought out. “She told me these decisions came from Home Office rules in the UK,” he said. “She was upset talking to me, but she said the rules had been changed in the 1980s. She told me: ‘You’ve overstayed in Britain for 50 years.’ I tried to explain: everything I have ever done in life, I did it in England. I learned to walk here, I learned to talk here. In Accra, I was like an alien, just landed on Earth. She was very sympathetic, but pfft … that was about it.” Amoah’s younger brother, Christopher, who had travelled alongside him to the funeral, returned home to London without him. “We were trying to sort it out until the day of the flight,” Christopher told me. “I had to get on the flight. I thought he would be able to sort it out, but he couldn’t. It was a nightmare.” Because Christopher had been born in the UK, he had never had problems with his documentation. He’d made a number of previous trips to Ghana, and never encountered any difficulties. At first, Amoah was merely frustrated by what he assumed was just a stupid bureaucratic hiccup. But after a few days, it became increasingly clear that officials at the British high commission would not budge. Within a few weeks his money had run out and he found himself homeless for the first time in his life, sleeping rough in slums on the outskirts of an unfamiliar city. His siblings in Ghana helped for a bit, but they had their own lives, and Amoah felt they were suspicious of this unknown person who had turned up at their father’s funeral. “Everything was upside down,” said Amoah. It was hard to get people to understand the problems he was having with British officials when he was struggling to understand them himself. He felt embarrassed having to ask his siblings for help, and there were some difficult misunderstandings. “I was offending people left, right and centre, and getting offended left, right and centre. I grew up in south London; I have a south London attitude, I’m a bit loose with my tongue and language. They had a real problem with that. I was totally marooned,” he told me. “I was in a country I didn’t know, among people that didn’t like me, in a culture I didn’t understand, with no sense of being able to return back home on the horizon.” In south London, Amoah had lived a comfortable, secure life, usually facing nothing more taxing than heavy traffic during his commute to work at an upholsterers in Battersea. The fifth-floor flat he shared with his frail mother, who he cared for, overlooked a park where he enjoyed watching swans on the lake. He had a girlfriend who he saw every day. He had a good relationship with his children, who were aged between seven and 25 when went to Ghana. In Accra, Amoah was quickly reduced to scavenging and begging. He was violently attacked on several occasions, and often afraid for his life. After two months, he returned in desperation to the high commission, hoping they might relent. He spoke to a senior diplomat, who was a distant friend of one of Amoah’s Ghanaian sisters. (I asked to speak to this diplomat but was refused.) She was aware of the unfairness of the situation, but felt unable to assist. He remembers she told him: “There’s no chance that you’re going to be allowed back into the UK.” * * * By the time I met Amoah, I had interviewed more than 50 people affected by the Windrush scandal. People had lost their jobs, their homes, their pensions and access to NHS care. But there was something particularly disturbing about Amoah’s conversations with a British diplomat who seemed to recognise that he was British, and that he was in an appalling situation through no fault of his own, yet did not feel inclined to help. In Ghana, Amoah’s life unravelled. Rather than getting accustomed to the horror, he found himself less and less able to cope. Sometimes, a friend or relative would let him stay for a night or two, but then he would have to move on. “It’s hard to stay longer if you have nothing to contribute,” Amoah told me. Often he would sit in all-night bars, waiting for morning; sometimes he would huddle by a street fire in between corrugated-iron shanty houses, horrified by the open sewers running through the dirt streets. Sometimes, he slept wrapped in a cloth on the beach. A year passed, and then a second. He became seriously ill with malaria, but had no money for medicine. He thought he might die. He picked up odd jobs here and there; a friend in England sent some money; a church offered moral support. But after a while, he lost all hope of returning home and decided to kill himself. He walked out in front of a truck on a fast highway. The truck driver swerved to avoid him and drove into a ditch. He was so furious at the damage to his truck that he attacked Amoah, beating him. “I felt like a prisoner, being held against my will away from my family,” Amoah told me, still incredulous at the treatment so carelessly meted out to him by British bureaucrats. “It was like being incarcerated for two and a half years.” After about an hour of talking, Amoah began to cry quietly. Amoah was particularly distressed by the damage done to his relationship with his children, who thought he had deserted them. (“They didn’t understand,” Christopher later told me. “He just disappeared from their lives. They started to resent him.”) He had no money to call them and could only occasionally afford to visit an internet cafe to try to make contact by email. “Richard is a caring, sensitive man, devoted to his children. He was his mother’s carer. It would have troubled him greatly to be stuck there away from them all,” Donovan Barnett, an old friend, told me later. “He must have been so tormented by the thought that he might never get back here.” Christopher tried to help from London, but was overwhelmed by the bureaucracy. “I was going round in circles, calling the embassy, trying to get information,” he told me. “I was very worried. He got ill and I couldn’t get hold of him. I was thinking I would have to go to bloody bury him.” * * * In April 2018, while Amoah was still stuck in Accra, the Windrush scandal became major news in the UK – leading to the resignation of the home secretary, and an official apology from the prime minister. The following month, Martin Forde, a QC who specialises in medical negligence, was appointed by prime minister Theresa May to devise a compensation scheme for victims of the scandal. Forde’s own parents had come to the UK from Barbados and St Lucia as part of the Windrush generation, and he was eager to help deliver justice. To the layperson, trying to put a monetary value on human suffering seems an impossible exercise. But compensation lawyers have a methodical approach, breaking down loss and distress into component parts that can be totted up into a neat sum. Forde based his scheme on the tariffs set out in Judicial College Guidelines for the Assessment of General Damages in Personal Injury Cases, the bible for all compensation lawyers, now in its 15th edition. The guidelines make the process seem simple, assigning a value to every conceivable unhappy scenario. Lost a middle finger? You’re eligible for £12,460. Received a scar to the face? Take £6,240. Particularly useful to Forde was the chapter on psychiatric and psychological damage, which breaks down levels of suffering, taking into consideration factors such as “the injured person’s ability to cope with life, education, and work” and “the effect on the injured person’s relationships with family [and] friends”. The guidelines advise that claims should be classified as moderate, moderately severe or severe, with payouts ranging between £5,000 and £108,620. Forde drew up a booklet for Home Office staff, showing how to assess claimants’ overall experiences according to their level of distress – rising from “inconvenience, annoyance, frustration and worry” (which would bring a payout of £250) to “profound impacts on a claimant’s life which are likely to be irreversible”, which would deliver a minimum £10,000 payment. There were also separate claimable categories for different problems: homelessness (payable at £250 a month), or detention (about £100 a day, depending on the length of wrongful imprisonment). The maximum payment for someone who was wrongly deported was set at £10,000. Applications began to be accepted in 2019. But campaigners who had seen up close the life-altering consequences of the Windrush scandal worried that these sums were rather low. David Lammy raised concerns in parliament, warning: “Victims have correctly described these payments as peanuts and insultingly low.” * * * In July 2018, more than 800 days after he had first landed in Ghana, Amoah’s situation was suddenly resolved. An email arrived from the same high commission official who, two years earlier, had expressed mild regret that she could not help. She had seen news reports about the Windrush scandal and realised Amoah was one of thousands of undocumented people whose Britishness had been contested. She arranged for him to have a call with the newly created Windrush taskforce to sort out documentation so he could return home. Amoah went to an internet cafe to call the UK to explain to British officials what had happened. “They said: ‘This is a totally horrendous situation; let’s get you back here as quickly as possible.’ I could hear they were shocked, which was strange to me, because how could they be shocked when they’d been refusing me the right to come back? I was just totally bewildered.” The official arranged the visa, and Amoah borrowed money from a relative for a plane ticket. He was amazed at the speed with which everything was resolved. “They had me out there for two and a half years for something they could have resolved in a matter of minutes,” he said. It was cold and wet when Amoah finally landed back in Britain in December 2018, after a total of 975 days away, but he didn’t mind. “I’d been missing the cold,” he said. “I could finally exhale and inhale. I felt like I was being put back together again.” He hadn’t told his relatives he was coming back, so he took a train and then a bus from the airport, using the last bit of money he had been lent. (“I’d forgotten they didn’t take cash on buses. The driver let me on for free.”) Quickly he realised that this wouldn’t be the return he had hoped for. During his time abroad, his mother had developed Alzheimer’s. She barely recognised him. “I’d only been able to speak to her once or twice when I was away. She was confused,” he said. His long absence had damaged his relationship with his children. “I had become quite alienated from my family. The consensus was that I chose to stay out there. I told them I’d been stopped from coming back into the country, but I didn’t go into much detail. I wouldn’t want to upset them. They haven’t had much to do with me since I came back.” Amoah struggled to return to normal life. He had lost his job and was unable to find new work, and he had been profoundly altered by his experience. “He was skinny, like a bag of bones,” Christopher said. “He used to be very bubbly and outgoing. Now he is the total opposite, more like a recluse.” * * * In the summer of 2020, a year and a half after his return, Amoah saw a TV news report about the compensation scheme and decided to apply. He searched online for a lawyer, who sent him the 18-page form, then he set about trying to shoehorn his experiences into the white spaces allocated, under headings that included: “When did you first have difficulties proving your lawful status in the UK?” “Include the dates you were homeless and where you stayed when you were homeless.” “Impact on life: provide details of the non-financial impact you experienced on your daily life for which you are claiming.” There is no space on the form for people who got stranded abroad and denied the right to return home, so he scattered his description of what had happened across other boxes. The compensation scheme was designed to be so simple that there would be no need for lawyers, but Amoah said he didn’t feel confident enough to do this alone. He instructed Malcolm Johnson of Lime Solicitors on a no-win, no-fee basis. In November, I joined a Zoom meeting between Amoah and Johnson as they made final tweaks to his application. “Is it about putting a value on what I lost or what I went through?” Amoah asked, pacing about his flat. “I wouldn’t say that compensation is my major object.” Johnson, who specialises in compensation claims, explained later that he frequently encounters this peculiar British queasiness about financial compensation. Claimants are anxious not to appear money-grubbing, but lawyers have a single-minded focus on trying to achieve the maximum payout for their client. “For us, it’s all about the money,” he said. The scheme, Johnson told me, was a “ghastly, snarled-up bureaucratic mess” – much worse than his experience with other government compensation schemes, such as those set up to compensate people who were abused in children’s homes, which allocated funding for lawyers, and often for medical reports setting out the victims’ mental trauma. Amoah’s agreement with Johnson’s legal firm was that he would pay them 30% of whatever compensation he is awarded. In return they would help Amoah with the application and gather evidence to satisfy assessors that he was telling the truth. The priority was tracking down old payslips and tax records to prove loss of earnings, and establishing medical proof that the experience had an impact. Both have been hard to do. Amoah’s own records were thrown away by relatives during his absence, and former employers have not been helpful. As for proving “impact”, Amoah, like many Windrush victims, was raised to be stoical, and he is disinclined to offload his feelings on to a GP, which makes it hard to prove how badly he has been affected. (“I don’t want to because I don’t want anyone thinking that I am mad,” Amoah told his lawyer.) Johnson had spent a lot of time trying to get Amoah to articulate his pain. He told me: “At each point we ask: were you distressed? How distressed? How debilitating was it?” But Amoah’s application was largely written in short, factual sentences. “I could barely afford to eat when I was there as I was not working and had no income,” he wrote in the “Impact on life” section. “My adult children took the view that I had abandoned them and that I had decided to stay in Ghana of my own free will. My partner left me when I told her I was stuck in Ghana.” On the page, his anguish had largely been bleached out. * * * The compensation scheme was troubled from the start. For the first 18 months, the sums offered to successful applicants tended to be low, and many found the process itself frustrating. In some cases, requests for supporting documents seemed absurdly demanding. One person was asked to find a post office receipt for £19.60 that had been paid years earlier. In November 2020, Alexandra Ankrah, the head of policy for the Windrush compensation team who had resigned from her post earlier that year, told the Guardian that her colleagues had “showed an unwillingness to look with any genuine concern at the situation of victims, many of whom were elderly and unwell”. She described one meeting at which officials argued over whether a terminally ill claimant should be paid “a trifling sum or a very trifling sum”. Towards the end of 2020, even Forde, who had designed the scheme, was becoming frustrated by the slow progress and unreasonable Home Office demands for documentary proof, which echoed the original scandal. “They come at this with a high index of suspicion. I understand it’s taxpayers’ money, but I’ve told them I don’t think you get many dishonest people in that cohort,” Forde told me. “The civil servants are doing a difficult job well, but the institution is tainted.” In December 2020, two weeks after Ankrah’s criticism of the scheme was published on the Guardian front page, home secretary Priti Patel announced a set of radical improvements. Any claimants who could show that they had been affected by the scandal would receive a swift interim payment of £10,000. The standard of proof was reduced from “beyond reasonable doubt” to “on the balance of probabilities”. The payouts for the “impact on life” categories were increased tenfold, so that someone whose life was affected in “profound” and “irreversible” ways might now in theory receive more than £100,000. “While nothing can undo the suffering they endured I hope that the additional money and support now available will go some way to rebuild trust,” said Patel. But, almost a year later, that trust has not been rebuilt. When the scheme was initially devised, civil servants estimated that the government could pay up to £570m to 15,000 people, but those figures have been revised downwards. The latest available figures, from October 2021, show that after two and a half years, only £32.9m had been paid out to just 885 people, and they now think they are only likely to receive around 3,000 applicants. Last month, I visited the Home Office’s headquarters in Sheffield, where civil servants conduct the initial assessments for Windrush compensation claims. On the walls, staff had pinned up thank you messages from people who have received payments, along with small, homemade cut-out figures – presumably meant to represent satisfied claimants – with words like “integrity”, “grateful”, and “phenomenal” written across them in felt tip. “Staff are happy to receive the thank yous, because there has been a lot of bad press,” the acting head of the scheme told me. The staff I spoke to felt proud of the work they were doing, and were very defensive about the criticism they were receiving over the slow progress of payouts. By the time of my visit, the home affairs select committee, then the National Audit Office, then the Public Accounts Committee, and finally a human rights and legal organisation, Justice, had all launched investigations into what was taking so long. The various reports have highlighted numerous problems with the scheme. They note that staffing levels have been consistently lower than planned. The Home Office initially stated it needed 200 caseworkers, but the scheme was launched with just six who were working full-time. Later, the proposed headcount was reduced to 125 full-time employees, but by October 2021, only about 80 of these positions had been filled. When I put this to the Home Office, I was told that they were aiming to recruit another 34 over the next three months. It is now advertising for “compassionate and eager individuals”. Another stumbling block has been the failure to allocate money for claimants to get legal advice when filling in the forms. In the crucial “impact on life” section, claimants often downplay just how badly they have suffered. “They are very embarrassed about the condition that they find themselves in now,” Jacqueline Mackenzie, a partner at the law firm Leigh Day, who has provided pro bono help to more than 100 applicants. “They need to be helped to explain how that has affected them,” she said, echoing what Amoah’s lawyer told me. What puzzles Mackenzie is why the Home Office has failed to recognise this persistent problem. “You would have thought that Windrush is the one group that they would want to get to things right for, but they seem to be failing abysmally,” she said. The Home Office is also regarded with understandable suspicion by many of those eligible for compensation. Some continue to believe, erroneously, that the scheme is a way to round up illegal immigrants; a Home Office survey revealed that 12% of respondents believed that the scheme was set up to send people who are in the UK illegally back to their country of origin. The team in currently charge of the scheme acknowledge these criticisms, and say that changes have been made. About 200 outreach events have been organised, trying to persuade people to apply. “I’m not going to be daft enough to say that it’s all great, when it isn’t. But we are making progress,” another senior manager said. Staff point out that the cases they’re dealing with are inherently complicated. “It would be easier if everyone applied with a neat pile of documents, but very few people keep records and most people have had a disrupted life because of what they’ve experienced. They may have been homeless, they don’t always have many documents. It does take some time to build up that picture.” Originally the Home Office estimated that it would take staff on average 30 hours to process a case; now they say it take more than five times that. “We can’t pretend that it is fast or simple, but we’re not dragging our feet because we can’t be bothered,” the senior manager said. When I asked about Amoah’s claim, staff could say nothing except that in cases of people being wrongly exiled, it would be up to the applicant to demonstrate how deeply their life was affected. To qualify for an impact on life payment at level 1 (£10,000), Amoah would need to show family events had been missed. To qualify for level 2 (£20,000) he would need to prove “some family separation”. For level 3 (£40,000), Amoah would have to demonstrate that his ability to live a relatively normal life was “substantially affected”, or for level 4 (£70,000) “seriously compromised”. For level 5, the maximum (£100,000), he would need to prove major physical or mental health impacts, from which a return to a relatively normal life is likely to take several years. The sticking point may be the question of proof. Without a psychiatric report or notes from a doctor that provide enough detail of his suffering, Amoah’s claim may be found to lack sufficient evidence, and result in a low payout. While staff wish more people were aware of the cases in which large payouts have been awarded, they recognise that publicising these cases is extremely difficult. “It’s never an outcome that you can be pleased about. We can’t say this is a good result, because then we would have to say, we did this terrible thing to someone, but look, now it has worked out well! It’s just not a good news story,” said a senior Home Office civil servant, helping supervise the scheme operation from London. Every day, they are reminded of the ways in which their department has devastated people’s lives, which can be particularly confronting for people who have spent their whole career with the Home Office. “What I do now is the polar opposite of what I used to do,” said one caseworker, who transferred over from an immigration enforcement role. “We’re recognising how much damage we have done,” another caseworker said. “It’s hard, the realisation that the organisation we work for did something so bad to them and we can’t take that back.” Taking helpline calls can be distressing. “Sometimes people will be really aggressive, telling us how they’ve suffered, then the next person on the phone will be crying, absolutely in bits,” the senior manager said. The staff who I spoke to seemed genuinely committed to their work, and hopeful that, in the end, people will receive fair payments. “The home secretary and the department remain steadfast in our commitment to ensure that members of the Windrush generation receive every penny of compensation that they are entitled to,” said the Home Office in a statement. One case worker told me: “It’s drummed into us that it is our job to try to get them as high an award as possible.” They are aware of their department’s poor reputation, but they argue that transferring responsibility for the scheme away from the Home Office – as the home affairs select committee report recommended last week – would simply cause further delays. “It’s not a popularity contest. People don’t have to like us. I don’t even mind if they don’t trust us, as long as they apply,” the senior civil servant said. * * * In the summer, Amoah received a £10,000 interim payment – an acknowledgment that staff accept he has a valid claim. Most of the money went towards paying off debts, and on organising a funeral for his mother which was held in August. Eight months after applying, Amoah has begun checking his email daily, waiting for news of a payment that could allow him to start rebuilding his life. He hasn’t been able to get his old job back, but he would like to start his own upholstery firm, and perhaps give something to his children. Periodically, he calls the Windrush helpline to see if the full amount might be paid soon; they tell him that the claim is being processed. “They say they have a limited amount of staff dealing with a heavy workload. They’re very polite, but the wheels of bureaucracy seem to turn very slowly,” he said. Amoah isn’t sure if a financial settlement could restore his life to anything like how it was before, but he hopes his application conveyed to Home Office staff what it was like to feel trapped abroad with no way of returning home. “I want them to try to understand what they did to me. It was pretty extreme,” he said. “I only went out there for a couple of weeks.” • This article was amended on 31 January 2022 to correct some family details. Amoah’s parents met in the early 1950s, not the early 1960s: his mother was pregnant with another child when she returned from Ghana. Amoah’s mother died in July 2021 and the funeral took place in August. • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, listen to our podcasts here and sign up to the long read weekly email here.Vegan alternatives to leather could save more than just animals. The scientists behind fashion’s new latest must-have – the “mushroom leather” handbag – believe that mycelium, a material grown from fungi which can be engineered to look and feel like calfskin or sheepskin, could help save the planet. Speaking to the Guardian before a talk at the Business of Fashion Voices conference in Oxfordshire, Dr Matt Scullin, CEO of biomaterials company MycoWorks, forecast that mushroom leather could be a sustainability gamechanger, “unlocking a future of design which begins with the material, not with the object”. Fine Mycelium, a patented material which can be grown from fungi in trays in a matter of weeks, replicates the appearance and feel of leather while outperforming it in strength and durability. The material recently made its high fashion debut as an exclusive Hermès handbag. “It can give the same emotional response as an animal leather. It has that hand-feel of rarity,” says Scullin. On a planet of finite natural resources, Scullin believes both the technology and the mindset of carbon-neutral, grown-to-order mushroom leather could be “revolutionary” – and have implications for innovation in manufacture beyond fashion. Alongside Scullin at the conference will be Merlin Sheldrake, author of Entangled Lives: How Fungi Make Our Worlds, Change Our Minds, and Shape Our Futures. Sheldrake, a biologist, is joining a lineup which also includes designers Vivienne Westwood and Tommy Hilfiger, “because I’m interested to talk to people in creative industries about how the possibilities of fungi can help open the mind to new ideas”. “I am excited to support the fashion world in its efforts to become more sustainable. There is so much potential in fungi to overcome some of the problems we face,” he said. Sheldrake sees fashion’s engagement with mushroom leather as a platform for “fungi as an analogy for thinking creatively, and sustainably”. Mushroom leather can be grown in pieces to the specific shape and size required by a designer, eliminating the need for cutting room waste. A report by the Higg Materials Sustainability Index found bovine leather to wreak more environmental damage than any other fabric, including plastic-based synthetic leather, due to the deforestation and gas emissions associated with animal rearing. With leather goods accounting for 15% of the luxury market in 2019, according to the Statista Consumer Market Outlook Luxury Leather Goods Report, sustainable alternatives could have a significant impact on fashion’s footprint. Bolt Threads – another California-based biomaterials company working with mushroom leather, which collaborated with Stella McCartney on a handbag shown at Paris fashion week and is developing products with Adidas – is another leading player in the mushroom leather market, alongside MycoWorks. Mushrooms may not have a glamorous image, but fungi-based leather has become an exclusive material, favoured by the kind of high-fashion design studios which work with double face cashmere, and silk organza. But in order to have a substantial impact on sustainability, the material would need to be accessible at a lower price point. “We are working with luxury fashion first because they are ahead of the curve when it comes to sustainability,” says Scullin. “These are brands which are in a position to think big and to think long term.” But partnership with mass market brands is “on the radar” of MycoWorks, which is about to open a second factory in the US. Scalability that ensured the material could be used in high street fashion or in car upholstery is a definite possibility – the material can be grown in trays in a few weeks – but bioscientists caution that insensitive design could undermine some of the environmentally friendly properties of mycelium. If a handbag or jacket is produced using hardware, trims, adhesives and fastenings which are not biodegradeable, this would undo much of the good the material was developed to achieve. “We can bring biodegradeability to brands, but there is a big problem in the industry with thinking sustainably about a finished product,” says Scullin. Sheldrake believes that one of the overarching lessons learned from studying fungi is “reforming the way we think about waste. If fungi didn’t do what they do, our planet would be piled metres high in the bodies of animals and plants”. He believes that the impact on mushroom leather on our culture could go way beyond a new It bag. “We have been trained as consumers to think in terms of a straight line whereby we buy something, use it and throw it away. Fungi can inform thinking about fashion on lots of levels. This is about material innovation, but it’s also about the culture of making endless new things, and what we can learn from thinking in terms of nature and of cycles instead.”Here are four truths about Scottish politics. The nationalist SNP commands the stage, reinforced by its latest Holyrood election mandate in May. Its leader, Nicola Sturgeon, is Scotland’s most admired political figure by far. Boris Johnson is a big turnoff for Scots. And more Scots want a second independence referendum by 2026 than do not. Sound familiar? They should. All four things have been true in some form or other for a long time now. The SNP has been dominant for 14 years now. Sturgeon has reigned supreme for seven. No Conservative prime minister has been popular with Scots. Demands for a second referendum have revved up since the 2014 No vote, especially after Brexit. So does that mean there will in fact be another independence vote soon? Many say yes. They depict the demand as politically unstoppable. Yet it all depends on which side holds the stronger card. Some polls give the nationalists a boost – yesterday’s Ipsos Mori poll has 55% support for independence. Most others counsel caution: a week ago YouGov had independence trailing on 47%. Scots tell the pollsters they want support to be consistently at 60% before Sturgeon calls a second vote. She remains well short of achieving that. While individual polls remain volatile, the overall picture has paradoxically become more settled. The immediate independence drive appears stalled. The return of Covid-19 boosts Sturgeon as a leader but that boost pushes independence down the agenda again. All this could continue for at least another year. That doesn’t mean there will never be a second referendum, let alone that there ought not to be one. But it does mean, as Galileo might have said to the Inquisition, that it still isn’t moving. To write this will provoke the usual abuse from supporters of independence. Looked at dispassionately, however, it is the case, and one good poll for the independence cause does not change it. More significantly, leaders on both sides in the argument know this too. Their actions can only be properly understood in that light. This is a time for political calculation. It may be less exciting than some want, but it is in some ways more fascinating. The underlying reality is that Scottish opinion still divides down the middle about independence. Smart strategists have long recognised that the resultant standoff requires delicate judgments. Nationalists don’t like the standoff, of course, while unionists do. Each must nevertheless be highly aware of the danger of overplaying their hands. Canny nationalists know they risk alienating middle-ground opinion by obsessing about independence over everything else, especially during Covid. Unionists know that Johnson charging around Scotland trying to stick a union flag on everything is a guaranteed vote-loser. If they didn’t know it before, they certainly do after Johnson’s 80% dissatisfaction rating in the Ipsos Mori poll yesterday, a record low. Gordon Brown argued earlier this year that Scottish opinion divides not into two but three. On many issues, diehard nationalists and unionists frame a group in the middle that is larger than either of them. These middle-ground voters, people whose politics are not wholly defined by the constitutional question but by other values too (many of them shared with people across Britain), will shape any outcome. They remain very much up for grabs. In 2014 they tipped the balance against independence. The nationalists have to change that – but they have not yet succeeded. Until they do, a second referendum remains an uncertain enterprise in which a second defeat would shake Scottish politics to its foundations. Never underestimate the ability of the SNP and the wider independence movement to shift opinion during a campaign, especially while Sturgeon remains at its head. Even so, more thoughtful nationalists acknowledge the difficult reality – and have done so even in the week of the SNP’s recent virtual party conference, in which all its leaders have been compelled to talk up the referendum as urgent business. In reality, there is more light and shade in all this than many would like. Inevitably, Sturgeon’s judgment, and that of the small circle around her, is crucial. Not many nationalists would go as far as one seasoned Scottish political observer did the other day, claiming to me that “Nicola’s commitment is Augustinian; give me a referendum, but not now.” But it is undeniable that Sturgeon – caught between the fervour of her followers and the caution of the voters whose support she needs – is being forced to play the long game on the second referendum. True, there have been moments when events were moving the nationalists’ way – especially in the early aftermath of the Brexit vote. But this has ebbed now, and Brexit, with all its uncertainties, is no longer the nationalist recruiting sergeant that it was. Nor has Sturgeon’s handling of Covid translated into an enduring boost of support for independence. At the height of the pandemic, especially when compared with Johnson, Sturgeon soared in the polls. In August 2020 her approval ratings reached +50. Today they are down, at +12. That’s still far better than anyone else, but it is a reminder that when Sturgeon is judged on other things, including the SNP government’s often poor domestic record, the aura can sharply diminish. The result, perhaps surprisingly, is that UK ministers currently think they have acquired more of a handle on the Scottish question than one might assume in the light of Johnson’s unpopularity and the SNP’s ascendancy. They have done it by a policy of what Victorian imperialists might have called masterly inactivity. Taking care not to inflame the situation needlessly, and trying to avoid outrageous ineptitude may not set the bar high for the UK government, but recent months have been marked by what ministers are more likely to call strategic patience. As long as there is no fervour for independence outside the core vote, UK ministers believe they can play it long. In practice, that means Scotland faces a constitutional poker game, not a battle for freedom. Both sides have to think several moves ahead. The central fact is that there will be no UK government agreement to any request from Sturgeon for a second referendum this side of the next UK general election. That election may not be until spring 2024. What will follow is a tough two years of mounting pressure on Sturgeon from SNP activists to go it alone in a referendum that opponents will dismiss as unlawful and which voters may regard as a misjudged priority. Much rests on the decision she must take. In the fight for the future of the United Kingdom, it is less a question of which side has right on its side, and increasingly a question of which side will blink first. Martin Kettle is a Guardian columnistThere has been a shift towards recreational drug users taking tiny doses of psychedelics, such as LSD and magic mushrooms, to improve their wellbeing and mental health during the pandemic, a leading addiction expert has said. People were microdosing to self-medicate rather than following the trend, popularised in Silicon Valley, of consuming small amounts of psychedelics to enhance creativity, Prof Adam Winstock, the founder and director of the Global Drug Survey, said. The 2021 survey found that among those respondents who both microdosed and took psychiatric drugs almost half reported reducing or stopping their prescribed medication. Winstock, a London-based consultant psychiatrist and addiction medicine specialist, said the findings suggested people had been experimenting with microdosing during the pandemic, perhaps due to increased waiting times for mental health services. The report also found people were experimenting with a wide variety of psychedelics. About a third of those who microdosed with LSD or magic mushrooms (psilocybin) reported also trying other substances, including ecstasy (MDMA), ketamine, a dissociative anaesthetic, and ayahuasca, a strong hallucinogenic plant-cocktail revered by indigenous faith healers. While a tripping dose of LSD is about 100 micrograms, ambitious tech workers from Silicon Valley have eulogised the effect of taking 10 to 20 micrograms every few days on their creativity and productivity, with people in the UK reporting doing so for similar reasons. “In the past people were using microdosing for performance enhancement and creativity,” said Winstock. “Now, I think people are shifting towards using microdosing to enhance wellbeing and to address mental health distress.” Of the fifth of microdosers who said they were taking psychiatric drugs, about a quarter reported they stopped taking their medications altogether and another quarter reduced their intake. “This, for me, is microdosing shifting into treating mental health,” added Winstock, who is an honorary clinical professor at the Institute of Epidemiology and Health Care, University College London. More than a fifth of respondents to the survey who had used LSD and magic mushrooms in the last 12 months reported having microdosed either drug during that period. Three-quarters of them reported no side-effects, while about 10% reported unwanted mental effects and 8% physical effects. Winstock was cautious about the findings, noting that the majority of research on psychedelics and mental health involved full doses of the drugs. He said he hoped the survey would encourage mental health services, the psychiatric establishment and policymakers to engage positively with microdosing, adding that if the practice remains illegal vulnerable people could be exploited or accidentally take hallucinogenic and harmful doses. The largest placebo-controlled trial into psychedelics to date by researchers at Imperial College London found that the mood uplift reported by microdosers might just be the placebo effect. One of the lead researchers on that study, Dr David Erritzoe, clinical director of the university’s Centre for Psychedelic Research, said he supported further clinical trials into the possible benefits of microdosing. But he added that the hype around the practice was leading people to report inflated positive effects. “The problem is that it’s a bit counterculture and from something as cool as Silicon Valley. You have bestselling books by really cool people writing about how their lives have been transformed. And it taps into scepticism about medical expertise and big pharma. All that adds to people’s expectations and a potential placebo effect.” The 2021 Global Drug Survey, which received responses from more than 32,000 people from more than 20 countries between December 2020 and March 2021, also noted the impact of Covid, with a slight drop in the use of recreational drugs. While the use of psychedelics had dropped slightly over that period, Winstock said data from the previous six years showed an upward trend in their use. Many people also reported that they had taken further precautions when taking drugs socially during the pandemic. Of the 14,000 respondents who reported using cannabis, 42% said they less frequently shared a joint, vape, pipe or bong with other people during the pandemic. Just under a quarter (24%) said they were more likely to use joints, pipes and bongs prepared only by themselves, while a fifth reported increasing social distancing while using cannabis. Of the respondents who reported using cocaine, 26% said they were less likely to share a straw or snorter with another person, while a fifth said they were less likely to snort a line racked up by someone else. Take part in the 2022 Global Drug Survey here.In the face of overwhelming scientific evidence, and news reports of the increasing association between climate change and more frequent storms, floods, and wildfires, it is a puzzle to psychologists why climate denial still has such a hold some people. After all, if someone drops a brick on your foot it is hard to find anyone who will deny the force of gravity. Kirsti M Jylhä, a researcher at the Institute of Future Studies in Stockholm, said colleagues consistently found correlations between climate change denial and conservative ideological views. It includes wishing to protect the status quo and a tolerance for the uneven benefit and risks of global warming. But while that finding condemns rightwingers, left-leaning liberals are not off the hook. Many people who believe that global heating is a serious problem and think governments should act to mitigate its effects still “continue living as if climate change did not exist and we had all the time in the world to act”. Jylhä says there are “gaps between how we think and how we behave. So perhaps we are all guilty of living in denial. Disregarding the consequences of our actions may enable psychological wellbeing despite the distress that results from conflict between our values and actions.”Clad in the cowboy boots and turquoise gemstone bolo tie of his home state, Tom Udall, Joe Biden’s longtime friend and pick as US ambassador, made a distinctly American impression as he addressed New Zealand’s press for the first time on Thursday. Despite the departure from the usual diplomatic sartorial tastes, Udall represents a less controversial pick than his predecessor, outspoken Trump selection Scott Brown, who left New Zealand in December. Brown had been one of Trump’s first political backers, with a colourful – at times controversial – history in and out of politics. Brown’s defence of the now-outlawed practice of waterboarding raised some eyebrows in New Zealand upon his selection. In 2017, US officials investigated complaints of inappropriate comments at a party during his inaugural visit to Samoa. Brown said he had been misinterpreted after telling other attendees they looked “beautiful” or “handsome”. Towards the end of his tenure, the ambassador made headlines when he used a private jet to avoid staying in a hotel as part of the country’s quarantine process and was instead permitted to quarantine at home. Udall says he met Biden as an intern in 1973, and the president had been “a good friend ever since”. The former senator for New Mexico will have been selected in part for his credentials working on the “existential” climate crisis and with indigenous nations, and said those would be two of his highest priorities in the role. Another focus for the ambassador will be on shoring up alliances in the Pacific, as the US looks to counter China’s growing influence in the region. “Being a Pacific nation, America is committed with allies and friends and partners to make sure that the Indo Pacific region is a rules-based order,” Udall said. “What [that] means when you get down into the specifics, we’ll see as we go along.” Udall has stepped into the role at a time of slight uncertainty in the two countries’ relationship. When the Aukus security pact between Australia, the UK and the US was announced in September, New Zealand was absent – and critics of the deal said New Zealand was “left out of the loop”. Experts said the deal more starkly illustrated existing differences between the country and its traditional security partners. On Thursday, Udall sought to assuage concerns that New Zealand could be set adrift on security alliances, saying the two countries’ “security cooperation is the best and broadest that it has been in decades”. Asked directly about Aukus, Udall responded: “I think it’s fair to say that nobody’s been sidelined.” “My role that I’ve been given by the president is not to come down here and tell people what to do. I’m here to work with them, to engage, to try to see where we share values … how do we all move forward and protect our democracies, that’s why we talk about the Indo Pacific region.” His other priorities would be climate change, building relationships with the indigenous community, and learning some te reo [Māori language], he said. “I would start with climate change and the extinction crisis that we’re seeing, which are existential threats, even more so here in the Pacific island nations,” he said. “What I’m going to try to do is just develop a very good working relationship … with Māori and with the indigenous people,” he said. “I’m working on my te reo Māori.”The Morrison government will face pressure from MPs to ratchet up sanctions on the Myanmar junta and target Chinese authorities after parliament passed sweeping new powers on the final sitting day of the year. Parliamentarians from across the political spectrum raised human rights violations in China’s Xinjiang region and the crackdown on dissent in Hong Kong as they signed off on long-awaited laws that will widen the government’s ability to impose international sanctions. The move is in response to cross-party calls for Australia to join the US, Canada, the UK and the EU in introducing Magnitsky-style laws to target human rights abuses and serious corruption. Foreign government officials could face sanctions for “gross human rights violations” and “egregious acts of international concern”, including cyber-attacks, under the laws that passed the lower house on Thursday, a day after clearing the Senate. Corrupt business people could also be banned from travelling to Australia and have their assets and bank accounts frozen. The foreign minister, Marise Payne, said the laws would “ensure that we do not become an isolated, attractive safe haven for such people and entities, and their illegal gains”. Payne said Australia would be able to “take timely action, including with like-minded partners where it is in our national interest, to impose costs on, influence, and deter those responsible for egregious situations of international concern”. It is understood the Coalition government is likely to face internal pressure to deploy the new powers, including against Chinese government officials and Myanmar’s junta. Government insiders have previously raised the lack of such laws as one of the reasons Australia wasn’t able to join with its allies to impose coordinated sanctions against Chinese officials over the mass detention and persecution of Uyghur Muslims in Xinjiang. In March Australia and New Zealand issued a statement welcoming sanctions announced by Canada, the EU, the UK and the US – while saying they shared “grave concerns” about Xinjiang. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning If Australia now followed suit, it would attract a furious response from the Chinese government, which has signalled it would respond in kind to any sanctions over what Beijing calls “fake” allegations. In the lower house on Thursday, the Labor MP Tim Watts cited Beijing’s crackdown on dissent in Hong Kong and “the reports of continuing mass detentions and other human rights violations against Ughyurs and other ethnic and religious minorities in Xinjiang and across China”. Watts, the shadow assistant minister for cybersecurity, said the new option of sanctioning individuals for malicious cyber-activity would help in “the fight against international cybercriminals who are menacing Australian businesses and our essential services, our critical infrastructure”. Labor’s defence spokesperson, Brendan O’Connor, accused some leaders of manipulating the pandemic to further weaken human rights. “As we speak today Chinese citizen journalist Zhang Zhan is on a hunger strike and at risk of dying without the urgent medical requirements that she needs,” O’Connor told the House. “Ms Zhang was sentenced to four years of prison in December last year for social media posts critical of the early Covid-19 outbreak in Wuhan.” The Liberal senator James Paterson, who has been outspoken in criticising the Chinese Communist party, said Australia was “equipping ourselves with the tools we need to defend our democracy, our sovereignty and our freedom in a dangerous world”. “The parliament of Australia is sending a very strong message to those who would seek to bully and threaten us … We will stand up for ourselves, our interests and our values on the international stage, no matter what you throw at us.” The Labor senator Kimberley Kitching said harmonising sanctions laws were “a weapon for democratic pushback”. “A strong and clear message will be sent to lower-ranking officials and criminal thugs that their crimes, whether on behalf of or protected by their superiors, will not be immune from international consequences,” Kitching said. “This legislation says to them: ‘Your stolen money is no good here. No matter how you steal from your people, there will be no shopping trips to Paris, no harbourfront mansions in Sydney, no skiing in Aspen and no nest egg in a western bank.’ “Like King Midas, they will have lots of gold but no way to enjoy it.” Last-minute amendments included changing the bill’s name to reference the late corruption whistleblower Sergei Magnitsky. In its first year in operation, the UK’s global human rights sanction regime – on which Australia’s legislation is modelled – imposed sanctions against 72 individuals and six entities. Russia had the most designations, with 29, followed by Saudi Arabia (20), Belarus (eight), China (five), and Myanmar (four). Twenty-five of Russia’s designations arose from the maltreatment and death of Magnitsky. All of Saudi Arabia’s sanctions were imposed over involvement in the death of journalist Jamal Khashoggi. Elaine Pearson, the Australia director of Human Rights Watch, said Australia should seek to harmonise its sanctions with those of allies and “use these provisions without delay”. The measures would “raise the cost of serious human rights violations”. “We want to see this new law applied in a consistent, principled way,” Pearson told Guardian Australia. “There are particular countries in our region that are egregious human rights abusers, and where sanctions would have an impact: look at Myanmar, at China, at Cambodia and the Philippines.” The EU, UK, US and Canada have imposed sanctions against key figures in Myanmar’s coup this year, and senior military officers accused of genocide and crimes against humanity committed against minority Rohingya. The coup leader, Min Aung Hlaing, has been sanctioned by all four, as have senior members of the Myanmar state administration council. Australia has not imposed any new sanctions on senior Myanmar military figures. Rawan Arraf, the executive director of the Australian Centre for International Justice, said she welcomed the “long overdue” laws, while calling for the sanctions office to be given more resources. “We are also hoping for better engagement with civil society organisations,” Arraf said. “Targeted sanctions should be a tool for protecting against the most serious violations of human rights wherever they occur in the world. We hope the Australian government will approach the use of this new sanctions power consistently, equally and free from double-standards.”Top story: Deal signed to buy 114m more doses Morning everyone. I’m Martin Farrer and these are the top stories today. Ministers may allow GPs in England to halt regular monitoring of millions of patients with underlying health problems as part of the urgent new blitz on delivering Covid booster jabs to combat the spread of the Omicron variant. Sajid Javid and NHS bosses are in talks with GPs about relaxing rules which mean family doctors undertake checks on people with diabetes, high blood pressure and other conditions, the Guardian has learned. It came as the health secretary pledged to “future proof” the UK’s vaccine programme and ensure protection for “even more people in the years ahead”. The government has brought forward vaccine deals to secure 114m more doses for the next two years. Under the agreements, the UK will buy 54m more doses from Pfizer/BioNTech and 60m more doses from Moderna. So far, 115m doses have been administered in the UK. There were another 10 cases of Omicron in the UK yesterday, taking the total to 32. Overall, there were 48,374 new Covid-19 cases on Wednesday, a rise of 2% on the previous week, and 171 more deaths. An Israeli doctor who was one of the first people in the world to become infected with the Omicron variant says he believes he caught the virus when he was in London for a medical conference last month. Elad Maor’s claims will raise fears that the variant may have been in the UK much earlier than previously realised. The US has recorded its first case of Omicron in California while analysis of data in South Africa shows the strain has spread “exponentially” and accounted for 74% of the virus genomes sequenced in November. And former health secretary Matt Hancock was under pressure last night to set the record straight over £40m of government Covid-related work won by his former pub landlord. Follow updates on the pandemic here. * * * Abortion debate – Justices on the US supreme court have indicated that they would support curbs on access to abortion during oral arguments in the most important reproductive rights case in decades, threatening the future of abortion access across the country. Campaigners have warned the case poses a direct threat to the legal underpinnings of Roe v Wade, a landmark decision made in 1973 that guaranteed the constitutional right to abortion. The case centres on whether Mississippi can ban abortion at 15 weeks’ gestation, roughly nine weeks before bans are permitted under current law. The court is expected to issue a decision on the case in June next year. * * * Ploughing on – Farmers will be paid for looking after England’s soils for the first time from next year, when the government’s £900m replacement for the EU’s controversial common agricultural policy begins to be rolled out. Environmentalists criticised the measures as puny and accused ministers of failing in their promises to use the UK’s departure from the EU to strengthen environmental protections and reduce the damaging impacts of farming. * * * Tennis ban – The Women’s Tennis Association has announced the suspension of all tournaments in China amid concerns about the safety of the Chinese tennis star Peng Shuai. The player disappeared from public last month after accusing a senior Chinese politician of sexual assault. Amid growing outrage from high-profile players, she was interviewed on video by Olympic chief Thomas Bach, whose organisation declared Peng was “doing fine”. But in a statement last night, WTA chairman Steve Simon said he could not allow athletes to compete in China when Peng Shuai was “not allowed to communicate freely”. * * * ‘Clown’ PM – French president Emmanuel Macron allegedly called Boris Johnson “a clown” in a private conversation, according to reports in France. The remarks came as Macron and Johnson clashed last week over the Channel crossing tragedy. According to Le Canard enchaîné, Macron reportedly said: “It is sad to see a major country with which we could do huge numbers of things being led by a clown.” The prime minister is also under pressure at home to explain why No 10 staff seemingly held two parties during lockdown last winter. * * * ‘Human error’ – A court in Austria has fined a surgeon for amputating the wrong leg of an elderly patient. The 43-year-old surgeon blamed “human error” after she marked the wrong leg of the patient, but the judge in Linz found her guilty of gross negligence and fined her €2,700 (£2,300). The 82-year-old patient died before the case came to court. Today in Focus podcast: Will Omicron cancel Christmas? A new Covid variant first identified in South Africa is spreading around the world, with leaders rushing to respond. Our science correspondent Nicola Davis outlines what we know so far about the Omicron variant. Lunchtime read: Noomi Rapace – from ‘badass’ to Lamb The actor Noomi Rapace shot to fame in The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo but says the role trapped her in “pain and sadness”. She tells Ryan Gilbey how starring in weird new thriller Lamb made her feel alive again. Sport Everton fans turned their fury on the club’s board last night after watching their team swept aside 4-1 at home by Liverpool in the Merseyside derby. Manager Rafa Benitez insisted he does not fear for his job but his team was outclassed by their rivals, for whom Mo Salah scored twice, and Jonathan Wilson writes that the Spaniard cannot be blamed for the malaise at Goodison Park. Liverpool stay third in the Premier League, Manchester City are second after beating Villa 2-1 and Chelsea stayed top by beating Watford by the same score. Former British No 1 tennis player Johanna Konta has decided to retire after struggling with a knee injury for years. She reached as high as fourth in the world in 2017 and bows out knowing she gave everything to her career. Bryony Frost, Britain’s most successful female jump jockey, told a disciplinary panel that her fellow rider Robbie Dunne subjected her to verbal and physical abuse, and exposed himself to her in the weighing room. Michael Vaughan has been dropped from BT Sport’s Ashes coverage because of his involvement in the ongoing investigation into racism at Yorkshire cricket. He also revealed he had tested positive for Covid-19 but his day improved a bit when he was told by the BBC – which has already stood him down from its Ashes coverage – that it expected to work with him again. Business An announcement that rail fares will rise by 3.8% in March was postponed by ministers last week after the furious backlash over downgraded government plans for rail investment in the north. The fare rise for England and Wales, not yet publicly confirmed but contained in leaked papers seen by the Guardian, will be the biggest in nine years. Beijing has urged US business groups with interests in China to “speak out” and lobby the US government in its defence, warning that as bilateral relations deteriorate they cannot make money “in silence”. It was another topsy-turvy day on the markets but the FTSE100 is set to start today up by 0.6%. The pound is on $1.331 and €1.174. The papers The Guardian leads with “GPs may stop monitoring millions of patients due to Covid jab drive”, while the Times says “Fourth jab to fight variants”. The Telegraph has a similar line with “Two more rounds of booster jabs ordered” and the i reports “Booster jabs until 2023: Britain buys 114m vaccine doses”. The Mail warns “Stop being Christmas killjoys, ministers” but the Express is feeling upbeat and claims: “Not all gloom and doom! Omicron cases are ‘mild’”. The Mirror has “Booze, nibbles &amp; party games until early hours” and the FT leads with “US delays deal to lift Trump era steel tariffs over N Ireland fears”. In Scotland the Record splashes on “Cops pay £1m to crash mum’s kids”. Sign up The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendParliament has adjourned for the year, with a whimper and not a bang, after the Morrison government shelved its controversial religious discrimination and national integrity commission bills. In a last-minute bid to win support for the religious discrimination bill, the Morrison government agreed to the demand of four Liberal moderates to protect gay students from discrimination in religious schools – a deal that now threatens conservative support for the legislation. The government is now split between religious groups, including the Australian Christian Lobby and Christian Schools Australia, threatening to withdraw their support over the deal. And a trio of its own MPs are still refusing to give support until an inquiry has reported back and possible further amendments are made. The House of Representatives adjourned on Thursday without a vote on the bill, which now faces two concurrent inquiries over summer, reporting back by 4 February, after the major parties unexpectedly agreed to an additional Senate inquiry on Thursday. Parliament resumes on 8 February. With an election to come as early as March and just 10 sitting days locked in before August, it is unclear whether the religious discrimination bill, protections for LGBT students or a national integrity commission – all promises from before the 2019 election – will be legislated. Despite winning support from some Liberals who had previously expressed reservations on religious freedom, the government is yet to persuade MPs Warren Entsch, Trent Zimmerman and Bridget Archer to support its own legislation. Labor has reserved its position until an inquiry is complete and had support from crossbench MPs to delay a vote, a threat which dissuaded the Morrison government from attempting to force one. On Thursday, Christian Schools Australia rejected the “appalling” deal struck by Dave Sharma, Katie Allen, Angie Bell and Fiona Martin to protect LGBT students by removing religious schools’ exemption to the Sex Discrimination Act. CSA director of public policy, Mark Spencer, said the Australian Law Reform Commission should continue its review of discrimination laws – due to report next year – because reform is “not as simple” as removing one religious exemption. Spencer warned of unintended consequences, arguing the change would prevent schools setting “behavioural expectations” and teaching a biblical view of sexual activity such as a prohibition on sex before marriage, or that marriage should be between a man and a woman. Spencer told Guardian Australia if the Sex Discrimination Act changes are “part of the same package” as the religious discrimination bills, then Christian Schools Australia would no longer support it. The Australian Christian Lobby national director of politics, Wendy Francis, said the exemption “protects the teaching and daily operation of faith-based schools” and talk of removing it “in exchange for some MPs’ support for the religious discrimination bill, is extremely unhelpful”. “Government policy is not made by backroom deals on a separate piece of legislation … without consultation with stakeholders, in particular the faith-based schools, about the implications of that,” she said. “The Australian Christian Lobby will withdraw its support for the religious discrimination bill package, if it includes the removal of [the] section.” The shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, told the lower house it was “clearly inappropriate” for Scott Morrison to push the bill through before the joint human rights committee began hearings into what is a “complex area of law”. Dreyfus said it was “simply wrong” for the Coalition to accuse Labor of delay given it had failed to introduce a bill for three years and had rebuffed offers to work on a bipartisan basis as recently as June, when Michaelia Cash became attorney general. The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, took aim at the Morrison government over its delay on the national integrity commission, reiterating Labor’s pledge for an anti-corruption body “with teeth” able to start its own investigations and inquiry into matters before its establishment. The deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, told the lower house the religious discrimination bill had to take into account “the breadth of views in the Australian community and that it is worthy of bipartisan support”. “It finally provides Australians with protections against religious discrimination at a federal level that are long overdue – and I’m pleased to support this bill,” he said. Earlier, the Coalition, Labor and Greens combined in the Senate to send the religious discrimination bill to a legal and constitutional affairs legislation committee inquiry.In his new memoir, former White House chief of staff Mark Meadows blames just “a handful of fanatics” for the 6 January attack on the Capitol – over which nearly 700 people have now been charged. “No one would [focus] on the actions of … those supporters of President Trump who came [to Washington on 6 January] without hate in their hearts or any bad intentions,” he writes. “Instead, they would laser in on the actions of a handful of fanatics across town.” Throughout his book, Meadows seeks to play down Donald Trump’s role in an insurrection regarding which Meadows himself will now co-operate with the investigating House committee. The former chief of staff writes extensively, supportively and selectively about Trump’s attempts to overturn his election defeat by Joe Biden, of which the Capitol attack was the deadly culmination. But while enthusiastically repeating Trump’s lie that his defeat was the result of electoral fraud, Meadows skates over attempts to stop the certification of electoral college results, the cause in which the mob attacked the Capitol. For example, Meadows does not mention Jeffrey Clark, a former Department of Justice official whose attempt to persuade Trump he could legally overturn his defeat landed him in legal jeopardy. Reporting by Jon Karl of ABC News has placed Meadows in the Oval Office on 3 January, when Clark tried to persuade Trump to fire the acting attorney general, Jeffery Rosen, who rejected the scheme. In his book, Betrayal: The Final Act of the Trump Show, Karl details how Trump was deterred by the threat of mass resignations at the DoJ. On Wednesday, the 6 January committee recommended a contempt charge for Clark. The issue now moves to the House. Karl also reports that aides to the then vice-president, Mike Pence, who would oversee certification of results at the Capitol on 6 January, “began to suspect” Meadows himself was pushing schemes to overturn the process. Meadows, Karl says, sent the vice-president’s staff a memo written by the campaign lawyer Jenna Ellis which argued that Pence could declare results in six key states to be under dispute. Reporting another memo written by Johnny McEntee, Trump’s director of the presidential personnel office, Karl writes: “This was all madness. There was no other way to put it.” Karl concurs with other reporters in saying Meadows was not in the Oval Office when on 4 January a constitutional scholar, John Eastman, presented his own memo on how Pence could supposedly stop certification. Two days later, in a few chaotic hours at the Capitol, offices were ransacked, rioters paraded Trump and Confederate flags through the halls of Congress and lawmakers were hustled to safety. Some rioters chanted that Pence should be captured and hanged. Five people died, including a Trump supporter shot by law enforcement and a Capitol police officer who collapsed the next day. Meadows, however, insists the mob had “absolutely no urging from President Trump”. The Guardian obtained a copy of the book, The Chief’s Chief, as Meadows reversed course under threat of a contempt charge and agreed to testify before the House select committee investigating 6 January. Also this week, lawyers for Trump argued in court that executive privilege means records from his White House should not be released to the panel. The former president contends the same doctrine should apply to former aides. Last weekend, the California Democrat Adam Schiff said the 6 January panel wanted to establish “the complete role of the former president” in the Capitol riot. “That is, what did he know in advance about propensity for violence that day? Was this essentially the back-up plan for the failed [election] litigation around the country? Was this something that was anticipated? How was it funded, whether the funders knew about what was likely to happen that day? And what was the president’s response as the attack was going on, as his own vice-president was being threatened?” Schiff stated. On Tuesday, citing sources close to Trump, the Guardian reported that hours before the Capitol attack, Trump made several calls from the White House to allies at a Washington hotel and talked about ways to stop certification. Meadows’ book, however, will provide few further answers. As he rode with Trump to a rally near the White House on 6 January, Meadows writes, Trump “was in mourning for the second term he had been unfairly denied”. Trump took the stage following an exhortation to “trial by combat” from his attorney, Rudy Giuliani. Trump’s own words featured his instruction to supporters to “fight like hell”. But Meadows claims the speech was “more subdued than usual”. He also claims that when Trump told the crowd “We’re going to walk down to the Capitol and we’re going to cheer on” Republicans objecting to electoral college results, it was all an “ad lib”. Meadows said Trump told him immediately after the speech that when he said he would march on the Capitol himself, he had been “speaking metaphorically” – but only because he “knew as well as anyone that we couldn’t organise a trip like that on such short notice”. In their own Trump book, Peril, Bob Woodward and Robert Costa of the Washington Post describe what happened next. “Following Trump’s hour-long speech, thousands of attendees took his advice. They marched down Pennsylvania Avenue toward the Capitol, and when they arrived, they … surged closer and closer to the Capitol despite pleas from [law enforcement]. “By 1.30pm, parts of the crowd had become a mob, pounding on the doors and demanding entry. At 1.50pm [police] declared a riot. Possible pipe bombs had been found nearby. “Shortly after 2pm, windows at the Capitol began to shatter. They were in. Many were looking for Mike Pence … outside, a makeshift gallows had been erected.”Republicans are preparing to shut down the American government on Friday, in the latest attempt by the party to thwart White House efforts to increase vaccine take-up, by undermining vaccine mandates across the country. Clamor is growing among some conservatives for Republican senators to oppose a stopgap funding bill, which would fund the government for the next few weeks, unless Democrats agree to not direct money towards enforcing a vaccine mandate for larger companies in the US. If the disgruntled Republicans, who reportedly include Senator Mike Lee, from Utah, are successful, the government would effectively run out of money on Friday and could be forced to furlough workers and shut down some federal services. The need for vaccine mandates, which have been introduced by Joe Biden, has taken on additional importance as the US braces for the impact of the Omicron coronavirus variant. The plot by the right comes after some Republican states have already sought to diminish mandates, by expanding unemployment benefits for employees who have been fired or quit over the requirement to get the vaccine. On Wednesday, the House Freedom Caucus, a group of rightwing Republicans in the House of Representatives, urged their Senate colleagues to block the funding bill, also known as a continuing resolution, “unless it prohibits funding – in all respects – for the vaccine mandates and enforcement thereof”. In a letter to Mitch McConnell, the Senate minority leader, the Freedom Caucus said the Democratic-dominated House was set to vote in favor of the stopgap funding bill on Wednesday. The bill will then go to the Senate, where Democrats need Republican votes to pass the bill by Friday night. The House Freedom Caucus said that deadline gave their Senate colleagues “important leverage” to prevent funding for mandates. Biden introduced vaccine mandates, which require employees to be vaccinated or submit to weekly testing, for federal workers and contractors in July. In September, Biden ordered healthcare workers to be vaccinated and companies with 100 workers or more to require Covid-19 vaccines or testing, which the government said would cover more than 100 million employees. Those measures have been put on hold by court rulings, after Republican state attorneys general, conservative groups and trade organizations have sued to stop the regulations. The appeal by House Republicans came after Politico reported that some Republicans in the Senate were open to blocking the stopgap funding bill. “I’m sure we would all like to simplify the process for resolving the [continuing resolution], but I can’t facilitate that without addressing the vaccine mandates,” Lee told Politico. “Given that federal courts across the country have raised serious issues with these mandates, it’s not unreasonable for my Democratic colleagues to delay enforcement of the mandates for at least the length of the continuing resolution.” The Washington Post reported that Lee had planned to at least “block swift debate” on a funding bill. The growing threat of a funding scrap comes after McConnell said on Tuesday there would be no shutdown. While that came before Wednesday’s push from his colleagues, some Republicans had been clear for weeks that they would use the funding bill to oppose vaccine mandates. Republican senators threatened a shutdown at the beginning of November, when Roger Marshall, a senator from Kansas, led a group of 11 Republicans who sent a letter to Chuck Schumer, the Senate leader, threatening to stymie funding. In that letter, signed by 10 Republican senators including Lee and Ted Cruz, Marshall complained that Joe Biden’s plan to require larger businesses to mandate vaccines or weekly testing for workers was “nothing short of immoral”. “We will oppose all efforts to implement and enforce it with every tool at our disposal, including our votes on spending measures considered by the Senate,” Marshall wrote. “To be sure, we agree that countless Americans have benefited from the protection offered by the Covid-19 vaccines. Nevertheless, the decision whether to be vaccinated against Covid-19 is a highly personal one that should never be forced upon individuals by the federal government.” Marshall, a former member of the House who was sworn in to the US Senate on 3 January 2021, has promoted a conspiracy theory about federal reports of coronavirus deaths on his Facebook account. Facebook said Marshall’s post violated policies against “spreading harmful misinformation”. Marshall said he was a victim of “corporate censorship”. Iowa, Tennessee, Florida and Kansas, which all have Republican legislatures, have changed their rules in recent weeks to expand unemployment benefits for people who have been fired or quit after failing to comply with vaccine mandates. On Wednesday, the Guardian reported that Missouri was contemplating similar laws, with more states likely to follow.In the spirit of getting your kicks where you can, I was tickled by former deputy chief medical officer for England Dr Jenny Harries’ recent Omicron-related advice to “be careful, not socialising when we don’t particularly need to”. What would necessary socialising look like? Can I cancel the stressful bits of Christmas and replace them with some quietly necessary drinking with a dear friend, or possibly just a cat? Could I pretend that I have responsibly chosen not to attend parties, when I haven’t actually been invited to any? I’m ready for these upsides. Harries’ advice actually feels like something of an ambivert’s charter. Ambiversion – combining introvert and extrovert traits – is very “now”. There is a theory that Covid and its attendant stresses and circumstance changes recalibrated our preconceptions about how we relate to others. Extroverts have been forced to explore a quieter life that some found they appreciated to an unexpected degree, and introverts are flourishing in a less hectically connected world, or alternatively, realising how much they need and miss human connection. We are becoming, or realising we already were, ambiverts with contradictory and complex needs in our relationships with others, not just tick boxes on a personality test. That is probably a good thing. In the corporate arena, research in 2013 described an “ambivert advantage”: ambiverts in sales outperform other groups, because they relate better to a range of people. Dr Karl Moore, author of the upcoming We Are All Ambiverts Now, argues that responding successfully to Covid challenges requires business leaders to listen, observe and reflect (introvert traits) but also to enthuse, energise and inspire (extrovert). In our personal lives, having a more nuanced understanding of ourselves and others as social animals feels like a forgiving way to approach these tediously still-unprecedented times. With eye-rolling inevitability, the PM rejected Harries’ recommendations, urging us to press ahead with all possible mulled Dickensian jollity, but I will be taking the ambivert’s approach. “All I want for Christmas is a measured amount of necessary socialising” might not seem very celebratory, but I quite like the sound of it. Emma Beddington is a freelance writerA flight I booked through Gotogate was cancelled last year due to the pandemic and, 16 months later, I am still waiting for my refund. Online, I can see I’m far from alone. TSP, London One of those keeping you company is OM of London, who has been waiting a mere 13 months for his refund. He’d also booked through Gotogate but Covid put paid to his holiday. You are paying the price for booking through a third party. The choice and cheap deals offered by booking platforms may seem attractive, but add-ons can inflate the price substantially and customer service can be unreliable. Gotogate, part of the Swedish Etraveli group, invites passengers to pay for after-sales service. Those who are willing to part with £8.99 or more are promised quicker responses and priority refunds, although a notice warns that Covid continues to delay the process. Those who aren’t are put to the back of the queue – and charged a sizeable admin fee to claim their dues. For a dummy booking to New York I was quoted £29 for help after any airline schedule changes unless I paid £17.99 for a “Platinum Support Package’”. In June, Gotogate confirmed to TSP that his refund had been received from the airline but warned pandemic disruption meant it may take a “long time”. It wasn’t until this month, 20 months after his flight was cancelled, that the money arrived. Gotogate told me it had contacted the airline for a refund last July (four months after the cancelled flight), but contrary to its message in June, it had not yet received the money. OM has also now been refunded. Gotogate blamed the airline. Passengers who book via a third-party agent risk finding themselves in limbo over refunds. The legislation entitling passengers to refunds or compensation if flights are disrupted applies only to airlines. However, some insist passengers claim through the booking agent. Gotogate’s terms and conditions make clear it is an intermediary and is not liable for shortfalls by airlines. According to Coby Benson of solicitors Bott &amp; Co, empty-handed customers are unlikely to have legal recourse against Gotogate. “The best option is to pursue the airline directly, because they’re the ones with a legal obligation (both under EC Regulation 261/2004 and contract law),” he says. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsAml Ameen is an actor and director who made his name in Kidulthood in 2006. Now he has made this likable Black British aspirational romcom in the transatlantic style, brashly giving his audience plenty of glam-tourist London locations with a cheeky nod to Richard Curtis’s Love Actually. Ameen plays Melvin, a British writer whose smash-hit bestselling book has taken him to LA, where he has fallen in love with casting director Lisa (Aja Naomi King). Now he wants to take her for a Christmas holiday to London to meet his extended family; his formidable mother Shirley (Marianne Jean-Baptiste) will be hosting her traditional Boxing Day party. But it’s tricky. His sister is personal assistant to the now internationally famous singing star Georgia (Leigh-Anne Pinnock from Little Mix), who used to go out with Melvin and whose heart he broke when he dumped her. Meanwhile, Lisa can’t bring herself to tell Melvin that she has been offered a prestigious job to work with Peter Jackson in New Zealand – and that she’s pregnant. Come to think of it, she may not have shared that info with Peter Jackson, either. Boxing Day has its flaws: I’m not sure that the world really needed another spoof of the Andrew Lincoln/Keira Knightley placard scene from Love Actually. But Ameen has perfectly plausibly brought off a high-gloss mainstream picture with a big heart and a very nice supporting cast, including Stephen Dillane as Shirley’s new boyfriend. For Ameen, it’s another step on the way to Hollywood stardom. • Boxing Day is in cinemas from 3 December.The Winter Village, York The new winter village at York Minster is a good spot for shopping as well as socialising, with wooden cabins selling local food, drinks and gifts. The Smoking Pig serves pulled pork sandwiches and Yorkshire bratwurst; the Chocolate Cabin sells sweet treats and hot chocolate; and the Cabin Bar has gluhwein and beer. Gifts include local cheese, rapeseed oil and preserves, and coffee roasted in Robin Hood’s Bay; spirits from the Yorkshire Bottle Shop; and candles, blankets and sleepwear from Yorkshire makers. There is an adjacent Christmas Tree festival with 40 trees, plus decoration workshops and other events. Until 6 January, yorkminster.org Escape to Winter Island, Manchester Escape to Freight Island, a street-food market in Manchester, has had a long-planned festive makeover and name change (it was due to open for Christmas 2020). Escape to Winter Island’s highlight, literally, is the “ice rink in the sky” – skaters glide around on a mezzanine overlooking the rest of the action. Hog roasts and mulled wine join the existing food and drink lineup, which includes Basque dishes cooked over a huge wood-fired grill, craft beer and cocktails. There are comedy nights on Tuesdays and orchestral renditions of Christmas songs on Wednesdays, and lots of bands and DJs the rest of the week. Other events include Massaoke (a giant singalong with a live band), wreath-making workshops and breakfasts with Santa. Also in Manchester, Ramona and the Firehouse is becoming a winter village with tequila cabins, a Christmas campfire and a dance tent (until 31 December, firehousemcr.com). Until 1 January, escapetofreightisland.com Chow Down Winter Village, Leeds Chow Down, an outdoor dining venue at Temple Arches, Leeds, has transformed into a winter village centred on a new two-storey apres-ski-style bar. Bar Hütte has DJs and a dancefloor downstairs and a rooftop curling club upstairs, plus other activities such as beer pong. There are kitchen residencies from local restaurants, rotating street-food traders, a cocktail bar, a cosy ski lodge and acoustic music sessions around the campfire. And it’s not just for adults: the tipis host festive family activities on Sundays, including the chance to meet Father Christmas. Until 31 December, chowdownevents.co.uk Gosford House Winter Wonderland, East Lothian Gosford House is the grand setting for East Lothian’s first winter wonderland. It has a vintage feel, with a Victorian-style fairground, a train ride around the grounds, donkeys and a Christmas tree maze with a postbox in the middle for sending letters to Father Christmas. There is also a marketplace selling independent Scottish brands and food traders serving warming dishes such as macaroni cheese. The house itself is opening for guided tours, dance classes and beauty treatments. On 17 and 18 December there is a food festival, Feast, with lots of East Lothian producers, a tipi bar with an open fire, and whisky tours and tastings. 17-23 December, roguevillage.com Cranside Winter Village, Glasgow Cranside Kitchen, a food courtyard in Finnieston, Glasgow, is another outdoor dining venue turning into a winter village. The bar now serves mulled wine and cider, winter cocktails and boozy hot chocolate, and the seven restaurant stands have been joined by Christmas food market stalls. New seating areas – which include igloos, a ski gondola and a “hygge lounge” with heaters, blankets and fairy lights – are set in winter gardens with festive foliage and a giant Christmas tree. There is a programme of DJs, live music, Christmas party nights and drag brunches. Until 2 January, cransidekitchen.co.uk Liberté Winter Village, Liverpool Liberté bar and restaurant’s rooftop winter village is back for a second year, with 16 heated wooden lodges, each seating six, plus the Shack, a new 30-seater lodge with its own bar. Drinks and food are served to the smaller lodges – including winter cocktails, crepes and waffles – which have Christmas tunes playing. Kids can have breakfast with Santa on Sundays in December, while for adults a lot of the magic comes from the location: the terrace is on the third floor of the Bentley Building on the Strand, with panoramic views of Liverpool’s waterfront and city centre, all lit up for Christmas. Until 22 January, liberteliverpool.com Junkyard Wonderland, Norwich Norwich’s Junkyard Market has been reborn as Junkyard Wonderland for Christmas, with five heated marquees, hot toddies and hearty food such as yorkshire pudding wraps and loaded roast potatoes. The market raises money for local homelessness charities, with £48,500 donated so far. Also in Norwich, Mysabar has reopened for the festive period: it’s a heated open-sided tent with 18 craft beers and ciders on tap, plus street food, Sunday music sessions and a New Year’s Eve party (weekends until 2 January, mysabar.co.uk). Weekends until 31 December, junkyardmarket.co.uk City Social, Birmingham Held in a neglected underpass, this is a hip alternative to Birmingham’s traditional German Christmas market, with independent traders, film screenings and live music. This year there is a new craft cocktail bar, plus the return of stalls selling hot Pimm’s and mulled gin, while food vendors include Roastie Toastie – Christmas dinner in a toasted sandwich. Local makers sell Christmas decorations and gifts, and there are buskers during the day, DJs on Fridays and live bands on Saturdays. Wednesdays to Saturdays until 18 December, thecitysocial.co.uk The Winter Village at Battersea Power Station, London This riverside winter village is returning for its third year, with pop-up alpine huts along the Thames. The Grade-II listed Coaling Jetty hosts stalls serving mulled wine, crepes and seafood treats from Wright Bros such as oysters and scallops cooked in flame-torched butter. Arts and crafts workshops will include, on 18 December, a “signature Christmas centrepiece” class on the jetty. A giant advent calendar art trail with the theme Peace on Earth takes in 24 venues and a newly opened section of the North Park in front of the power station hosts a vintage ferris wheel and Toy Town carousel (£2). Visitors will be able to play Yule Boules, Reindeer Toss and Feed the Snowman games for free. Frozen II is showing at the Cinema in the Arches and The Cat in the Hat is on at the Turbine theatre; and the 13 bars and restaurants have Christmas menus. Until 3 January, batterseapowerstation.co.uk Winter Wundergarten at Depot, Cardiff Depot, a warehouse events space in Cardiff, is all decked out for Christmas and has a packed festive programme. The Winter Wundergarten on 4 and 11 December is a Bavarian-themed party with steins, street food and Christmas songs. The Christmas market on 12 December has Welsh traders, live music, hot cider, and arts and crafts for kids. There are several Christmas circus editions of Bingo Lingo, its bingo party nights, featuring acrobats, fire-breathers and singers belting out songs from The Greatest Showman. Then there’s the Gavin &amp; Stacey Christmas quiz, the children’s rave and a New Year’s Eve party with live band and champagne. Various dates until 31 December, depotcardiff.comJane Campion’s The Power of the Dog is a film of reveals: some gradual and ruthlessly calculated, others abrupt and careless and hastily re-concealed. Bodies and desires are unwittingly exposed to others. Motivations are guarded until it’s too late to change them. When they slip, they show us the secret lives and minds of men who want to seem more straight and simple than they are. Benedict Cumberbatch’s performance is the film is a reveal in itself. It’s aggressive and dissonant and off-kilter in ways the refined British actor rarely permits himself to be on screen, and I spent a good portion of the film’s running time figuring out if I liked it or not. Whenever he plays American, Cumberbatch gives the appearance of acting more than usual, and such is the case here: cast very much against type as crude, caustic Montana rancher Phil Burbank, his growling drawl and wide-gaited cowboy swagger feel like put-ons, almost distractingly unnatural to him — even as his presence fixes your gaze with eerie insistence. At a certain point, the penny dropped. The tensely macho affectations aren’t so much Cumberbatch’s as Phil’s: the actor is channeling the character’s own uneasy but compelling performance of alpha masculinity, straining to keep a different sense of self under his shapeless leather cattleman hat. And it was with this realisation that the not-so-secret agenda of Campion’s terse, hard-bitten and surprisingly, substantially queer film began to bloom, like a cactus flower in a very hostile desert. Or a paper flower on an otherwise dingy barroom table setting — out-of-place decorations fashioned by out-of-place teenager Peter (Kodi Smit-McPhee), a quiet, anxious boy who looks like he was once scared entirely out of his skin and never quite got it to fit again. The ornate fake blossoms are brusquely destroyed by Phil, set on fire to light his cigarette, and for much of The Power of the Dog, it looks like Peter will likewise fall prey to the older man’s wilfully destructive impulses. There, too, the film defies our expectations, as Phil and Peter enter a fierce psychological standoff that highlights their very different senses of duty toward masculine identity — and ultimately reveals what they have in common. Phil has always had a beta counterpart to torment: usually, his mild-mannered brother George (Jesse Plemons) has taken the brunt of that need. For 40 years, the men have shared a bedroom in the dark, unloved wooden house at the centre of the family ranch, maintaining a physical closeness in spite of personalities roaming ever farther apart. Stuffily suited George is the ranch’s gentle pragmatist; Phil, never not seen in oily, sweat-stained workwear, is its brawny labourer, despite a superior, well-read intelligence that he works hard to override — as if his intellect might give the lie to his brutishness. It’s an unhappy arrangement that has nonetheless worked well enough for years. Phil is more rattled than he cares to admit when George rather suddenly marries fragile widow Rose (Kirsten Dunst), moving her into the house and himself out of the brothers’ bedroom. Perhaps he’s merely taking that frustration out on Rose’s son Peter when he starts relentless bullying the boy, taunting him for his spindly physique, his effeminate hobbies and his mother’s weaknesses. But perhaps he recognises a strange kind of threat in Peter’s wispy demeanour, fearing that a kid who cares so little for performative masculinity will see right through his own. And so The Power of the Dog proceeds as a morbid, cold-souled negative of Brokeback Mountain: a film where two lonesome cowboys recognised a mutual queerness in each other, letting it pull them close until the world pulled them apart. Here, the world needn’t intervene: the men can weaponise that shared secret against each other all by themselves. Though Campion’s adaptation of Thomas Savage’s novel makes blunt nods to gay desire in some respects — even revealing a character’s hidden stash of muscle magazines, what passed in the 1920s for gay porn — its most charged queer relationship is an unseen one. Taciturn Phil speaks little of anything personal, but frequently shares memories of a late cowboy, Bronco Henry, his perma-scowl lifting by a full inch whenever the name crosses his lips and mind. Henry, we gather, showed young Phil the literal ropes as a rancher, and more besides. But nothing Phil says of the man is as revealing as the fetishistic reverence with which he treats his one keepsake of Henry, a riding saddle that he displays in the barn, regularly oiling and polishing it with an out-of-character tenderness that borders on the erotic. Poor George and ailing Rose can only dream of this tactile chemistry between Phil and his idol’s leather seat. Campion, a great sensualist film-maker, is rarely given due credit for her sense of humour, but there’s sly, leering wit in the way she draws on rustic BDSM iconography — saddles and chaps and ropes and whips, oh my — to articulate the queer longings her characters would rather not. Elsewhere, she revels in male-for-male vanity and peacocking: in one marvellous tableau, she gazes across Phil’s retinue of young ranch hands on a work break, in repose in various states of undress, one even sprawled like a beefcake model astride his horse. It’s a luxuriant display of male beauty for the benefit of no one but each other. Claire Denis’ Beau Travail comes to mind in its body-beautiful symbology of masculine power and servility — though so, perhaps accidentally but not inappropriately, does the rodeo-chic queerness of Madonna’s Don’t Tell Me video. Yet the most hard-to-read queerness in the film lies in the character most easily targeted and bullied for not being like the other boys. Peter’s desires are opaque throughout; when he begins mirroring Phil’s behaviour later in the film, to the consternation of his protective mother, it’s not clear whether he’s motivated by empathy and identification or canny, vengeful trap-laying. Phil softens to the lad, making peace, as you do, by weaving him a snazzy, handmade cowboy’s lasso. It’s a gesture of kinship: they’re family, of course, but perhaps he means another kind of community. Masculine bonding is a fixture of the American western, of course, though Campion’s thrilling, perverse film subverts that tradition, bringing the long-seated subtext of the genre perilously close to the surface — only to get violently evasive just as her cowboys are about to come clean, or come out, to each other. The Power of the Dog is now available on NetflixWith that - we will leave it for the evening. What a year, what a day! Here were the major news developments: Liberal MP Alan Tudge will step aside after former staffer Rachelle Miller alleged an ‘abusive’ affair with the minister. Scott Morrison has announced an inquiry into the allegations. Health minister Greg Hunt has officially announced his retirement from parliament at the next election. Hunt has been in parliament since 2001. Greens senator Lidia Thorpe said to Liberal Senator Hollie Hughes “at least I keep my legs shut...” in the Senate today. The Senate also referred the religious discrimination bill to the legal and constitutional affairs legislation committee, which will now inquire into it separately to the joint human rights committee... in February. The Fair Work Ombudsman has accused Coles of underpaying 7,800 staff between January 2017 and March 2020. Victoria recorded 1,419 Covid cases and 10 deaths while New South Wales recorded 271 new cases. Former South Australian premier Jay Weatherill has tested positive for Covid after arriving in Adelaide. Parliament is officially adjourned until February next year after MPs and senators delivered their annual Christmas messages. And legend ABC radio broadcaster Fran Kelly has retired from early mornings. A Senate committee report blasting the Morrison government’s commuter car park grants scheme has been tabled in parliament, AAP’s Alex Mitchell reports. The committee, which had heard the $660m commuter car park fund did not grant money in an effective or merit-based way, found it was “clear executive government and decision makers are not being held to account ... for corrupt and otherwise questionable behaviour”. Labor senator Tim Ayres, who chaired the committee, said the report showed the prime minister “was only interested in using public money to sandbag vulnerable Victorian seats”. The only metric that mattered was votes. There was no consideration of a project’s merits. There was no evaluation of a project’s feasibility or costs. It was a rort. It remains a giant rort from a corrupted government that has learned nothing and shows every sign of doing it again next year. Among seven recommendations, the report asks PM Scott Morrison to table a full explanation of the role he played in allocating car park funding before 17 December. Through the inquiry, senior Australian National Audit Office official Brian Boyd said the entirety of the $4.8bn urban congestion fund had been used for the selection of projects with the same process. Another report recommendation was a complete audit of the UCF. Greens Senator Janet Rice echoed Senator Ayres’ sentiments: The prime minister was up to his neck in it. Basically, we had a systematic, co-ordinated scheme ... to be spending taxpayer’s money for political purposes - to buy votes. A dissenting report penned by Liberal senator Claire Chandler says the report makes a series of political criticisms “while ignoring (Labor) took an almost identical policy to the 2019 election”. Morrison has previously argued the responsible minister made decisions using the proper authorisations and Australians deserved better access to car parking. And with that, the Senate is officially adjourned until 22 February. Meanwhile in the world of weather: In Tasmania, there’s a road weather alert for the South East, Upper Derwent Valley, and southern parts of the Central Plateau, Midlands and East Coast for reduced visibility in heavy rain due to thunderstorms over the next two hours. Bridget McKenzie is up: “like Senator Wong, I’ll be very very glad to see the back of 2021”. I love when politicians see eye to eye, so refreshing. As Amy Remeikis takes a wildly deserved break, Penny Wong is thanking deputy leader of the senate Kristina Keneally in her end of year statements, and says she hopes she “makes a long and successful contribution in the house of representatives”: It’s going to be a tough year...but I hope we’re on the other side by the time I’m giving these remarks next year...it’s been a year where a lot of emotions were expressed, this is where conflict is engaged in and we will work to contain that conflict...I hope we can all work to contain that, sometimes successfully, sometimes not. Whatever differences we have, we all have people we love and cherish. So my hope for you is everyone here...can reconnect with those they love...may Father Christmas deliver on 25 December and may we deliver next year. The Senate is also beginning to wind down, and the planes are starting to take off from Canberra, so you can call the 2021 sitting year pretty much done and dusted. Parliament is not due back now until February. That is unless Scott Morrison decides to call an election after 26 January, of which there is still every possibility, in which case it won’t be back at all until after the election. Either way, the Guardian will be there to cover it all for you. I have a few months of pre-planned leave from next week, as I take care of a few other projects, so I may miss the first weeks of parliament (and possibly the election campaign, or at least part of it) but you will be in very good hands with Mike Bowers, Katharine Murphy, Paul Karp, Sarah Martin and Daniel Hurst, with Tory Shepherd’s expert hand on the blog. She has covered politics for years, so she is well across all of the things and is also hilarious, so you are very lucky. It’s been a pretty rough year in what is becoming a decade of rough years. There are no words to sum it up adequately, or even bring sense to it, because we have all been on some pretty intense and individual roads this year. The rest of the nation has no idea what Melbourne and surrounds have been through and can’t pretend. Sydney and NSW saw their own lives grind to a halt – but even that experience depended on your postcode. The ACT had a taste, joining half the nation in lockdown, while the other half of the population lived within their borders like the pandemic was almost yesterday’s news. Families have been apart for going on two years (or longer). Australian citizens saw themselves unable to return to their country, and at one stage threatened with imprisonment if they happened to be coming from India. Visa holders who had made lives in Australia suddenly found their papers not counting for much. Parents did their best to keep both children and lives in order, without any relief. People who lived alone were cut off from the social lives which sustained them. Not being able to make plans brought its own load, and then suddenly, the reopening was upon us, and life was meant to return to “normal”. It’s OK if that has been a lot. It’s OK if nothing still feels normal to you. And it’s OK if you are still coming to terms with everything you have been through. We get it. We also saw women rise up and say enough. And we saw, in many cases, that wasn’t enough. I know that has brought up a lot of trauma for a lot of people, many of who were dealing with it for the first time. I have said this before, and I will say it again for anyone who needs to hear it – however you need to deal with it is exactly right. You do not have to share your story for it to be valid. You are no less brave, no less a survivor. We see you, and we are proud of you for just putting one foot in front of the other. For those who shared your stories, thank you. We honour all of you. And then there are all the private battles everyone goes through, no matter what is happening in the world. We see you too. Thank you to everyone who spent part of their year with Australian Politics Live and us. The Guardian Australia news blog will continue, so make sure you tune in for that. But for the Politics Live team, it is farewell until next year. All of the thanks and love and gratitude to the heart of the blog, Mike Bowers for all that he does (it is so much more than you see on the page) – this project would not exist without him. Murph is the best leader you could hope for – and even better than you imagine – and we are all better for her wisdom, gentle guidance and fire. Sarah Martin juggles 50 balls at once, while listening to my rants, and I would be lost without her. Same with Paul Karp and Daniel Hurst, who are two of the most excellent journalists in the gallery and even better humans. I am very lucky to have them on the team. I owe all of the gratitude and debts to the Guardian team at large – you may not see all their names, but there are scores of people who are responsible for this project and who go above and beyond keeping this a safe place for us all. From the moderators, to the desk editors, the audio visual team, the data team, the producers, the subeditors, the journalists and correspondents – you are all wonderful. Thank you. But mostly, thank you to you, our audience. We adore you and we are so thankful and honoured by your support. You brighten our day, challenge us, and keep our fires burning, and we are so grateful. We may not always get it right, but you are the reason we keep trying. I will be back in the first half of next year. In the meantime, you can reach me here and here if you need to, and I’ll be popping up all over the place, so I won’t be far. I can only say thank you again. Happy holidays, merry all the things, and whatever the next year brings you, I hope it is brighter than what you have just been through. For the final time in 2021 – take care of you. We all need a little kindness after that year. Ax Rachelle Miller, through her lawyer, has issued a statement: Rachelle Miller welcomes the announcement by the Prime Minister Scott Morrison today of the appointment of Doctor Vivienne Thom to review the conduct of Minister Tudge, as outlined by Rachelle this morning. Gordon Legal senior partner Peter Gordon said today: “Rachelle will cooperate fully with this investigation. Rachelle spoke out today on her own behalf and in support of the brave women who have fought to advance this issue in recent times. Her priority is that both major parties commit immediately to implementation of all 28 recommendations of the Jenkins review. “We regard Mr Morrison’s announcement today of what he calls ‘an independent and fair’ review of Mr Tudge’s ministerial conduct as an admission of the fundamental flaws of the existing complaints process. That existing process allows the Government to hire its own lawyers to the complaint, hide the result under legal privilege, provide a Minister with access to the determination but not the complainant, and allows the Minister concerned to tell everyone his own version of what was decided. The existing system is neither independent nor fair, as Commissioner Jenkins has made clear. “Recommendation 22 of the Jenkins review provides that Parliament establish within 12 months a new fair, independent, confidential and transparent system to handle complaints and appeals about misconduct by members of Parliament.” We look forward to receiving details of the terms of reference and the process Dr Thom proposes to follow. And the house has adjourned. Parliament is all but done for 2021. Here is some more from Mike Bowers, capturing the end of parliament. The SA senator is then asked about the federal integrity commission legislation which didn’t materialise: We won’t see progress on this, we can’t see progress on this. We can see a complex bill like the religious discrimination bill takes a couple of months of inquiry to be able to deal with it properly. I am not convinced we will get to a comfortable place with that bill at all, when we have got something like an integrity bill whether people again are passionate, and there are a lot of issues that need to be worked through. We have got three days in February sitting in the Senate and a further three days in the budget, and that is it, before the election. There is no way that an Icac bill can now get through the Senate. So we end up with a broken promise from Scott Morrison and it is a broken promise that is not the fault of the Senate, this legislation, as Mark Dreyfus just pointed out, has been sitting around on a shelf, unadjusted, for some period of time. I think the government, perhaps quite deliberately, has left it at this point. We will no doubt have stories after the election of colour-coded spreadsheets looking at marginal seats, and that is a misappropriation of funds for the benefit, not necessarily of the communities that get a grant of some sort but the purpose for the ground, the dominant purpose is to in actual fact, influence the election in a particular way using public funds. Rex Patrick is then pushed on his comments on Lidia Thorpe’s interjections, given there are plenty of interjections from other senators: I think what she does, and other senators do it too, it is disruptive. There are times when people do heckle or shout across the chamber. Again, it is normally about a particular point in the discussion, but that is kind of the way that parliaments work. It should never get, never go to issues of a personal nature. That is not acceptable in any way, shape or form. I will just point out that Senator Thorpe is very, very enthusiastic and passionate about particular issues, and maybe my advice to her as a fellow senator, and someone who cares about the processes, and people having their say, is to be tactical about how you do it. Rex Patrick is speaking to the ABC, where he is asked about the Greens senator Lidia Thorpe’s interjection (which was withdrawn with a subsequent apology) to Liberal senator Hollie Hughes. Look, debates can be fiery and passionate. I don’t have a problem with interjections across the chamber, provided it’s related to the topic of the bill or the matter that is being debated. There is no excuse for anyone bringing personalities into the debate, and particularly inside conversations across the chamber. Look, I heard what Senator Thorpe said yesterday. I was disgusted by it. It kind of left me a little bit breathless. I will give credit to Senator Larissa Waters, who I think immediately acted, and we saw a result and apology from Senator Thorpe. But I think there probably needs to be some further discussions with Senator Thorpe about some of the interjections that she has made across the chamber. She’s very passionate about particular issues, particularly in relation to Indigenous rights, Indigenous safety, but sometimes the interjections are quite disorderly. While we are on talking weather, there is a hail warning for Canberra. Tory posted a little earlier about a thunderstorm asthma warning – keep that in mind if you are near central Victoria: After four months of being closed to the public, the parliament will officially reopen on December 4. The DPS is very excited: There is a fantastic program of summer events ready for visitors to enjoy, along with delicious dining and the return of exciting experiences. The opening weekend will include new tours, a fresh summer menu along with the reopening of our beloved roof to the public. People will need to book in for ticketed events, such as the Yeribee and art &amp; architecture tours. To celebrate 110 years of the Historic Memorials Collection, over the next few months, visitors can see artworks which rarely are exhibited publicly and interviews that explore the intersection of art and politics in Australia. In the lead up to Christmas, there are plenty of opportunities for a little indulgence with Christmas lunches, dinners, and high teas. The Parliament House Christmas high tea mixes traditional Christmas dishes with Aussie classics, while lunch or dinner can be two or three courses, or a five course Chef selection. While people are enjoying what Parliament House has to offer, they can also donate to the Parliament House Christmas Giving Tree to support the Australian Indigenous Leadership Centre and The Food Centre. Adam Bandt has also spoken in support of Julian Assange. The house now moves on to the matter of public importance (which is the usual the government is quite terrible motion Labor puts forward). Andrew Wilkie, with George Christensen sitting behind him, is moving a motion acknowledging Julian Assange and his continuing incarceration, as well as calling on the prime minister to speak to Boris Johnson and Joe Biden “to end this madness”. And then the new Speaker Andrew Wallace makes his speech – it is short and sweet: I was going to make a speech on behalf of all those in parliament – if you work in the building, thank you very much for your service to the commonwealth and also to the members of parliament. And senators. Thank you very much and Merry Christmas. Covid is still making its impact felt Of course, the fact that we have moved on to the Christmas messages mean we won’t be getting to religious discrimination in the house today. So that is that. Barnaby Joyce doesn’t go through the names of his staff though (although he does thank them all) because he can’t remember them all. Barnaby Joyce is now doing his thank yous. It seems to involve a few inside jokes, and thank yous to people by their first names. Anthony Albanese finishes with this: I do want to wish everyone a wonderful Christmas – may it be a time of reunions worth of happiness, relaxation, and a 2022 to bring us whatever we want in life. I guess people know what my wish is for. While question time was doing what ever it was question time does, the Victorian parliament passed its pandemic laws. That was a pretty big slog for the Andrews government, but as AAP reports, it is now a done deal: Victoria has become Australia’s first state to introduce specific laws for managing a pandemic. The Public Health and Wellbeing Amendment (Pandemic Management) Bill passed the upper house 20 votes to 18 on Thursday afternoon. Transport Matters MP Rod Barton, Animal Justice Party MP Andy Meddick, Reason Party MP Fiona Patten and Greens leader Samantha Ratnam voted with the government. The bill will go to the lower house, where the government has a commanding majority, for final approval and then to the governor of Victoria for royal assent. It comes into effect from December 16, when the current state of emergency expires. Under the legislation, the premier and health minister will have the power to declare a pandemic and enforce orders such as lockdowns, mask-wearing, vaccination mandates, and quarantine. The pandemic orders can differentiate between cohorts of people based on characteristics such as age and vaccination status, relevant to the public health risk. Under the current state of emergency, those powers lie with the chief health officer, who is an unelected official. The upper house sat for 21 hours this week debating several amendments to the bill, which were made to secure the support of Mr Barton after former Labor minister Adem Somyurek announced he would return from a self-imposed absence to vote against it. Mr Somyurek was in the chamber when the final vote occurred on Thursday. The legislation became a lightning rod for anti-lockdown and anti-vaccination groups, who have occupied the steps of state parliament for weeks in protest. Anthony Albanese is now delivering his Christmas message – he also thanks everyone, including cleaners and other essential workers, who became absolutely (even more) crucial during the pandemic. But he too can’t help but get a little political (it is that sort of year) In thanking Tony Burke he says: “he is a good person. He will make an outstanding leader of the House. He does understand the standing orders.” And as part of a thank you to his party he says: It’s been a tough period to be in opposition. We had to come into the parliament, and we supported every single piece of legislation that was put up during the pandemic. Even though we regard some of it as being flawed. We said we wouldn’t allow the perfect to be the enemy of the good because the national interest required that and we did [support all of that] without exception. It’s something that those opposite don’t always acknowledge, but they are they are the facts of what happened. So much of the Australian economy is riding on the property market, so there’s always interest in what is likely to happen next. Today we learnt from the ABSthat investors are continuing to pile into housing, with new loan commitments rising another 1.1% in October to almost $10b. That’s near their record highs, and the value has risen each month for 12 months in a row increasing by 90% all up. Still, the pace of the increase is slowing, with higher fixed mortgage rates among the drags. Overall new lending for housing retreated 2.5% last month, with owner-occupier lending dropping 4.1%, extending falls that began in May. As CommBank economists noted, lending to first-home buyers is also dropping. “Lending is a good leading indicator of dwelling prices and we expect dwelling price growth to slow in 2022 and for prices to fall in 2023,” the bank said. (See more on the ‘twilight of the housing boom’ here.) Capital city property auctions, meanwhile, remain near the highest since at least 2008, when consultancy CoreLogic began tracking trends. This week, some 4222 homes are expected to go on the block this week, less than 1% fewer than the 4251 auctioned last week. Only two weeks have ever had more than 4000 predicted auctions, and this latest forecast is about twice the number of a year ago. In Melbourne, 1887 homes are scheduled to be auctioned this week, making it the third-busiest of the year. In Sydney, the 1547 planned auctions would top last week’s tally to be the second-busiest in those record (since 2008). The sales have been on the rise for nine weeks. Auctions are less popular in most other cities, with only five homes set to go under the hammer in Tasmania, for instance. CoreLogic, meanwhile, has also been tracking housing affordability outside the major urban centres. Guess what? It’s got a lot worse. “In the year to March 2021, migration from cities to regions increased 5.9%, while the number of people leaving regional Australia for the capital cities declined 3.5% in the same period,” it said in a separate report out today. Homes available to buy or rent have been pushed to “extreme lows”. “As of 28 November, the amount of for sale listings counted across regional Australia remained 36.9% below the five-year average, with just under 60,000 properties available for sale,” it said. I suppose those looking at a tree- or sea-change (or a ti-tree change, for both) had better put it off for a while. Scott Morrison finishes his speech with this: Mr. Speaker, this has been a challenging and difficult year for our country. ...The house is rising but elsewhere in our country Australians are facing down those floods and our gratitude continues to be with them [and those who] were serving them. We might have been separated by borders for these last few years, but those borders are certainly lifting as our vaccination rates are at all high levels. Mr. Speaker, we look forward to those being lifting and we look forward to Australia continuing to open safely so we remain safely open. Our hope and our prayer is for a quiet season without either fires or more floods. But if there are Australians know that those who work across our government will be there to support them in their time of need. May it be a time of of great peace and renewal and refreshment and may 2022 be a better year than that preceded it. 2021 is in the revision mirror, 2022 is the way forward Mr. Speaker, God bless and Merry Christmas to all. The Australian Christian Lobby’s national director of politics, Wendy Francis, has issued a statement threatening to withdraw support from the bill over a deal with four Liberal moderates to protect gay students from discrimination in religious schools. She said: Talk of simultaneously removing section 38(3) of the Sex Discrimination Bill, which protects the teaching and daily operation of faith-based schools, is extremely unhelpful. Fortunately, a religious discrimination bill inquiry will get to investigate these issues and take submissions and evidence from stakeholders before the bill returns to Parliament in February 2022. Government policy is not made by back room deals on a separate piece of legislation, the Sex Discrimination Act, without consultation with stakeholders, in particular the faith-based schools, about the implications of that. A faith-based school has the right to set a faith-based environment and discourage activity in the school that openly undermines that. This is much broader than the red herring of faith-based schools expelling same sex attracted children. There is no evidence that is happening and no peak body for Christian Schools support that. The Australian Christian lobby calls on the government to proceed to debate and vote on the Religious Discrimination Bill, about which there has been years of consultation, without undermining the substantial protections for religious schools contained in the Sex Discrimination Act. The Australian Law Reform Commission is currently examining the Sex Discrimination Act and should be allowed to complete its work. The important issue of protection from religious discrimination based on religious belief and practice should not be conflated with other existing discrimination acts. Religious bodies have a right to protect their religious character in the same way that political parties can employ people who will protect their ethos. Last minute reports that moderate liberals have pressured the Attorney General to include changes to the Sex Discrimination Act to get the long-awaited Religious Discrimination Bill appear conflated as they defy standard parliamentary processes and lack public backing by the Attorney.” Scott Morrison can’t help but let a little politics slip into his Christmas message: To the deputy prime minister and his predecessor [Michael McCormack] I say thank you very much for your friendship and your support. And to the great strength of the coalition of the Liberals and the Nationals. That’s a coalition we want – not the other coalition’s that could occur on that side” He then says he will return to the ‘tone’ of the message and continues his thank yous. Here is some of how Mike Bowers saw the chamber (now that it is pretending to be nice to each other again) Scott Morrison is up first. He speaks about the resilience, the Australian people, all of the institutions, the parliament, the national cabinet, the retiring members and pretty much everyone else you could think about. After Greg Hunt finished up his retirement announcement, the house moved to the Christmas messages (on indulgence). This is of course the time when the leaders and all the MPs pretend like they haven’t just been slinging insults at each other. Good afternoon politic lovers – what an absolute day it has been. A very big thank you to Tory for her work today – she is brilliant. You have Amy Remeikis for the afternoon/evening Health minister Greg Hunt has told parliament that he advised the prime minister this morning that he would not be contesting the next election. He says one of his children had said to him, “It’s time to come home dad”. Hunt, who has been in parliament since the November 2001 election, said he wanted to see a “strong brilliant woman” take over the Mornington Peninsula seat. He praises the Liberal party and the prime minister, saying “the bigger the issue the clearer he knows the way.” He also expresses a somewhat unpopular view this week, saying “as much as I love the Liberal party, I love this place more,” and refers to the passage of Maeve’s law last night as an example of parliament at its best. Hunt thanks his staff, including many long-serving. He also reads a letter of thanks from a mother for whose daughter he had lobbied for compassionate access to medicine. He says his focus now is on Paula, Poppy, James, Elsa and Charlie the cavoodle, and then paraphrases The Princess Bride (apparently his favourite movie). The prime minister, Scott Morrison, pays tribute to Hunt, saying he has relied on no one more than Hunt during the pandemic. He says he could find “no more brilliant mind, no greater friend, no person of greater integrity, but most importantly someone with a massive heart.” He says the health portfolio is one of the most challenging, saying it is a difficult moral challenge to weigh up the competing needs in the sector. Now for some Mike Bowers action! And with that, that’s me done for now. Back to remarkable Amy Remeikis for the rest of this strange, final day. Alan Tudge - who has stood aside, as we found out in question time - has issued a longer statement about Rachelle Miller’s allegations: I completely and utterly reject Ms Miller’s accusations. Both of us have acknowledged publicly that we had a consensual affair in 2017. This is something that I regret deeply. We were both married at the time and it was wrong. It contributed to the end of my marriage that year. Ms Miller and I worked closely together in 2017. It involved constant travel, long hours and often we were under pressure. We became attracted to each other and on a small number of occasions that attraction was acted upon. It should not have happened. Ms Miller was a good media adviser. My chief of staff and I sought to get her promoted to the level she requested. It was ultimately unsuccessful but when she moved to Michaelia Cash’s office in late 2017, she was promoted to the senior level. I have not seen Ms Miller since 2017. I have accepted responsibility for a consensual affair that should not have happened many years ago. But Ms Miller’s allegations are wrong, did not happen and are contradicted by her own written words to me. I regret having to say these things. I do not wish Ms Miller ill but I have to defend myself in light of these allegations, which I reject. The contradictory written evidence will be referred to a full, independent review. I welcome such a process and will make available both myself and all materials, and co-operate in every way. I would note that a previous set of claims were also considered and rejected through an independent investigation. During the course of this process I will stand aside as minister for education and youth. Given the immense personal impact of such claims I will also now take a period of leave between now and Christmas. You know it’s serious once it gets a hashtag-gate. As in, #barbecuegate. The steaks are high. Labor leader Anthony Albanese has made a personal explanation about ... well, just read this story. Albanese said: The member for La Trobe (Jason Wood) has joined the conspiracy theorists (who say) that a barbecue cooked for me by the premier of Victoria on Saturday was a fake. I can confirm, Mr Speaker, just like the moon landing, it was real. The steaks were cooked perfectly medium rare, the steaks were cooked but not as cooked as the member for La Trobe. Bill Shorten’s up again, with a question about another NDIS participant, Liam: Liam is an autistic young man. He and his family won a landmark case in 2017 over NDIS transport funding that had implications for thousands of other people who rely on the NDIS for support. But in November the Morrison government cut Liam’s plan by $38,000, including his transport funding, bringing the family to tears. Prime minister, how many individual participants like Liam had their NDIS funding cut in the last 12 months? Stuart Robert responds on behalf of minister Linda Reynolds: The minister is well aware of the concerns raised by (Liam’s mother). The minister received direct communication from her a number of weekends ago, I will be responding to the concerns raised. On receipt of the concerns raised, the agency made contact with the family. I understand they have acknowledged the error that has been made in relation to the transport funding. The NDIA has apologised for that error. And the issue is being resolved through that process. Here’s the earlier story about Liam: Former Labor leader Bill Shorten persists in using a picture, despite the Speaker asking him to get rid of the “prop” - it’s a picture of “Nick from Mackay”, who has multiple disabilities. Shorten puts it down for his question: Nick from Mackay was born with multiple complex disabilities requiring 24/7 high-level support for all areas of his daily life. When the Morrison government cut Nick’s plan by $300,000, Nick’s family, Tammi and Rob, described the NDIS’s behaviour as emotionally exhausting, horrendous and (say it) has left Nick unsafe. How many individual NDIS participants have had their funding cut in the past year? Prime minister Scott Morrison accused Labor of using specific people for “political points” and refers to a separate NDIS case that was raised yesterday, about Harper: I wrote promptly back to the member to follow up the very issue he raised in this place yesterday. I can tell (him), I’m advised that National Disability Insurance Agency is in frequent contact with Harper’s parents and it’s incorrect to say that Harper’s current NDIS funding has been reduced, including overnight supports. I’m advised that Harper’s current plan is in place for six months and includes a higher rate of funding than his previous 12-month plan. It’s important to consider plans. They are implemented for a shorter period, such as six months, for participants such as complex needs like Harper’s... ... If he’s going to use people, Mr Speaker, to make political points, that’s a separate issue. I will let others make the judgement. We took his complaint seriously. We followed it up. We got back to him, Mr Speaker. Libby Coker is next up for Labor, with a question on living costs: The prime minister said he would deliver higher real wages. But petrol prices have gone up as much as $900 in a year, while real wages have fallen by $700. Will the prime minister finally acknowledge how hard it is for working families to make ends meet, under this decade-old government? Scott Morrison: The member raises questions around the cost of living. Mr Speaker, and in the three years since I was elected prime minister, Mr Speaker, inflation has grown by 1.8%. That compares in the last three years of the Labor government, of 2.5%. Mr Speaker, electricity prices have fallen on average each year by 3.2%, and under Labor in their last three years, they increased each year by 12.2% and over the course of their government, electricity prices doubled because of their mismanagement. Clothing and footwear costs over the course of the last three years have fallen by 1% on average each year, compared to a 0.4% increase under the Labor party in their last three years. Fuel prices, Mr Speaker, over the last three years, have increased by 1.2% each year, over the last three years, and under the Labor party in their last three years, they increased by 7.2%. Each and every year of those last three years, on communications costs, Mr Speaker, under our government, since I was elected, they have fallen 2.8% each and every year on average, and under the Labor party, they went up by 1.2% over the last three years. Mr Speaker, housing costs, as we note, 320,000 Australians helped into home ownership because of the policies of our government, but not only that, housing costs over the last three years, since I was elected prime minister, up 0.6% on average each year, under the Labor party, in their last three years, they went up by 4.3% each and every year, Mr Speaker. Some seven times higher than what has occurred under our government. And health costs have gone up 3% per year, each year on average, under the Labor party, they went up, Mr Speaker, 5% each year, and every year. What the Australian people know, Mr Speaker, is that regardless of the challenges that we face, as a country, for our economy, and what it means for cost of living, and what it means what they can earn, they can know two things: one, our strong economic management will always ensure the Australians will be better off than they would under the Labor party, Mr Speaker, and they’ll be able to keep more of what they earn because we believe that Australians and Australian business owners should keep more of that what they earn, (and, two): if they give it to the Labor party, they know they’ll only waste it. Defence minister Peter Dutton is paying tribute to members of the Australian Defence Force and agencies, and all those “who perform work in our country’s name”. Oh, and to former defence minister Kevin Andrews, who will leave parliament at the next election. (Andrews is the current father of the house). Labor leader Anthony Albanese echoes the sentiments (towards the ADF - Andrews didn’t get a second guernsey). Labor’s deputy leader Richard Marles keen to work his party’s line on prime minister Scott Morrisons trustworthiness. He asked: Can he confirm this fortnight that the prime minister has denied saying electric vehicles would end the weekend, denied paying parents to vaccinate their children, wrongfully claimed he texted he was going on holiday to Hawaii, and blamed Labor for his failure to introduce an anti-corruption bill. Why does the prime minister have such difficulties with the truth? As leader of the house, Peter Dutton is having none of it. A barely credible question all the way through, and then at the end he flicked the switch to vaudeville. It’s - the last part of that question is completely out of order because it contains a slur. It’s only said for the TV cameras. And the Australian public should see through it. Amid the jeers from Labor as Tony Burke tries to argue a point of order, member for Whitlam Stephen Jones has to withdraw the word “corruption”. Labor leader Anthony Albanese to prime minister Scott Morrison: (This) fortnight government members and senators have crossed the floor on multiple issues. The chair of the privileges committee resigned over a report on the member for Pearce, who also resigned. And the prime minister was forced to abandon his voter suppression bill. Hasn’t the Morrison/Joyce government lost the ability to govern? Short version of Morrison’s response: No. Longer version: The Coalition government continues to focus on the issues that the Australian people have foremost in the front of their minds, Mr Speaker. Last Sunday, before we came back into this Parliament this week, Mr Speaker, we raised one of the most important issues that Australian families have ... the terrible impact that (Covid) is having on the mental health of their families. I hear the interjection what, Mr Speaker, from those overseas [sic]. Over on the other side of the chamber, Mr Speaker. Now they may not be aware of the severity of this issue, Mr Speaker, that may not be what they are concerned about, but I can assure you for members, on the government benches, in the coalition government, they’re terribly concerned about this. And while the Labor party want to focus on the parliamentary games of Canberra and what goes on in the bubble of this place, Mr Speaker, my government, our government, will focus very firmly on what is happening in the homes and the communities all around this country. (We) are concerned about their health and their wellbeing as we come through one of the largest and most significant pandemics in 100 years, Mr Speaker. And over the course of this year, and even just this week, as we reached 20 million Australians having had their first vaccinations, one of the strongest economies coming back from the appeal, one of the lowest fatalities from Covid in the world, having saved 30,000 lives, 217,000 apprentices and tradies in training, one million Australians working in manufacturing, Mr Speaker, schools getting back and open again, Australia opening safely, so it can remain safely open. These are the issues, these are the issues our government is focused on. The defence of our nation, the signing up to the Aukus agreement, and Mr Speaker, working with our allies and partners to create a free and open Indo-Pacific with the uncertainty that our world faces, particularly in our own region. And even now, Mr Speaker, we hear from the OECD that they have upgraded the economic forecast for Australia, as we go into next year, Mr Speaker. People getting a job, people buying a home, 320,000 Australians getting into home ownership, as a result of the policies of our government. Mr Speaker, the leader of the Labor party spends a lot of his time focusing on this place, he should focus on what is happening out there in the Australian community. Labor’s Catherine King to Paul Fletcher, who is representing attorney general Michaelia Cash: Can the prime minister confirm his model of an anti-corruption commission cannot ever hold public hearings for politicians, will only undertake investigations the government wants, and won’t even be able to make findings of corruption? Fletcher starts before Labor’s Tony Burke calls a point of order, Speaker Andrew Wallace and he have a contretemps about it. Fletcher tries to start again. Burke is up again (rinse, repeat). Fletcher then sashays into Icac territory, and then we move on. Anyway, here’s what Fletcher said before it went awry: As we have consistently explained, the government’s model for the commonwealth integrity commission will have the same powers as a royal commission to investigate criminal corruption, but we also sought to do to make sure it appropriately provides procedural fairness to individuals under investigation for corrupt conduct. And there are appropriate safeguards against vexatious, baseless politically motivated and time-wasting referrals such as the nine failed referrals to the Australian Federal Police by the shadow attorney general... we are serious about combatting corruption. Labor’s Brendan O’Connor with the next stage of the quarantine questions: The government is supporting the setting up of a private luxury resort-style quarantine but has failed to establish a single purpose built quarantine facility almost two years into the pandemic. Why? Now it’s picked up by health minister Greg Hunt: I want to directly address the question in relation to quarantine facilities. Firstly, 471,000 Australians have come back on redzone flights. That’s 471,000. It puts into perspective the task the nation has had in order to keep people safe, in so doing, a series of elements were set up. Firstly, the hotel quarantine was established and what that has led to is one of the four containments to protect Australia in terms of borders, testing, tracing and distancing. That led to one of the lowest rates of Covid and one of the lowest rates of loss of life in the world. That is the first line of protection. The second thing is, we did set up a national resilience centre, specifically focused and run by the commonwealth at Howard Springs. I will read the advice I have received which reflects that, which has been put forward as I understand it, through Jane Halton, the former secretary of finance and of health. Howard Springs maintains the highest standards of infection control practice and to date there’s been no reported instances of transmission between cohorts of international arrivals in quarantine at the centre, and no instance of transmission into the Australian community. The third element that has been set up is the establishment of purpose-built, as opposed to Howard Springs, which already existed and which was adapted and used in a way which has not seen a single case transmitted between cohorts or a single case escape. It is a functioning, highly effective system, now taken over by the Northern Territory at their request as they saw it as the irresponsibility. In addition to that, though, there is now obviously the facility being developed in Melbourne. As well as facilities in Brisbane and in Perth. Which are at different stages of advancement. Those three layers have been established and that is why - that is why perhaps above all the other elements that we have taken, amongst those rings of containment, that we’ve had one of the lowest rates of loss of life in the world, one of the three lowest rates, among the OECD countries. That means that we have saved over 30,000 lives by comparison with the OECD average. We have saved over 45,000 lives by comparison with the rates in the United Kingdom and in the United States. So these actions, these three steps, quarantine within hotels, the dedicated Howard Springs national resilience facility, and the establishment of new dedicated facilities are the things which have helped keep Australians safe and will keep them safe going forward. Here’s some more info on those questions about quarantine facilities from Paul Karp: In September news.com.au revealed a proposal by Quarantine Services Australia for a new network of privately operated Covid-19 quarantine facilities to offer “user pays” care for up to 5,000 overseas students, workers and skilled migrants a month. QSA’s director is Scott Briggs, the former NSW Liberal deputy director and close friend of prime minister Scott Morrison. On Wednesday, Labor quizzed the department of the prime minister and cabinet about QSA, but got nowhere, as officials said it was not something they deal with. Then, later in the evening, Kristina Keneally asked home affairs about the proposal, after hearing from a source the plan could be announced this week. Asked if international students will go through QSA facilities, the home affairs secretary, Michael Pezzullo, said: Possibly, as I’ve been advised the umbrella not for profit mutual known as QSA would have a number of limbs, one of which would deal with companies needing to bring skilled labour here, another might well involve engagement with tertiary institutions to arrange a different standard bulk if you will student accommodation. I think at one point I was briefed on QSA, leaving aside company arrangements … It had a third limb, or area of interest, it might have been related to agricultural workers on farms. Labor’s Brendan O’Connor has asked prime minister Scott Morrison about reports taxpayer funds have gone to “two of (his) best mates” at Quarantine Services Australia. (I’ll get you some more context for this shortly). Morrison said he hadn’t seen the report, but: What I can say is that at all times I and my ministers rightly declare any possible interest that may relate to matters that are being considered in the cabinet as the standing first item on every single agenda of every cabinet meeting, and I call for that at every single meeting as cabinet ministers will understand. I can’t speak to comments made by others that I have no knowledge of whatsoever, Mr Speaker. All I know is that I have always fully disclosed any interests where they are relevant to any matter that I may be considering and the suggestion otherwise is a disgraceful slur by a grubby opposition. O’Connor again: Can the prime minister confirm his government has awarded $80,000 to set up and run private luxury resort-style quarantine facilities? Can the prime minister confirm this quarantine business is being run out of his best mate’s lobbying firm based at the Hotel Realm in Canberra? Response this time from Home Affairs minister Karen Andrews: Can I start by saying that the secretary of the department of home affairs has been questioned about this particular issue twice at Senate estimates, once in October and the second time just a week ago. So there have been a range of questions that have been put to the secretary. The secretary said that he was very clear, and what the secretary said, is - I will actually quote from what secretary Pezzullo said at Senate estimates, he said: ‘It had nothing to do with ministers, their staff, or ministerial officers.’ So he was very clear. There’s significantly more. I would invite those people who have questions in relation to this matter to look at the Senate estimates transcript. Because it makes it abundantly clear any such contract was entered into directly by the department of home affairs. It was done without my knowledge, the first I became aware of it was following the contract having been finalised. Now, we make no apology for the fact that we ... did all that we possibly could to make sure that Australians were as protected as they possibly could be during this pandemic. Mr Speaker, the transcripts from Senate estimates... clearly sets out what the arrangements were in relation to this contract. Some more detail from prime minister Scott Morrison: (The inquiry) will enable my department to provide me with any further advice regarding any implications for the ministerial standards. But I wish to stress that this action, in no way seeks to draw a conclusion on these matters, Mr Speaker. But this is the appropriate action for me to take under the ministerial standards. I note that minister Tudge has welcomed this process, Mr Speaker. And he looks forward to participating in this process. I have also asked, as is occurring now, Mr Speaker, at the same time, for this advice to be provided directly to Ms Miller by my chief of staff. In the interim, minister (Stuart) Robert will act as minister for education and youth. I also note, Mr Speaker, that today, the minister for employment, workforce, skills, and small business and family business will answer questions in relation to those portfolios. Prime minister Scott Morrison is giving a statement by indulgence on Rachelle Miller (see earlier posts for background): I rise on indulgence to refer to the statement made earlier today by Ms Miller and the allegations regarding her relationship with minister Tudge. Mr Speaker, these issues are obviously deeply concerning and I know deeply distressing, for Ms Miller, minister Tudge and the families affected by these events. I have discussed Ms Miller’s statement with Mr Tudge, who refuted the allegations made. Given the seriousness of the claims made by Ms Miller, it’s important these matters be resolved fairly and expeditiously. To this end, the minister has agreed to my request to stand aside while these issues are addressed by my department, through an independent and fair process, to ensure that the matters that have been raised can be properly assessed and the views put by the respective parties in relation to these issues. I’m advised by the department they’ll be seeking to do this through (former bureaucrat and intelligence official) Vivienne Thom. So that’s a big start - more to come. We’re ploughing through members’ 90-second statements on the way to question time, now. It’s been a woolly week with some question time scraps, so we’ll see how they wind it up. And Amy Remeikis will pick you up on the other end and take you through your afternoon. Heads up if you’re in Melbourne and its surrounds. Health department professor Mike Roberts says there’s a high risk of epidemic thunderstorm asthma today, with the storms bringing high grass pollen levels. There’s also a moderate risk in the Mallee, North Central, North East, Northern Country, South West, West and South Gippsland and Wimmera weather districts. Roberts said people should avoid wind gusts before the storm by going inside, closing windows and doors, and waiting it out. Anyone who needs preventative medication should take it as directed, and have an asthma plan in place - and, of course, call 000 if it’s an emergency. The House of Representatives has started debating the religious discrimination bill - but it’s still unclear if it will go to a vote. Labor’s shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, said it was “clearly inappropriate” for prime minister Scott Morrison to bring the bill on for debate before the joint human rights committee has begun holding hearings into what is a “complex area of law”. Dreyfus said Labor wants “respectful debate” that would be best informed by communities MPs represent. He then went through the three-year history of Morrison’s pledge to work in a bipartisan spirit to introduce laws prohibiting discrimination on the grounds of religion. Dreyfus said the government failed to introduce a bill for three years, and when he reached out to attorney general Michaelia Cashin June to work on it together she didn’t take Labor up. Dreyfus said to introduce the bill in the final fortnight and accuse Labor of delay is “simply wrong”. Dreyfus said the bill “should not remove protections that already exist in law to protect Australians from other forms of discrimination”. The committee will consider that, and “the need to ensure the provisions work as intended” and have no unintended consequences. Dreyfus is now talking about religious diversity: I think we can learn to embrace those differences as a wonderful boon to be embraced, not merely as a burden to be tolerated. Dreyfus quotes the international covenant on civil and political rights, which guarantees protection of religious beliefs - but subject to the limitation that they don’t infringe on the rights of others. Dreyfus notes that Scott Morrison also promised to update laws to protect LGBT students “as soon as possible” - but then delayed, and as recently as last week said he’d wait for the law reform commission report in a year. Dreyfus notes the government will now include this protection in the package to appease Liberal moderates. Labor MP Tim Watts has raised China’s Xinjiang region and cyber attacks in a speech backing the expanded sanctions powers. (The bill passed the lower house minutes ago.) Watts said: In an era where democratic values are under increasing pressure, and authoritarianism gains pace around the world, both within and without countries we need to be forthright in our defence of democratic values. Watts wasn’t happy that it took so long for the government to propose the legislation and get to this stage of proceedings. It’s nearly 12 months since a cross-party parliamentary committee called for expanded targeted sanctions laws. Watts said during those 12 months, there had been disturbing human rights violations, including the military coup in Myanmar and the erosion of one-country two-systems framework in Hong Kong. He also cited “the reports of continuing mass detentions and other human rights violations against Ughyurs and other ethnic and religious minorities in Xinjiang and across China”. “In finally passing these laws, we are saying to human rights abusers that Australia will not be a bolthole for you, that you are not welcome here,” he said. Watts, the shadow assistant minister for cyber security, said the government’s legislation also allowed sanctions to be imposed on individuals who perpetuate malicious cyber activity: This is a very good step in the fight against international cyber criminals who are menacing Australian businesses and our essential services, our critical infrastructure, particularly to international ransomware crews. In Australia and around the world these criminals have wilfully targeted health and hospital networks, bringing them to their knees and putting lives at risk. We’ve seen no less than eight attacks on health and hospital networks this year. These cyber attacks are not just disruptive, they’re not just costly, they are a threat to life. And indeed we’ve tragically seen deaths from ransomware attacks on hospitals in Germany and the United States. Frankly, we’ve been lucky there haven’t been more deaths and particularly lucky there haven’t been deaths in Australia. These modern day privateers regularly undertake these attacks with impunity from their host countries, and sanctions regimes targeting individual hackers, like the expanded scope included in this bill, are a useful part of the cyber diplomacy toolkit for trying to put an end to this impunity. Watt said it’s not easy to attribute malicious cyber attacks. “But where it is [possible] sanctions regimes are a useful tool for responding to and deterring malicious cyber activity,” he said. More signs of that much-heralded economic rebound from the Delta Covid lockdowns are emerging, with the Australian Bureau of Statistics reporting today on retail sales. Nationally, the retail turnover jumped 4.9% in seasonally adjusted terms in October compared with the previous month. That makes it two months in a row of growth following falls in July and August. NSW’s 13.3% rise brought turnover back to the levels pre-Delta. Victoria, which emerged from its sixth and hopefully final lockdown on 22 October, registered (so to speak) a 3% rise. The ACT’s shoppers went berserk, spending 20.2% more. Still, as Ben James, the ABS’s director of quarterly economy wide statistics, says: Although sales have bounced back strongly following the end of lockdowns, it is important to note that overall retail turnover has not yet reached the level of May 2021, the month prior to the Delta outbreak. South Australia and Tasmania were the two regions to go backwards, easing 1.2% and 2.4%, respectively. Among the different targets for shopping the clothing, footwear and personal accessory retailing rose 27.7% to $481.7m in October, in seasonally adjusted terms. Department stores posted a 22.4% rise in turnover to $277.8m in October, while cafes, restaurants, and takeaway food services recorded a 12.3% to $412m. The Senate has referred the religious discrimination bill to the legal and constitutional affairs legislation committee, which will now inquire into it separately to the joint human rights committee. Both inquiries have the same reporting date (4 February). How on earth did that happen? Well, Liberal senator Anne Ruston moved that the bills not be referred to an inquiry; Greens senator Janet Rice moved that they go to an inquiry with a 15 February reporting date; then Ruston amended that for a 4 February reporting date. The attorney general, Michaelia Cash, and the committee chair Sarah Henderson seemed surprised: Labor, the government and Greens all ended up agreeing on a parallel inquiry to report by 4 February. No division was called – although the Greens and Rex Patrick put on record that they would have preferred the 15th. The separate processes opens up some intriguing possibilities. While the human rights committee only wants three public hearings, all in Canberra, the Senate committee might prefer more hearings, around the country. The chair of the human rights committee, Anne Webster, has said she doesn’t want to hear about religious exemptions to other discrimination laws, we don’t know what view the other committee will take. Deep breath. OK. There are a lot of moving parts today and the Guardian Australia team is all over them. It’s a little hectic. There’s more to come. But for now, please enjoy the news that Taronga Zoo is set to welcome what AAP has described as a “ridiculously cute and chubby newborn pygmy hippo”. Pygmy McPygmyFace (AKA the yet-to-be-named hippo) will arrive in time for the school holidays, and is the first pygmy hippo calf to arrive at the zoo in more than four years. She was born to mum Kambiri and Dad Fergus in October and has been learning to swim - Taronga unit supervisor of ungulates Gave Virgona said the calf took her first step into the shallow pool in their den yesterday. “Although it may not seem like a big step to some, it is a massive milestone for mum and calf,” she said. And here she is. Hay there! Labor’s defence spokesperson, Brendan O’Connor, has raised the plight of a Chinese citizen journalist who has been detained, and has raised concern about the Future Fund’s investments, during debate on tougher sanctions laws. Changes to toughen up Australia’s sanctions laws are currently being debated in the lower house. The Magnitsky-style laws – which will allow travel bans and bank account freezes to be imposed for human rights abuses, cyber attacks and serious corruption – passed the Senate with cross-party support last night with a few amendments. O’Connor tells the lower house it’s timely that this legislation will pass before parliament rises for the year. He notes the government took eight months to respond to last December’s multi-party committee report, delays that “sent a regrettable message” that Australia did not take human rights abuses seriously - but “we have finally arrived at where we should have arrived earlier”. O’Connor says that in some countries, “political leaders have sought to manipulate the circumstances of the pandemic to further weaken human rights in their own countries and unfortunately there’s nothing new in that”. He tells the House of Representatives: We have seen increasing and disturbing reports of human rights violations around the world, and in some places political leaders have sought to manipulate the circumstances of the pandemic to further weaken those human rights. As we speak today Chinese citizen journalist Zhang Zhan is on a hunger strike and at risk of dying without the urgent medical requirements that she needs. Ms Zhang was sentenced to four years of prison in December last year for social media posts critical of the early Covid-19 outbreak in Wuhan. For more on the plight of Zhang, see this recent story. O’Connor continues in his speech to the House: The February 1st military coup in Myanmar was a direct attack on the country’s ongoing democratic transition. The subsequent violent crackdown against those protesting the coup saw thousands of political prisoners detained and civilians killed by security forces. Ten months have passed and Australia stands alone amongst the UK, the US, Canada and the European Union in not applying additional targeted sanctions against those responsible for the violence. And now we have reports that Australia’s Future Fund - the taxpayers’ fund - have been investing in joint ventures which of course in some ways have assisted these human rights breaches. The opposition has written to the minister and expressed our concern about these reports. It’s fair to say and I’m sure every member of this house would agree the Future Fund should not be investing in such matters, it should not be profiting from what’s happened in Myanmar. For more on that Future Fund issue, see recent coverage by my colleagues Ben Butler and Ben Doherty: (The Future Fund said: “In line with its mandate from government, the Future Fund has built a broadly diversified portfolio which includes passive investments through external investment managers in thousands of entities globally.”) Another chapter in the saga of the latest Senate slur. Earlier, it was reported that Greens senator Lidia Thorpe had said to Liberal senator Hollie Hughes: “At least I keep my legs shut”, which Thorpe said was in reference to something she saw that “disturbed” her. Hughes then said, according to the SMH, that what she took from that comment was “had I kept my legs shut (then) I would’t have a child with autism”. (Read more about Hughes and her son here). Now, Thorpe has issued a statement repeating her apology for the comments – the contents of which she has not confirmed – and goes on to say that Hughes’ characterisation of those comments was untrue: I thoroughly reject any suggestion that I directly or indirectly referenced Senator Hughes’ family. That characterisation of my interjection is completely untrue, and more importantly, harmful to every disabled person. If you want more scurrilous slur action, here’s Paul Karp’s piece again: Mike Bowers has, as always, been capturing parliamentary moments for posterity. He was there this morning when Rachelle Miller spoke. And a shot of a distinctly unimpressed-looking prime minister from last night... And on another note, the Fair Work Ombudsman has launched legal action against supermarket giant Coles, alleging it underpaid more than 7,800 employees $115m between January 2017 and March 2020. There ya go... The religious discrimination bill is being reviewed by the joint human rights committee. Labor wasn’t thrilled about that and had pushed for a joint select committee, which would have allowed more choice of which MPs and senators would conduct the inquiry. Today, Labor has subbed out two of its human rights committee members (Pat Dodson and Nita Green) for two new members: Deb O’Neill and Louise Pratt. O’Neill and Pratt both have a keen interest in the religious discrimination issue and the related issue of religious exemptions to other discrimination laws. One hails from the left faction (Pratt) and one from the right (O’Neill). It seems after they didn’t win the fight over the forum for the inquiry, Labor have simply switched up the committee membership. The inquiry will be considering submissions over summer, with three public hearings (21 December, 13-14 January) before a tight 4 February reporting deadline. Apple has lost its bid to have a case brought against it by Epic Games over the banning of the hugely popular Fortnite game from the App Store stayed until litigation in the US courts is finalised. The high court dismissed the special leave application seeking to overturn a full federal court ruling that the case in Australia can go ahead. The ruling means the case will return to the federal court to be heard, presumably sometime next year. Epic Games took Apple to court last year in Australia at roughly the same time as the US, after it was banned from the App Store for bypassing Apple’s in-app purchasing system. This allowed people to make in-game purchases outside the Apple ecosystem without Apple taking a slice of every sale. Since the ban, Apple has reduced the cut it takes for smaller developers from 30% to 15% of every purchase, and now allows developers to contact users outside of the app, i.e. via email, with alternative payment options. Epic had argued in a federal court hearing earlier this year that the case should go ahead in Australia because Australian Consumer Law rights could not properly be assessed in the US courts. The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission has also flagged an interest in regulating the dominant Apple and Google app stores to address competition issues. Guardian Australia has sought comment from Apple and Epic Games. Changes to toughen up Australia’s sanctions laws are currently being debated in the lower house. The Magnitsky-style laws – which will allow travel bans and bank account freezes to be imposed for human rights abuses, cyber attacks and serious corruption – passed the Senate with cross-party support last night with a few amendments. Supporters of the new measures were a little worried this morning, after the bill was left off the daily house program for today – the last sitting day of the year. The government hopes to have this legislation in place before the Christmas break. For more on what the bill will actually do, see our earlier story: Yesterday Labor helped the government pass a bill in the Senate that will force charities to reveal their donors for all advocacy, not just work directly related to the election. The bill has come back to the house today because it contained government and Labor amendments, which has given the crossbench a chance to criticise the deal. Greens MP Adam Bandt said the house should not tick off “this dodgy deal”. He said it was “bad for democracy” and had been “rushed through the Senate without debate or inquiry”. Bandt accused the government of “silencing those who disagree” and argued that the “party of free speech wants to tie up organisations in red tape”. MP Zali Steggall also spoke against bringing the bill on immediately. Shadow assistant minister for charities, Andrew Leigh, told Guardian Australia: Labor strongly opposed the government’s political campaigner bill as it was originally drafted, because it would have negatively impacted charities, unions, and not-for-profits engaging in legitimate public interest advocacy. When it was clear that crossbench members were refusing to block the government’s attacks on our democracy, Labor managed to secure a number of changes, which will mean that fewer small charities and not-for-profits are caught up in disclosure requirements – as well as successfully defeating the attempt to introduce Trump-style voter identification laws. While the Senate amendments we’ve secured are the best achievable outcome for charities, a Labor government would revisit this framework. The Senate crossbench – Stirling Griff, Rex Patrick, and Jacqui Lambie – dispute Labor’s claims that they were refusing to block the bill, because all three were opposed to its retrospective effect. The motion to consider the bill sailed through the lower house (54 to 5), with only the crossbench voting against it. They’re now going through amendment by amendment, which the government agreed to. Sounds like a great soap box for crossbench opponents of the bill, and a good stalling tactic for the government before the religious discrimination bill. Plenty of slurs in parliament in this final week – and not just at boozy end-of-year office parties. Paul Karp has pulled together some of what’s been uttered, from “boofhead” to doggy growls to accusations Greens senator Lidia Thorpe said to Liberal Senator Hollie Hughes “at least I keep my legs shut”. Read it all about it here: NSW health minister Brad Hazzard has reminded people that the new Covid variant, Omicron, is not the only game in town. Social distancing and masks indoors are still needed, he told the ABC, and emphasised the need for testing, vaccinations, and boosters. He said: (While) the community and the media have become focused on Omicron, Delta is still out and amongst us and we still need to be cautious in our activities. The message there is that we know this virus is dangerous, it does come out of some different forms, don’t take it lightly. If you have been offered a booster come and get it, that is basically since your last shot ... if it has been six months, go and get your booster. A Victorian court has dealt a blow to class actions against the state’s hotel quarantine program, dismissing one claim in its current form and another entirely. Justice John Dixon said in the supreme court on Thursday that he had dismissed the statement of claim lodged by 5 Boroughs, but granted leave for the Melbourne business to re-plead its case. Dixon summarily dismissed the similar claim of Jordan Roberts, who had claimed to represent all the owners and employees of Victorian businesses affected by the state government’s restrictions. Both claims were made on the basis that the restrictions were a direct result of the failures in the state government’s hotel quarantine program. Dixon said there was significant overlap between the two cases, and they were heard together. Lawyers for the government had applied to the court for summary judgments dismissing the claims because they argued neither had a prospect of success. Alternatively, they had asked the court to strike out the whole statements of claim. Dixon said the business should be able to re-plead its statement of claim despite, in some instances, failing to properly articulate an argument about how the state breached its duty of care. The claim had, for example, not clearly articulated how breaches of hotel quarantine caused the state’s second wave of Covid-19, he found. Dixon said: It can be said that many parts of the statement of claim are properly pleaded and will not prejudice, embarrass or delay the fair trial of the proceeding or otherwise fail to disclose a cause of action or abuse the processes of the court. That said, the pleading is infected by the initial failure to properly identify the posited duty of care, which has a flow-through effect. Last year, the state’s inquiry into hotel quarantine found the speed at which the program had to be set up meant proper risk assessments were not undertaken, paving the way for mistakes in infection control. The independent MP Helen Haines has told Parliament that the government’s failure to introduce a federal integrity commission is “worse than disappointing”. Haines pointed to the government’s proposed business for the day, noting the bill would not be introduced on the final sitting day of the year. “Today we have seen the final set of bills that the government are planning to introduce to the House and I note that, as expected, there is no integrity commission bill coming from the Government,” Haines said in a statement on indulgence. She said the prime minister, Scott Morrison, had been referring this week to the same exposure draft that was published more than a year ago, and “to be clear that is not a bill before this House”. “I want to know why the government is doing this, I want to know why we haven’t seen an integrity commission bill introduced this morning on the final sitting day of the year,” she said. Haines said that despite the “brave and extraordinary” move by Bass MP Bridget Archer to cross the floor last week to support Haines’s bill, the government had failed to respond, despite MPs and senators urging action after her move. It (Archer’s crossing the floor) was a brave step, and it has not been taken up by the government. This is really, really disappointing, in fact it is worse than disappointing, this is the most important bill that the government should introduce and it is nowhere to be seen. John Alexander, the Liberal MP for Bennelong, responded to Haines, saying both parties needed to work together on the issue: If we were to enter a period of debate on this issue we might be here in another 20 years as we have been on climate change. I would suggest that we act like mature adults, enter a room, we both have our positions and start working through this document line by line until we get a resolution together, working together across this great divide to do well for the Australian people, because the one thing they want from the people of this place is integrity and our stocks are not high in that department at this time. The government wants to put the religious discrimination bill to a lower house vote today, but Labor’s position is to attempt to delay it until the human rights committee reports back in February. I’ve done a ring around to work out where the crossbench stands. Labor starts with 68 votes. So far Adam Bandt, Andrew Wilkie, Zali Steggall, Rebekha Sharkie and Craig Kelly have confirmed they want to delay the bill. Helen Haines is believed to have the same position. That takes them to 74 votes. The government starts with 75 MPs (after the speaker is subtracted). Three government MPs have not committed to vote for the bill – Warren Entsch, Trent Zimmerman and Bridget Archer. So, to win and force a vote the government would likely need to win Bob Katter and at least two of those rebels back, without losing any more in their own ranks (like George Christensen). Sharkie told Guardian Australia: I think that the house should receive the joint committee report before it votes. It will report before we return [in 2022] so I think it prudent to wait. Organisations such as the Law Council have said they will not make comment until they make a formal submission. I am particularly concerned that there are elements in this bill that could trump other anti-discrimination laws and so clarification from the Law Council and other learned legal professionals is critical. On Monday Guardian Australia revealed the powerful parliamentary committee had cleared Christian Porter over his declaration that a trust part-paid his legal fees with money from undisclosed sources. Nevertheless, it concluded rules should be overhauled to uphold the “intent and integrity” of the register of interests. The chair of the privileges committee Russell Broadbent has just given a short statement to the House about the alleged leak. He said the unauthorised disclosure was “extremely regrettable” but it was the committee’s view that it would be “difficult to determine with any certainty the source of the unauthorised disclosure”. He said the leak was particularly unfortunate because the privileges committee should be setting the standard when it comes to strict adherence to parliamentary conventions. Broadbent fired a warning shot at the press gallery: Those in the media who decide to use and publish [leaked] material ... show their disrespect for the parliament and the important principles that underpin its work. I want to make it very clear to journalists and their publishers that a potential contempt can be committed ... this is serious. I will be writing to the journalist in question and the president of the parliamentary press gallery accordingly. Broadbent said unauthorised disclosures corrode trust in parliamentary processes “and have a clear adverse impact on our work as parliamentarians”. Rachelle Miller, who came forward to speak about the Canberra culture more than a year ago, detailing her experience after her relationship with minister Alan Tudge ended, has delivered a statement in support of women who have experienced abuse and harassment in the parliament, calling on men to begin addressing the issue. “I am fully aware that a year ago I said my relationship with minister Alan Tudge was a consensual relationship, but it’s more complicated than that,” she said in front of cameras in the Mural Hall. “I was so ashamed, so humiliated, so scared, so exhausted. I told the small part of my story I was able to manage.” Miller said the Liberal party did not have a ‘women problem’ but a ‘men problem’ and said while she had attempted to speak to the prime minister about her experience on more than one occasion, she had been rebuffed: All I ever wanted was for the government to listen and to acknowledge our experiences in this building,” she said. Yet when I spoke out, not a single member from this government contacted me to see if I was OK. One female chief of staff sent me a text and that was it. Many former staffers reached out to tell their stories and they were shocking. I’m here because the government will not listen. Despite the prime minister’s claim on Tuesday that he’s willing to hear our experiences, his actions have betrayed that he’s not. Miller said she was coming forward again in an attempt to have the parliament implement the full suite of recommendations in the Kate Jenkins’ review into parliamentary culture. Miller said she became isolated from her family and friends during her relationship with Tudge, which she alleged was “emotionally abusive” and on one occasion, was allegedly “physically abusive”. In a statement on Thursday morning, Tudge rejected Miller’s claims. He said: I completely and utterly reject Ms Miller’s version of events. Ms Miller and I had a consensual affair in 2017 as both of us have publicly acknowledged. This is something I deeply regret. Miller said she was not there because she wanted to be, but “because speaking through the media is the only way this government will listen”. She said: All of us who have survived awful experiences in this workplace, tried to reach out and seek change many, many times before we went to the media. This is our last resort. The Jenkins’ review showed the perpetrators are mostly male parliamentarians with immense power over their junior victims. As the prime minister reminded us all on Tuesday, they know they can only be held accountable by the Australian people at the ballot box. They are firmly focussed on their re-election. So I’m speaking to all Australians through the media, the appalling treatment of women that happened in the early 90s when I was a teenager, is still happening today. Remember that when you vote. Equality Australia has said Scott Morrison’s deal to win over moderates by promising to immediately make changes to the Sex Discrimination Act is a “bad deal” which offers no more than “what he’s repeatedly promised and failed to deliver for three years”. Equality Australia said: If the government is serious about fulfilling its election commitment, it would end discrimination against LGBTQ+ students and staff in religious schools by delivering simple legislation to stop schools from firing, expelling or discriminating against them for who they are. What a cynical move to make ending discrimination against gay students conditional on support for a bad Bill that will wind back hard-fought protections for LGBTIQ+ people, people with disability, women and people of faith. Our laws should protect all of us, equally, regardless of who we are, what we believe or whom we love. If MPs care about preserving protections for marginalised communities, they must oppose this Religious Discrimination Bill or at least send it to an inquiry to consider before debating it. Under the deal offered to the moderates, the government has said it will remove the section of the Sex Discrimination Act that gives religious schools an exemption to discriminate against students based on their sexuality. But other exemptions in the SDA, including the same provisions that relate to teachers, remain and will be subject to the Australian Law Reform Commission inquiry that reports 12 months after the RDA bill passes parliament. Despite the government’s deal with four of their Liberal moderate MPs, it’s not clear that the religious discrimination bill will go through the lower house today. Labor believes that three Liberal MPs are still holding out – Warren Entsch, Trent Zimmerman and Bridget Archer – and the fact the House is starting the valedictory speeches mean the government isn’t ready. But don’t forget there are also MPs who want to add amendments to the bill that might help Labor prevent a vote today. Liberal MP Craig Kelly told Guardian Australia: I can’t see the need to rush it through, it was only introduced the other day. There are only 10 days of parliament in the first half of next year – parliament is meant to be about debate, [the sitting calendar] is an embarrassment. This bill shouldn’t be rushed for the political agenda of the prime minister. Asked if he would help Labor prevent a vote until the human rights committee had reported back, Kelly said: It’s the first I’ve heard of this, but yes. I don’t think this should be rushed through at all. To only have a couple of hours for debate today seems almost contempt of the parliamentary process. Kelly wants to amend the bill to reinsert a provision allowing religious medical practitioners to object to certain procedures. The House of Representatives has kicked off with prayers and an acknowledgement of country. And so the last day begins in earnest! On Wednesday my colleague Sarah Martin reported that the Morrison government has struck a deal with some moderate Liberal MPs to support its contentious religious discrimination bill, agreeing to make immediate changes to protect gay students from discrimination in religious schools. Under the change agreed to by attorney general Michaelia Cash, the government will introduce consequential amendments to remove section 38(3) of the separate Sex Discrimination Act which allows religious schools to discriminate against another person on the grounds of sexual orientation, gender identity, marital or relationship status or pregnancy. Christian schools are pushing back against the deal. Christian Schools Australia director of public policy Mark Spencer told Guardian Australia: The religious discrimination bill should be considered on its merits and voted on today to allow the possibility of passage before the election. Nobody thinks that religious freedom as an election issue is a good idea. However this shady deal on amendments to the Sex Discrimination Act is appalling. 2019 made clear it is not that simple – that is why the experts at the [Australian Law Reform Commission] should be allowed to do their job. Spencer warned of unintended consequences because removing the section would prevent schools setting “behavioural expectations”and teaching a biblical view of sexual activity such as a prohibition on sex before marriage, or that marriage should be between a man and a woman. Spencer said if the SDA changes are “part of the same package” then Christian Schools Australia would no longer support it. National Catholic Education Commission executive director Jacinta Collins said Catholic schools “don’t suspend or expel students based on attributes [such as sexuality]” but the NCEC would need to study the detail of the proposed change to ensure it was limited. Crown Resorts will allow Blackstone, which wants to take over the troubled casino empire, access to private financial data in the hope the US funds management behemoth will lodge a sweetened offer. Crown’s board says the $12.50 a share in cash Blackstone is offering isn’t enough. It’s almost $1.50 more than Crown shares closed at yesterday but below the $13 range in which they were trading in the middle of the year. It will let Blackstone into the dataroom so that it can “undertake initial due diligence inquiries on a non-exclusive basis so that it can formulate a revised proposal that adequately reflects the value of Crown”, Crown told the stock exchange. Blackstone has already dropped or modified many of the conditions it initially put on its bid, taking on much of the risk that Crown faces from a royal commission in WA that follows similar inquiries in Victoria and NSW that focused on money laundering taking place at its casinos and criminal infiltration of junket operators who brought high-rolling gamblers in from overseas. Now for the latest on the pandemic front ... sadly, there have been 10 more deaths in Victoria. And the state reports 1,419 new cases; NSW 271: Quite a bit of chatter this morning on the economics front, particularly about yesterday’s third-quarter GDP result, including the third-largest quarterly contraction on record. October retail sales figures out from the RBA should be another indicator of how well the rebound from the NSW, Victoria and ACT lockdowns is going. Looking further forward, meanwhile, there’s this interesting issue about whether Australia’s iron ore industry might turn out to be not very suitable for green hydrogen processes. A lot is at stake, particularly if the steel industry really does shift away from coking coal – which Australia is also a big player in globally. The Australian Energy Markets Commission, meanwhile, has released its final determination on how to treat new storage, especially big batteries and pumped hydro. This week we flagged the wariness by virtually everybody in the electricity sector that storage was about to be disadvantaged. AEMC chair Anna Collyer has talked up today’s rule changes: We have created one single category for storage and hybrids to register and participate in the national electricity market (NEM), called the Integrated Resource Provider (IRP). This makes it simpler and easier for anyone who provides storage or a combination of energy services to enter the market. For large batteries the rule will cut red tape, reduce costs and logistical hurdles to participate in the market. Batteries will no longer need to register twice, to both draw energy from the grid and send it out, as they currently do. Bruce Mountain, director of the Victoria Energy Policy Centre,is not so impressed: We all know that developing a viable storage industry is a priority as Australia rapidly transitions to variable renewable generation. The AEMC has put itself on the wrong side of the challenge. Instead of smoothing the way, it has pushed the problem to storage providers to negotiate with a monopoly, with the fall back being that if they can not get a good deal from this they can just pay regulated charges. Negotiation with a monopoly is a contradiction in terms. And even worse in many cases the monopoly here will often have a vested interest: but it has no interest in batteries disrupting their monopoly. How can this possibly be in the consumers’ interests? Who will benefit from the government’s proposed anti-troll social media laws? That’s a very good question. Paul Karp and Josh Taylor have waded through the murk for you. Check it out here: A Senate inquiry into the car park rorts program will report today. The Senate finance and public administration committee has completed its report into the urban congestion fund, which will be tabled this afternoon. The inquiry examined the commuter car park fund. In June the Australian National Audit Office released a scathing report on the $660m fund, finding not one of the 47 sites promised by the Coalition at the 2019 election was selected by the department. Rather, sites were handpicked by the government on advice from its MPs and candidates. The inquiry’s terms of reference included considering the role of the offices of the minister, Alan Tudge, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, and deputy prime minister (at the time, Michael McCormack) in determining funding allocation. In November the committee heard that the allocation of a $4bn urban congestion fund that the Morrison government used for a controversial commuter car parks program would “amount to corruption” if a federal integrity commission existed, according to a former New South Wales auditor general. Back to Brittany Higgins and Grace Tame. Fran Kelly asked Tame how hard it is for survivors to talk about their trauma. Tame said it was “invariably re-traumatising”: Certainly I find it quite difficult because this is every day. She talks about being in the limelight, and the intense public scrutiny, and how glad she is that she met Higgins, who can understand what she’s going through. If you want to really wrap your noggin around those mitochondrial donation laws and why they’re so important, here’s Full Story for you. Laura Murphy-Oates speaks to reporter Rafqa Touma about her family’s experience: Two incredible women who have had an enormous influence on 2021 – Grace Tame and Brittany Higgins – have joined Fran Kelly on ABC radio. Australian of the year and sexual assault survivor Tame said nothing has really changed at the top level yet in the wake of a raft of allegations of sexual assault, harassment and bullying in parliament – including, of course, this week’s report: It remains to be seen if there’s any actual change. That’s my opinion. Former Liberal staffer Higgins said the behaviour was “rampant” in the building long before she was there and that we were yet to see any real change: We know there are structural needs that need to be addressed. None of this is new information.” Kelly asked Higgins, who was allegedly raped in Parliament House, if she thought the situation would be different today. She replied: It wasn’t about me, it was about maintaining power … I don’t think fundamentally anything has changed internally within the building policy-wise that would stop this happening to another woman. She does hope the handling of an alleged assault would be more sensitive now. Between 280,000 and 550,000 young Australians will be born into poverty in the next decade unless “urgent action is taken to tackle disadvantage”, a new report estimates. Disrupting Disadvantage, by the Committee for Economic Development of Australia, said Australia had made no progress against a UN commitment to halve poverty by 2030. The report said the proportion of Australians living in poverty remained above 13%, and 17.7% of Australian children under the age of 15 were living in poverty: Estimates of child poverty suggest that anywhere between 9.2 and 17.7% of children up to the age of 14 are living in poverty. If similar trends continue for the over 3 million children expected to be born in the next decade, between 280,000 and 550,000 of these children will enter child poverty in the future. CEDA chief economist Jarrod Ball said: We are still waiting to see the full impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic, but there is already evidence the pandemic has further exacerbated the financial, employment and health hardships of Australia’s most vulnerable. Unless Australia addresses these issues now, we will be entrenching the next generation of poverty and disadvantage. By choosing to do nothing and ignoring the need to change Australia’s piecemeal social support system, we are making a choice as a society to commit too many young Australians into entrenched disadvantage. The report recommends an overarching national agreement between federal and state governments to reduce disadvantage and poverty, including greater data collection. Welfare groups and other economists have said the easiest way to reduce poverty in Australia would be to lift welfare payments. ANU research found the temporary $550-a-fortnight increase to welfare payments at the height of the pandemic last year lifted 2.2 million people out of poverty. Josh Frydenberg also paid a tribute to health minister Greg Hunt, who is expected to confirm his resignation today: It is a big loss for me and his electorate and the country and for the Coalition. He’s my best friend in parliament. I was the best man at his wedding. We’re the godfather to our respective children ... being the health minister in a once-in-a-century pandemic is a challenge for anyone. And I think that Greg has done a sterling job ... [that] Australia now has one of the highest vaccination rates in the world and one of the lowest mortality rates in the world is a credit, obviously first and foremost to the health workers, but Greg can also be proud of the part that he played in that outcome. Here’s Josh Frydenberg again, this time on ABC television. He warns there will still be “ups and downs” with Covid, and is repeating his message about the recovery. Then he’s gone on to the contentious voter ID laws: The Labor party was not in favour of it and we reached an accommodation on other aspects of improving the integrity around electoral laws and various thresholds for further accountability. But at the same time, we do believe that voter IDs important and that’s why we announced it in the first place, but didn’t have the support in the parliament to introduce it. Paul Karp reported on the wheeling and dealing here, and please enjoy First Dog’s take on the laws here: Treasurer Josh Frydenberg has been on ABC radio this morning talking up the nation’s economic recovery (this was a strong theme in parliament yesterday, and is sure to be a recurrent theme today). I mentioned those pollie farewells earlier ... there’s another one of huge import in the political sphere. It’s ABC veteran, legend, *insert other epithets here* Fran Kelly’s last day on Radio National breakfast today. She told Amanda Meade the job still thrills her but “it will be nice to breathe out a little”. Fair enough! Read morehere: Perpetrators and bullies “still believe they’re untouchable”, former Liberal party adviser Chelsey Potter has told political editor Katharine Murphy. Her voice joins former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins in calling for swift action after that shocking report into parliamentary behaviour this week. Murph has all the details here: Some very Adelaide news from ... Adelaide. Former South Australia premier Jay Weatherill flew into town from his new hometown of Perth. Unfortunately, he brought Covid with him. SA has been pretty much Covid-free, and bracing for it to come in after opening the borders on 23 November. Who’d have thought it would be the former state leader carrying it? (He wasn’t the first, but still ...) What’s more, Weatherill met state opposition leader Peter Malinauskas, so now state parliament has been adjourned (although Malinauskas has now had a negative result. And Weatherill did a bunch of media interviews and had meetings with SA’s movers and shakers, so contact tracers have their work cut out for them. The ABC has more details here. We’ve made it. The last sitting day of the year. And what a year! But there’s still a lot to get through before the people flee parliament to go out into the summer. We’re expecting health minister Greg Hunt to announce his resignation, which of course follows Liberal MP Christian Porter’s announcement he’ll quit yesterday. There’s a bunch of other MPs, too, who are on their way out (or onwards?). Some late-ish news from yesterday, in case you missed it. Legislation for partial DNA donations passed – that’s the mitochondrial donation bill known as Maeve’s law. There’s sure to be ongoing discussion of sex discrimination commissioner Kate Jenkins’ report into parliamentary workplaces. Pressure will be kept on prime minister Scott Morrison to act, and quickly. And we’re set for some more palaver over religious discrimination. Some moderate Liberal MPs have been brought over the line with late amendments but it may not be enough to get the legislation through. Stay tuned. Our political team is all set for this monster day. Mike Bowers will bring you the visual delights, while Katharine Murphy, Daniel Hurst, Paul Karp and Sarah Martin are here to entertain and inform you. It’s Tory Shepherd on the blog for now, with Amy Remeikis picking up later on. Hold on tight!The UK must “walk the talk” on climate action over the next 12 months, which will be critical in tackling the climate emergency, according to an assessment of the Cop26 summit by the Climate Change Committee. The UK has one of the most ambitious 2030 emissions targets in the world, according to the government’s official advisers, but it does not have all the policies in place to deliver it. In particular, the CCC said, the government must produce a robust plan for cutting emissions from farming, which produces 10% of UK emissions, and address a gap in behaviour change policy for shifting diets away from meat and dairy and limiting rising demand for flying. The UK hosted Cop26 in Glasgow and retains the presidency until November 2022, giving it a vital role in driving international action. The CCC said overseas aid spending should return to 0.7% of GDP “as soon as possible”. The UK’s aid cut was criticised by developing countries at the summit as undermining trust in rich countries to deliver promised funding. The UK and other countries also have a duty to act on the pledge in the Glasgow climate pact to phase out “inefficient fossil fuel subsidies”, though the CCC said no fossil fuel subsidies should be classed as efficient. The UK subsidises fossil fuels by £12.5bn a year, according to a report. “The next year is critical for climate action in the UK and internationally,” said John Gummer, the chair of the CCC. “At home, we need to walk the talk and urgently deliver actions in the net zero strategy. “Globally, the UK must continue to encourage stronger action on climate and insist on rapid emissions reductions and stronger adaptation through all diplomatic channels. The ultimate success of the Glasgow climate pact will be measured in climate risks averted, not words on a page.” The CCC said Cop26 delivered an increase in ambitions to cut carbon emissions worldwide but the current climate policies of countries did not come close to achieving these aims and would mean a catastrophic 2.7C of global heating. It said the success of Cop26 could only be measured by the actions that follow in the coming year and beyond. The government published its net zero strategy in October, which included the end of new gas boilers by 2035 and a mandate requiring carmakers to sell a minimum proportion of electric vehicles from 2024. The strategy largely followed the CCC’s advice but the advisers said on Thursday missing policies must be implemented urgently. The CCC previously warned the strategy had “nothing to say” on reducing meat eating or limiting growth in flying, making hitting climate targets riskier and more difficult. The government published a research paper on behaviour change in October but swiftly withdrew it, saying it had been released by mistake. On fossil fuel subsidies and other fiscal measures, the CCC recommended “the Treasury initiates a review of the role of the tax system in delivering net zero”. This was absent from a Treasury assessment published alongside the net zero strategy. The CCC said the UK’s commitment to the Glasgow climate pact could be further demonstrated with stronger actions to tackle the UK’s wider carbon footprint, such as applying more stringent green standards to goods both from the UK and imported and levying a carbon border tax on polluting imports, as the EU was already considering. The CCC also suggested using “trade levers”. The UK was criticised in September for dropping references to the temperature goals of the Paris climate agreement from a prospective trade deal with Australia. Funding to help developing countries deal with the climate emergency was a key issue in Glasgow. The CCC said the UK’s continuing presidency must deliver on the commitments made, including a doubling of funding for adaptation and establishing a “constructive dialogue on loss and damage”. Loss and damage is the term for compensation for the damage being caused in poorer countries, which have done little to cause global heating. In Glasgow a coalition of 134 countries, representing 85% of the world’s population, demanded the setting up of a loss-and-damage facility but the proposal was killed by the US.After all this time, is that it? The white paper on social care in England, published on Wednesday, doesn’t begin “to fix social care once and for all”, as Boris Johnson promised on Downing Street’s steps. Ignoring the scale of this crisis, nothing was announced that will actually slow the galloping rate of the sector’s collapse, with half of councils having dealt with a care home closure or bankruptcy in the past six months. Only a fifth of funds, £1.7bn, raised from the new national insurance levy goes where it’s most needed, including retaining a vanishing social care workforce, which is already 100,000 short. Instead, the bulk of the £5.4bn will go on preserving the inheritances of well-off homeowners. Wednesday’s announcement, which does not come with extra money, reallocates some to new technology for collecting data, assessing risks to help prevent patient falls and for adapted housing for the frail. But in this hurricane, good ideas risk sinking under water. What an odd political blunder, not to “level up” in class and geography but instead perversely tip the scales towards the richer south. The design of the £86,000 cap on care costs means Boris Johnson’s promise that no one will lose their home to pay for care is kept only for southerners with expensive properties, not for northerners whose house prices are lower, contrary to his electoral strategy. Here are the bleak financial facts: social care funding will only return to the level it was at 15 years ago by 2025, Ben Zaranko, senior research economist at the Institute for Fiscal Studies, tells me. In fact it’s worse than that: the population has grown since then and so has the number of elderly people who need help, so per capita funding will still fall far below the standards of 2010, which were never brilliant. Here’s the scale of the crisis: Age UK’s charity director, Caroline Abrahams, says the number of people now receiving no care who would have qualified a decade ago has risen to 1.6 million in England, leaving many vulnerable people home alone with neither family nor care. Social service directors this week reported that a further 400,000 people are stuck is a queue waiting to be assigned the care they qualify for. No one yet knows the significance of a 30% rise in numbers of people dying at home over the past two years, but some of these will be the lonely, unattended deaths of those denied care. The number of district nurses has been cut by half in eight years. Care staff are leaving the sector to work in warehouses, supermarkets or the NHS, where the pay is better. If they were to be paid the same as the lowest band for NHS healthcare assistants, the cost would be an extra £1.2bn a year, says the IFS – but that’s much more than what is in this care plan. Why are care workers paid so much less than NHS staff with the same skills? Because they are virtually un-unionised, they have no pay review body, no national pay scale and they are scattered among a host of small employers. Without muscle, there’s no leverage for a pay and career regime to attract and retain this disappearing workforce. Besides, care is not just for the old. Half that puny £1.7bn must cover care for people of working age, with the number of those with disabilities surviving birth and childhood who might not have generations ago growing. One of the most perverse policies will actually accelerate care home collapse. At the moment, many providers keep going by cross-subsidising their underfunded council residents through charging the self-payers about 40% extra. The government says that’s unfair, so self-payers will be allowed to ask their council to fix their care at the lower rate. That’s a recipe for instant bankruptcy. As council fees are so low, if everyone were to pay that rate, a lot of homes would go under at a stroke, says Mike Padgham, head of the Independent Care Group, an umbrella lobby for small northern care home owners. No wonder Stephen Chandler, president of the Association of Directors of Adult Social Services, warned this week: “Red lights are flashing right across our dashboard.” His organisation calls for a £1,000 winter retention bonus to keep hold of care staff. Jeremy Hunt’s health and social care select committee estimates that £7bn is needed to keep social care afloat. The Treasury may reckon most voters will never see these private care tragedies hidden behind lace curtains, with only a few families using care at any one time. The hot politics are all with the NHS, and especially its ballooning waiting lists. But any attempt to clear that backlog of operations will fail with too many hospital beds filling up with those denied social care. This derelict plan leaves health and social care even less prepared for a future pandemic wave. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistSidney Powell, the former lawyer for Donald Trump who filed lawsuits across the US for the former president, hoping to overturn the results of the 2020 presidential election, has on several occasions represented to federal courts that people were co-counsel or plaintiffs in her cases without seeking their permission to do so, the Guardian has learned. Some of these individuals say that they found out that Powell had named them only once the cases were already filed. During this same period of time, Powell also named several other lawyers – with their permission in those instances – as co-counsel in her election-related cases, despite the fact that they played virtually no role in bringing or litigating those cases. Both Powell’s naming of other people as plaintiffs or co-counsel without their consent and representing that other attorneys were central to her cases when, in fact, their roles were nominal or nonexistent, constitute serious potential violations of the American Bar Association model rules for professional conduct, top legal ethicists told the Guardian. Powell’s misrepresentations to the courts in those particular instances often aided fundraising for her non-profit, Defending the Republic. Powell had told prospective donors that the attorneys were integral members of an “elite strike force” who had played outsized roles in her cases – when in fact they were barely involved if at all. Powell did not respond to multiple requests for comment via phone, email, and over social media. The State Bar of Texas is already investigating Powell for making other allegedly false and misleading statements to federal courts by propagating increasingly implausible conspiracy theories to federal courts that Joe Biden’s election as president of the United States was illegitimate. The Texas bar held its first closed-door hearing regarding the allegations about Powell on 4 November. Investigations by state bar associations are ordinarily conducted behind closed doors and thus largely opaque to the public. A federal grand jury has also been separately investigating Powell, Defending the Republic, as well as a political action committee that goes by the same name, for fundraising fraud, according to records reviewed by the Guardian. Among those who have alleged that Powell falsely named them as co-counsel is attorney Lin Wood, who brought and litigated with Powell many of her lawsuits attempting to overturn the results of the election with her, including in the hotly contested state of Michigan. The Michigan case was a futile attempt by Powell to erase Joe Biden’s victory in that state and name Trump as the winner. On 25 August, federal district court Judge Linda Parker, of Michigan, sanctioned Powell and nine other attorneys who worked with her for having engaged in “a historic and profound abuse of the judicial process” in bringing the case in the first place. Powell’s claims of election fraud, Parker asserted, had no basis in law and were solely based on “speculation, conjecture, and unwarranted suspicion”. Parker further concluded that the conduct of Powell, Wood, and the eight other attorneys whom they worked with, warranted a “referral for investigation and possible suspension or disbarment to the appropriate disciplinary authority for each state … in which each attorney is admitted”. Wood told the court in the Michigan case that Powell had wrongly named him as one of her co-counsel in the Michigan case. During a hearing in the case to determine whether to sanction Wood, his defense largely rested on his claim that he had not been involved in the case at all. Powell, Wood told the court, had put his name on the lawsuit without even telling him. Wood said: “I do not specifically recall being asked about the Michigan complaint … In this case obviously my name was included. My experience or my skills apparently were never needed, so I didn’t have any involvement with it.” Wood’s attorney, Paul Stablein, was also categorical in asserting that his client had nothing to do with the case, telling the Guardian in an interview: “He didn’t draft the complaint. He didn’t sign it. He did not authorize anyone to put his name on it.” Powell has denied she would have named Wood as a co-counsel without Wood’s permission. But other people have since come forward to say that Powell has said that they were named as plaintiffs or lawyers in her election-related cases without their permission. In a Wisconsin voting case, a former Republican candidate for Congress, Derrick Van Orden, said he only learned after the fact that he had been named as a plaintiff in one of Powell’s cases. “I learned through social media today that my name was included in a lawsuit without my permission,” Van Orden said in a statement he posted on Twitter, “To be clear, I am not involved in the lawsuit seeking to overturn the election in Wisconsin.” Jason Shepherd, the Republican chairman of Georgia’s Cobb county, was similarly listed as a plaintiff in a Georgia election case without his approval. In a 26 November 2020 statement, Shepherd said he had been talking to an associate of Powell’s before the case’s filing about the “Cobb GOP being a plaintiff” but said he first “needed more information to at least make sure the executive officers were in agreeing to us being a party in the suit”. The Cobb county Republican party later agreed to remain plaintiffs in the case instead of withdrawing. Leslie Levin, a professor at the University of Connecticut Law School, said in an interview: “Misrepresentations to the court are very serious because lawyers are officers of the court. Bringing a lawsuit in someone’s name when they haven’t consented to being a party is a very serious misrepresentation and one for which a lawyer should expect to face serious discipline.” Nora Freeman Engstrom, a law professor at Stanford University, says that Powell’s actions appear to violate Rule 3.3 of the ABA’s model rules of professional misconduct, which hold that “a lawyer shall not knowingly … make a false statement of fact or law to a tribunal”. Since election day last year, federal and state courts have dismissed more than 60 lawsuits alleging electoral fraud and irregularities by Powell and other Trump allies. Shortly after the election, Trump named Powell as a senior member of an “elite strike force” who would prove that Joe Biden won the 2020 presidential race only because the election was stolen from him. But Trump refused to pay her for her services. To remedy this, Powell set up a new non-profit called Defending the Republic; its stated purpose is to “protect the integrity of elections in the United States”. As a not-for-profit organization, the group is allowed to raise unlimited amounts of “dark money”, and donors are legally protected from the ordinary requirements to disclose their identities to the public. Powell warned supporters that for her to succeed, “millions of dollars must be raised”. Echoing Trump’s rhetoric, Powell told prospective donors that Defending the Republic had a vast team of experienced litigators. Among the attorneys who Powell said made up this “taskforce” were Emily Newman, who had served Trump as the White House liaison to the Department of Health and Human Services and as a senior official with the Department of Homeland Security. Newman had been a founding board member of Defending the Republic. But facing sanctions in the Michigan case, some of the attorneys attempted to distance themselves from having played much of a meaningful role in her litigation. Newman’s attorney told Parker, the judge, that Newman had “not played a role in the drafting of the complaint … My client was a contract lawyer working from home who spent maybe five hours on this matter. She really wasn’t involved … Her role was de minimis.” To have standing to file her Michigan case, Powell was initially unable to find a local attorney to be co-counsel on her case but eventually attorney Gregory Rohl agreed to help out. But when Rohl was sanctioned by Parker and referred to the Michigan attorney disciplinary board for further investigation, his defense was that he, too, was barely involved in the case. He claimed that he only received a copy of “the already prepared” 830-page initial complaint at the last minute, reviewed it for “well over an hour”, while then “making no additions, decisions or corrections” to the original. As with Newman, Parker found that Rohl violated ethics rules by making little, if any, effort to verify the facts of the claims in Powell’s filings. In sanctioning Rohl, the judge wrote that “the court finds it exceedingly difficult to believe that Rohl read an 830-page complaint in just ‘well over an hour’ on the day he filed it. So, Rohl’s argument in and of itself reveals sanctionable conduct.”Now, let’s be clear about this right here at the beginning. Not all the stories they tell about Alvin “Titanic Thompson” Thomas are strictly accurate. He wasn’t given his nickname because he escaped from the ship by disguising himself as a woman and sneaking into a lifeboat. He didn’t beat Ben Hogan playing golf right-handed, he didn’t beat Byron Nelson playing left-handed, and he certainly didn’t do both back-to-back. And he never did con Al Capone out of $500 by throwing an orange over a five-storey building. According to one of his biographers it was actually a lemon. And according to the other, he swapped it with one he’d stuffed with buckshot the previous evening. But some of them are true. Or something like it. And this is one of them. In the early 1950s, Thompson was living in Dallas where, a friend had told him, there “was big money to be made off rich Texans with a gambling spirit that hardly matched their handicaps”. Many days, he was at Tenison Park golf course. “A lot of different people played there,” wrote Lee Trevino, who did too when he was young, “it was the only golf course I’ve ever seen where the parking lot was filled with Cadillacs, jalopies, pickups and beverage trucks”. Thompson was also there. “If you saw him once, you’d always remember him,” Trevino wrote. Thompson was in his 70s then. “He had the youngest pair of hands and the clearest blue eyes I ever saw.” Trevino said Thompson could be relied on to show up “anywhere people enjoyed games with money on the line”. He never drove, never drank, never smoked, “he did everything possible to ensure he had the edge in anything he bet on”. Trevino once saw him take a water hose and leave it on a green while it was watered, then move it the next day. When they mowed the green the hose left a groove behind it. “I saw Ti bet a guy he could sink three out of five putts from 30 feet, then send the ball right through that trough”. Trevino wasn’t the only future pro hanging around Tenison back then. Lee Elder was there too. Elder, who would go on to become the first black man to play in the Masters, and who would, in time, become one of the tournament’s three honorary starters. He has just died, at the age of 87. When Thompson met Elder, he was working at Tenison as a caddie. Elder was the youngest of 10 children, who were all orphaned when their parents died within three months of each other during the second world war. His aunt raised him in Los Angeles, where he worked as a caddie. But by the time he was 16, he was out on his own. He had his own set of clubs, a gift from another hustler who used to hang out there, Dick Martin. Years later, when Elder was a successful pro, he met Martin again, and wrote him a cheque for $40 to pay for them. Elder could play, when he got the opportunity. But there weren’t a lot of those going. Most clubs had colour bars. Elder was 16 before he ever played a full 18 holes. Thompson made Elder a proposition. They would go on the road, around the golf clubs across the south, and split the take 50-50. “You’ll make more money than you’ve ever seen,” he promised. Thompson wasn’t a civil rights advocate, he just figured that all that prejudice gave them an edge. It could be used against the people who held it. They made an odd couple, a 70-something white man and a black teenager, travelling together in a Cadillac. “I’m not proud of everything that happened with Ti,” Elder said later, “because some of the ruses were a little sneaky. But it was an interesting life.” And an education too. “Every day I learned something new from him.” Usually it went like this, Thompson would give the haircut and Elder the shave. “Do you mean to say you’re scared to play my coloured-boy caddie?” Thompson would tell the men he was playing against, and of course, when they did, Elder would beat them flat. “The kid can’t play worth a nickel, give us two strokes a side.” Sometimes he would even dress up in livery and pose as Thompson’s chauffeur, the line that time went something like “I bet you couldn’t even beat me if I was partnered with him, and he’s never even tried golf before”. And when they didn’t fall for that, they’d handicap him. In those years, Elder won games playing on one leg, off his knees and cross-handed (he never explained that it was the grip he’d first learned when he was a kid). One time, he even won a game playing in a full rain-suit in 100 degrees heat. The bet was $500 for nine holes. “So they dress me up in this rain suit, zip it up to my collar, tape it at the sleeves and legs so I couldn’t get air. I thought I was going to suffocate.” Elder won the match on the 7th. One telling of that story goes that Elder wrapped iced towels around his limbs before they dressed him. Thompson and Elder split up in ’58, or thereabouts. If he wasn’t proud of their time together, Elder once said he wasn’t ashamed of it either. “I had to depend on my hustling to make a living in golf.” The PGA was Caucasian-only until 1961, and the prize pots on the UGA, which was open to everyone, were so small you couldn’t live off them. When Elder finally did make it to the PGA, he finished in the money in his first nine tournaments. When he was finally invited to play the Masters in 1975, he said later, all those years hustling with Ti “had trained me to handle pressure” he felt on the first tee. Thompson didn’t live to see it. He had died a few months previous. Chances are, he was still figuring the odds.The Inter-American court of human rights has ruled that El Salvador was responsible for the death of Manuela, a woman who was jailed in 2008 for killing her baby when she suffered a miscarriage. The court has ordered the Central American country to reform its draconian policies on reproductive health. The decision on Tuesday marked the first time an international court has ruled on El Salvador’s extreme abortion laws and was celebrated by women’s rights activists, who believe it could open doors for change across the region. Since 1998, abortion in El Salvador has been banned without exception, even in cases of rape and incest. Over the past two decades, more than 180 women have been jailed for murder for having an abortion after suffering obstetric emergencies, according to rights groups. The case of Manuela v El Salvador was brought after the 33-year-old mother of two from the countryside died from cancer after receiving inadequate medical diagnosis and treatment, leaving her two children orphaned. She had been serving a 30-year prison sentence for aggravated homicide after a miscarriage. When Manuela – whose full name has never been made public in El Salvador – went to the hospital after miscarrying, staff failed to provide her with timely treatment and instead subjected her to verbal abuse and accused her of having an abortion, according to the Center for Reproductive Rights. Manuela was handcuffed to her bed and denied access to a lawyer while police interrogated her. “There is no doubt that Manuela suffered an obstetric emergency,” the landmark court ruling stated. “Such situations, as they are medical conditions, cannot lead to a criminal sanction.” The court also ruled that the state must pay reparations to Manuela’s family, and should develop comprehensive sexual education policies and guarantee doctor-patient confidentiality. “The Inter-American court has done justice by recognising Manuela was another victim of an unjust legal context that originates in the absolute prohibition of abortion,” said Morena Herrera, at the Feminist Collective for Local Development, one of the parties in the case supporting Manuela’s family. “Manuela’s story is a sad one, but it represents a change and becomes a path of justice and hope for all women in Latin America and the Caribbean who are criminalised for obstetric events.” Most countries in the region respect the Inter-American court’s jurisdiction, opening the door for sweeping change, activists said. “This is a huge advance for reproductive rights, not only in El Salvador but across Latin America,” said Catalina Martínez Coral, regional director for Latin America and the Caribbean at the Center for Reproductive Rights, another party in the case. “This is a standard we can apply to the constitutions and states across the region.” Martínez Coral added that while the ruling was to be celebrated, the issue of poverty affecting access to reproductive rights remained a challenge. “There are over 180 cases of women in jail, or that have been jailed, over these issues,” said Martínez Coral, who also worked as a litigator on the case against the Salvadorean state. “What that means is we’re dealing with a state that criminalises women and, above all, criminalises poor women in the most rural and impoverished areas,” she said.The Queensland government will “extensively consider” the recommendations of a women’s safety taskforce, which has called for the criminalisation of coercive control and an inquiry into “widespread cultural issues” within the state’s police service. The taskforce, led by the former court of appeal president Margaret McMurdo, handed its report to the Queensland attorney general, Shannon Fentiman, on Thursday. The McMurdo report proposes a staged path to criminalising coercive control that would take at least three years. The offence would be subject to a maximum prison term of 14 years. While the taskforce praised the leadership of the Queensland police service, it also recommended an independent commission of inquiry “to examine widespread cultural issues within the Queensland Police Service”, including whether the state required an independent law enforcement conduct commission. Guardian Australia has reported extensively on policing failures related to domestic violence victims in Queensland. Women’s groups have called for such an inquiry into officer attitudes – unsuccessfully – for several years. “A Queensland woman seeking police help to stay safe from a perpetrator enters a raffle – she may get excellent assistance, or she may be turned away,” the report says. “Queensland women tell us that is not good enough. “Unfortunately, the taskforce has … heard that many police officers right across the state are not responding to women’s complaints of domestic violence and this is putting women’s safety at risk. “Police are the gatekeepers to our domestic violence protection system. A widespread failure to assist women seeking to escape domestic violence is apt to erode public confidence in the delivery of justice in Queensland.” High-profile domestic murders – including the killing of Hannah Clarke and her three children in 2020 – have heightened concern about the impact of coercive controlling behaviours in abusive family relationships. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The taskforce said most submissions supported criminalisation and that it had proposed a pathway to legislation including procedural reforms and education required to support it. It also recommended working in partnership with First Nations people to “co-design a specific whole-of-government and community strategy to address the over-representation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in Queensland’s criminal justice system” which should be operative before any legislation to criminalise coercive control. But there remain serious concerns about the unintended consequences of such legislation. Chelsea Watego, a Munanjahli and South Sea Islander woman and academic, said the report ignored the concerns of Indigenous women – who were already disproportionately criminalised and misidentified as domestic violence perpetrators – and their concern they could be targeted by laws conceived to protect them. “(Criminalisation) will channel resources into this violent industry (policing and corrections) and not into tangible and practical things to keep women safe,” Watego said. The experience in the UK, which criminalised coercive controlling behaviours in 2015, also offers a warning that criminalisation is not a panacea. A review of the English law, published in March, found that since the offence was introduced, the number of recorded coercive control offences recorded had increased each year, but that charges were increasingly rare. In 2018-19 police in England and Wales only charged 6% of recorded offences. The conviction rate of those charged was 52%. Most of those prosecutions were for instances where the offender was also charged with other offences, such as assault. The review noted “evidential difficulties” caused challenges for police and prosecutors. A recent article in the UK Law Society gazette said the impact of criminalisation had been limited because of “a lack of understanding of the offence by the police, coupled with practical difficulties in proving it”. The Queensland taskforce’s report said that submissions “almost universally” called for intensive education across the community about coercive control and healthy relationships. “The report contains recommendations as to how to achieve this, with a special emphasis on the education of police, lawyers, judicial officers, service providers, children and young people, the aged, people with disability and First Nations and culturally and linguistically diverse peoples. “It is critical that education in First Nations communities is community led and delivered.” Fentiman said the findings and recommendations of the taskforce’s first report would be “extensively considered” by the government and would help lay the foundation to criminalise coercive control. “Today marks the day that we begin creating a strengthened framework to respond to coercive control and prevent more harm coming to victims,” she said. “The report shows that we cannot just criminalise coercive control – we also need to educate the community and frontline responders on how to recognise and respond to coercive control. “There is crucial work that needs to be done before we can effectively criminalise coercive control.”Researchers who challenged the Australian Research Council’s rejection of critical funding applications on the basis of a controversial rule change have been vindicated, with their appeal upheld and 32 previously rejected projects deemed eligible for funding. Researchers across the sciences and humanities were left furious and frustrated in August after their applications for Australian Research Council (ARC) fellowships were rejected because of a new rule that banned preprint material from being cited. The ban was introduced by the federal government agency in the 2021 funding round of the Discovery Early Career Researcher Awards (Decra) and Future Fellowships. After widespread outrage from the Australian research community, the ARC overturned the rule in September. Researchers behind 28 applications appealed the decision of the ARC to deem their applications ineligible. All those appeals were upheld by the ARC’s independent appeals committee. The ruling was extended to a further four applicants that did not submit an appeal but had been excluded on the same basis. Of those 32 reassessed applications, six were ranked highly in the grants assessment process and were recommended for funding, the ARC said in a statement on Thursday. They consisted of five Decra applications and one Future Fellowships application. The remaining 26 applications were ruled to be eligible but not recommended for funding due to their lower ranking. Decra and Future Fellowship grants provide crucial multi-year salary funding for researchers. They determine the trajectory of many researchers’ careers and can be a critical factor in their job security. They are also deeply competitive, and eligible applications are subject to a ranking process, which determines whether or not they are then recommended for funding. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The applications themselves are very time-consuming, with researchers routinely spending months putting them together, with success rates of less than 20%. Articles published in academic journals undergo peer review, a critical part of the process that ensures published research is robust and rigorous. It is a slow process, so it is common practice in some disciplines to upload new research to preprint servers for broader access while peer-review is taking place. It has long been a requirement of ARC applications that researchers could not refer to preprints of their own work. But the new and now-revoked rule change banned references to all preprints, even where they were not authored by the applicant – a decision that was described as out of keeping with modern research practices and “a remarkably stupid own-goal for Australian science”. It was revealed in August that grant applications worth $22m in funding were deemed ineligible due to this rule change – after the Senate passed an order requiring the government to provide de-identified information about them. In backflipping on the new rule in September, the ARC said the use of preprints would no longer be an eligibility issue, and future applications would not be excluded by their use. The appeals ruling came after the Greens senator and education spokesperson Mehreen Faruqi wrote to the ARC on 30 November to push the council to come to a decision, with the next round of Future Fellowship applications due on 15 December and some applicants still unsure of whether they would need to reapply. “The success of these appeals is a vindication of the researchers who were so poorly treated by the ARC,” Faruqi said on Thursday. “The ARC needs to learn from this whole saga. Researchers need much clearer, more appropriate processes and rules – including set timelines. Otherwise, there will always be mistrust.” The ARC said all eligible but unfunded applicants could reapply in the next funding round.Ernst Lubitsch’s 1940 romcom classic is re-released: it stars James Stewart and Margaret Sullavan as the two squabbling shop assistants, Alfred and Klara, who are anonymous romantic penpals falling in love without knowing who the other really is and who in real life can’t stand each other. It’s a parallel universe situation that effectively takes the dislike/love duality of the meet-cute scenario and perpetuates it through almost the entire drama. The Shop Around the Corner is based on the Hungarian stage play Parfumerie and keeps the Mitteleuropa setting of elegant Budapest: strange to think that this film was appearing just as Hungary was joining the war, on the wrong side. It inspired many remakes, most famously the Tom Hanks/Meg Ryan weepie-romance update You’ve Got Mail in 1998 – with emails instead of letters – which shifted the action to New York. (My own personal theory is that the original’s ensemble set-up, with its gallery of shop assistants and a venerable father-figure boss, inspired the BBC TV comedy Are You Being Served?) This is the first time I have sat down to watch The Shop Around the Corner since the last revival in 2010, and some of its weirder moments struck me afresh. Modern-day romcoms probably wouldn’t have a thwarted suicide attempt leading to a two-week hospitalisation, with the patient being swiftly cured by the spectacle of his store doing very well on Christmas Eve: a weird link to It’s a Wonderful Life. But revisiting this film lets you see how ingeniously constructed it is: Klara’s romantic letters, with their grand and high-flown insistence on general ideas, mean that Alfred and Klara don’t start talking about their specific situation and so don’t give the game away to each other. And naturally Alfred is miserable and grumpy: he is being unfairly victimised by his boss Mr Matuschek (Frank Morgan, famed for playing the Wizard of Oz) who wrongly suspects him of having an affair with his wife: a crisis that is to trigger his depression. Were it not for that unjust suspicion, Alfred might be in a sunnier mood and we wouldn’t have a story: and the scenes in which he indignantly stands up for himself are strangely real and uncomfortable. And there are more epistolary complications: Mr Matuschek finds out about his wife’s infidelity from an anonymous letter. Who can have sent it? My money is on the nosey errand boy Pepi (William Tracy) who’s always out and about on his bicycle, pretends to be other people on the phone, saves his boss’s life and finally gets a promotion. There is a sprinkling of vinegary malice from the smarmy shop assistant Vadas, played by Joseph Schildkraut (an Oscar-winner a few years previously for his portrayal of Alfred Dreyfus in The Life of Emile Zola): it always makes me laugh when this conceited popinjay tries to tell his co-workers a joke and they coldly cut him off. A paprikash of romantic misadventure. • The Shop Around the Corner is released on 3 December in cinemas.Tesco’s festive TV campaign featuring Santa Claus bearing a Covid vaccine passport has been cleared by the UK ad watchdog despite anti-vaccination campaigners making it the second most complained about advert of all time. The advert, titled “This Christmas, Nothing’s Stopping Us”, prompted more than 5,000 complaints to the Advertising Standards Authority (ASA), which determines whether marketing campaigns have broken the UK advertising code. The ad shows the public determined to enjoy a proper Christmas with family and friends after lockdown restrictions prevented gatherings last year. However, in one scene a reporter appears on TV with “breaking news” telling viewers that “Santa could be quarantined”. Father Christmas is then shown presenting his Covid pass at border control, proving he has been vaccinated to a customs official so he can enter the country without restriction. “Having carefully assessed the 5,000 complaints we received about the Tesco Christmas ad campaign, we have concluded it doesn’t break our rules and there are no grounds for further action,” a spokesman for the ASA said. “We consider that the depiction of Santa displaying a proof of vaccine status in an airport is likely to be seen as a humorous reference to international travel rules people have experienced this year. It is unlikely to be interpreted as a message about these rules or the Covid-19 vaccine more widely.” The scene sparked controversy on social media, attracting criticism from those in the anti-vaccination movement. The ASA received 5,009 complaints from members of the public who felt that the scene encouraged medical discrimination and the need to be vaccinated. The 90-second ad, which is set to Queen’s Don’t Stop Me Now, is being supported by a mix of press and out-of-home advertising, such as poster sites, billboards and bus stops and sides, as well as radio, social media promotion and in-store displays. “While we understand that some people disagree with the vaccine programme and may find the ad in poor taste, we have concluded that the ad is unlikely to be seen as irresponsible or cause serious or widespread offence on the basis suggested,” the ASA spokesman said. Tesco’s Christmas campaign has officially become the second most-complained about ad of all-time in the UK. The betting company Paddy Power’s 2014 ad campaign drumming up business from the murder trial of the South African athlete Oscar Pistorius, offering punters “money back if he walks”, remains the most complained about ad of all time, with 5,525 complaints.Silverview John le Carré (Viking) Le Carré’s final complete novel was published in October, in the week of what would have been his 90th birthday. Having made his fortune, Julian Lawndsley has left the City to run a bookshop in East Anglia, where a meeting with an eccentric Polish émigré and former spy draws him into a web of intrigue. The cast of characters, including several husband-and-wife spy pairings, are compromised by secrets, loyalties and allegiances both professional and familial, and no one, least of all the Service itself, is innocent. Valedictory, with a final turn of events that ends surprisingly but pleasingly in a cock-up, this is a satisfying coda to the career of the finest thriller writer of the 20th century. Riccardino Andrea Camilleri, translated by Stephen Sartarelli (Mantle) Written in 2005, Camilleri’s final Inspector Montalbano novel was kept in a safe for publication after the author’s death, which occurred in 2019. Like its much loved predecessors, Riccardino is set in the fictional Sicilian town of Vigata, but this time the increasingly tired and tetchy detective is joined by the author himself, who makes ever more far-fetched suggestions as to how the investigation into the death of the titular character should proceed. The absurdity mounts as the Catholic church persists in sticking its Jesuitical oar in and the revelations about the dead man’s private life grow ever more colourful. This novel is a fittingly exuberant last outing. The First Day of Spring Nancy Tucker (Hutchinson) “I killed a little boy today …” From the first line of this assured debut, we know that eight-year-old Chrissie is a murderer. Neglected by her parents to the point of starvation, she is desperate for both physical and emotional nourishment, and her every action – bullying her classmates, making trouble at school, and finally strangling two-year-old Steven – is a heartbreaking attempt to make somebody notice her existence. The narrative is split between the child Chrissie and the adult she becomes, released from a secure unit and renamed Julia, now with a child of her own. Tucker explores the difficult subjects of cruelty, guilt and redemption with compassion and extraordinary finesse, in a way that will resonate long after the final page. Girl A Abigail Dean (HarperCollins) Another superb first novel that is all the more powerful for being unsensational, Girl A is the story of Lex, the eldest daughter of a religious fanatic who, enabled by his wife, abused his children so appallingly that the family home became known as the “house of horrors”. Many years later, Lex, now a lawyer in New York, is compelled to relive the past; she returns to England to oversee the house’s conversion to a community centre and is forced into contact with her siblings, all of whom have reacted to their childhood experiences in markedly different ways. One of the best depictions I have read of the difficulties of “moving on” and the impossibility of explanations to outsiders, this book is haunting and powerful, with a hard-won hope. Winter Counts David Heska Wanbli Weiden (Simon &amp; Schuster) Vigilante-for-hire Virgil Wounded Horse acts on behalf of those on the Rosebud Native American Reservation in South Dakota who have been failed by both the toothless tribal police and a foot-dragging US criminal justice system. After his teenage nephew almost dies from a heroin overdose, Virgil is determined to take on the men responsible for bringing the drug into the community. However, with limited authority and some powerful adversaries, his life is becoming both complicated and very dangerous. In his debut novel, Weiden, a member of the Sicangu Lakota Nation, gives a fascinating insight into an often overlooked world, and draws the reader into a satisfying mystery. • Browse all the featured books and save up to 15% at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.What was set up to be a rollicking MVP race has descended into a mess. Heading into Week 13, no one has an unassailable case. Toss the league’s top quarterbacks up and they could fall down in any order over the next month: Tom Brady, Josh Allen, Dak Prescott, Aaron Rodgers or Kyler Murray. If you want to tack on a running back as a candidate, then feel free to add in Jonathan Taylor. But the MVP is almost exclusively a quarterback award at this point – the last non-QB to win it was Adrian Peterson in 2012. The four criteria are: Who had the best season; which team won the most games; who was the most fun to watch; who has the best story. This season, it’s hard to find anyone who ticks all the boxes. Quarterback play across the league is in a down year. The advanced metric site RBSDM tracks a figure known as Expected Points Added, which measures the value (compared to historical records) for each and every play. The number for great quarterback play is anything above 0.25. Last season, five quarterbacks were well beyond that figure. This season: Zero. Zilch. Nada. The MVP conversation this year – or argument, depending on your zealousness – is less about which quarterback has excelled and more about who hasn’t stunk at one point or another. Which quarterback will struggle the least down the stretch and therefore outlast his peers? Early in the season, Kyler Murray was the clear favorite. He marshaled the league’s best and last undefeated team. His play was electric. He had taken a clear, obvious leap. A coronation for the mobile, cannon-armed Murray felt in keeping with the evolution of the sport, and would follow the trend of the game’s best and brightest young quarterbacks winning an MVP early in their career. Then Murray got injured. He has missed three games so far this season. Can a player who’s missed 17% of the available games be eligible for the award? What’s more valuable: Scorching the earth for 14 games (provided Murray returns this Sunday playing at the same level as when he left) or playing good, solid football for 17? Elsewhere, it has not been a banner year for Aaron Rodgers, whose off-the-field behavior and the fact he picked up the award last year will all but rule him out of this season’s proceedings. Justin Herbert has been up and down. Ditto for Josh Allen. Lamar Jackson’s early-season candidacy has fizzled, too. With mounting injuries, the Ravens offense has consistently ground to a halt. It’s a similar story for Matthew Stafford, who has fallen from preseason darling to ‘Is Stafford What’s Wrong With The Rams?’ fodder in record time. Realtors on Stafford Island are scrambling to meet this week to discuss slumping prices. This writer, for what it’s worth, will keep his beachfront property for now. Of those six, Allen has the best shot at regaining a foothold in the race. The Bills quarterback has a chance to punctuate his candidacy down the stretch with two games in four weeks against Bill Belichick and the Patriots. If Allen comes through both games unscathed – or thrives in one or more of them – he will find himself at the top of voters’ ballots, perhaps with a shoulder shrug from them. I mean, sure, I guess he’s the MVP. There, ready and waiting for an Allen slip, is Tom Brady – because isn’t he always? Brady’s humdrum excellence has seen him skate a touch under the radar this season. At this point in his career, the season doesn’t truly begin until the postseason rolls around. And while Brady and the Bucs have not been the overwhelming force that many expected coming into the year, they’re still on course to contend for the top seed in the NFC. Brady is the current betting favorite. He leads the league in touchdown passes. He is tops in DVOA, a measure of a player’s down to down efficiency, and he leads the league in Football Outsider’s DYAR, a measure of player’s total value. By those metrics, yes, he is the sport’s most valuable player – at 44-years-old. That story in and of itself might carry the day – there remains a real possibility that Tom Brady and Bill Belichick win an MVP-Coach of the Year double in 2021, which will probably force the rest of the league to take a moment for quiet contemplation in a dark room somewhere. Then again, an optimistic voice would point out that the drop in quarterback play is a chance toto shine a light on the league’s other stars. Taylor continues to garner attention from national analysts as a potential outside candidate. Yet the running back’s candidacy has much to do with the imagination of coach and play-designer Frank Reich and the Colts’ all-mauling offensive line. A running back winning the award for the game’s top player in the year 2021 feels slightly dinosaur-ish, but when there are few candidates elsewhere on the board, maybe he can sneak into the discussion. Were he healthy, Derrick Henry would merit consideration. What about a defensive player? Can Cameron Heyward – the league’s most ferocious pass-rusher – be considered the most valuable player if his Steelers are mediocre? What about Aaron Donald? Should he win the award if the Rams defense continues to be a sieve? Shouldn’t Myles Garrett carrying a beat-up Browns defense to some level of respectability merit attention beyond the Defensive Player of the Year honor? It should, but it won’t. Even in a down year, the award will almost certainly go to the game’s most effective quarterback. It doesn’t have to be more complicated than this: Which player do you fear the most on third down? Murray seems like the right answer. But there is Brady, ever lurking. This season, there is no right answer. It’s a matter of taste.The offices of Scott Morrison and Alan Tudge were “central in the coordination” of canvassing of Coalition MPs and candidates” about the location of $660m in commuter car parks promised under the federal government’s controversial pre-election program, an inquiry has found In a report, tabled on Thursday, a Senate inquiry called on Morrison to provide a personal explanation about his role in the allocation of $660m under the commuter car park fund by 17 December. It also recommended creation of a national integrity commission and an urgent Australian National Audit Office audit of the wider $4.8bn urban congestion fund (UCF). The committee chair, Labor senator Tim Ayres, told the Senate on Thursday there was still $890m in the fund “ripe for rorting before next year’s election”. “Prime minister you have 15 days to explain to the Australian people the role you played and your office played in the commuter car park fund with minister Tudge and the Liberal party campaign,” he said. “Don’t hide behind former minister Tudge … Don’t hide behind self-serving interpretation of cabinet confidentiality and public interest immunity.” In June, a scathing ANAO report found not one of the 47 car park sites was selected by the infrastructure department, with projects handpicked by the government on advice of its MPs and candidates. The finance and public administration committee inquiry heard the same staffer in the prime minister’s office engaged in the notorious sports rorts affair was also involved in deciding which car park projects would be funded. The ANAO told the Senate inquiry the former urban infrastructure minister, Alan Tudge, had instructed staff to first consult marginal seat MPs before commuter car parks were selected, although Tudge has said he was not aware of a list of “Top 20 marginal” seats that guided the process. The committee found the “misallocation of funds under the commuter car park fund reflects an endemic culture within the government of using public money for political purposes”. “The committee is persuaded by the evidence that both the prime minister’s office and minister Tudge’s office were central in the coordination of the exclusive canvassing of Coalition MPs and candidates, in marginal Coalition held seats and targeted opposition held seats, and in the development of the ‘Top 20 marginals’ spreadsheet,” the report said. “Further, the evidence strongly points to the prime minister being aware of the canvassing process and that either he (or his office) approved all the car park projects within the scope of the ANAO audit.” The report warned that “the entire UCF program is vulnerable to politically motivated misallocations of funding”. The committee noted the infrastructure department used a prime ministerial press release as the only authority for funding the Mitcham car park, which showed “a complete disregard for proper executive decision-making and governance”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Tudge has denied any wrongdoing, insisting that all projects were “were chosen on the basis of need”. Morrison has previously told parliament Australians wanted more carparks and were the winners from the fund. In a dissenting report, the Coalition senators said the majority report “disingenuously” criticises the government’s program while omitting that Labor had “committed funding to car park projects on the basis of lobbying by Labor candidates”. It cited Labor’s $300m park-and-ride fund for 24 projects including $15m for a car park in Robertson and $5m in Longman, both marginal seats. The Coalition accused the majority report of “political criticisms and commentaries designed to undermine public confidence” in the program. According to evidence from the department in November, just four of the 47 car parks promised by the Coalition have been completed, with five under construction and a further seven to start construction this financial year.More than a third of pregnant women fear losing their jobs due to safety concerns about Covid in the workplace, according to a survey. Research from Maternity Action shows 36% are concerned about their work if they take time off or ask their employer to do more to protect them from Covid. The charity is urging ministers to immediately overhaul health and safety rules for pregnant women in the workplace, which it says are “not fit for purpose”. Ros Bragg, director of Maternity Action, said: “The situation for pregnant women is dire and is only getting worse as the pandemic progresses. “They are frankly right to be worried – because the system that is supposed to protect them is not fit for purpose. There is a vast gap between what the law says and actual employer practice, leaving women under huge pressure to work in unsafe conditions.” Bragg said officials and organisations given the responsibility of enforcing workplace health and safety had “shown themselves wholly inadequate to the task”. Women are being left with an “unenviable choice” of either taking their employer to a tribunal to get basic health and safety protections or “carrying on working in an unsafe environment”. Current evidence suggests pregnant women are no more likely to get Covid-19 than other healthy adults, but they are at slightly increased risk of becoming severely unwell if they do get the disease, and are more likely to have pregnancy complications such as preterm birth or stillbirth. In the survey of more than 400 pregnant women, over two-thirds (69%) said they were fairly or very worried about catching Covid because of their work. A fifth of respondents (20%) said they took time off or even left their job because they were so concerned about becoming infected. More than half (59%) raised concerns about their health and safety with their employer but, of these, almost one in five (17%) said their employer took no action to address their concerns. One pregnant woman told how she was forced to quit her job during the late stages of pregnancy over concerns about Covid safety in the workplace. “I asked about risk assessment and [was] told it wasn’t necessary,” the woman, who asked to remain anonymous, said. “I just kept saying: ‘Can I work from home today?’ Every day I would go to the office and our office remained a busy environment and not at all Covid-secure. It wasn’t possible to socially distance. We didn’t do anything like wearing masks or take those other ordinary steps. “I was genuinely afraid. I had a lot of conversations about what I needed from them. It became clear very quickly that none of that was on the table. They weren’t prepared for a moment to accept any changes to my working patterns. I had previous felt valued but suddenly every conversation was a difficult one. “I was asked to come into a formal meeting and at that meeting it was made clear that my career with my employer was over. I effectively had to leave at short notice, not knowing what I would be going to. “What you can’t do is look in the paper and find another job, because you are visibly massively pregnant. It was frightening because you’re thinking about your mortgage, and your kids and wondering if you’ll be able to pay the car loan at the end of the month. I had asked for so little, and what I expected was so reasonable but at some point they decided that investing in me wasn’t worthwhile.”Lord Rothermere has upped his bid to take the publisher of the Daily Mail, i, Metro and New Scientist private to try to win over investors who believe he is significantly undervaluing the business. The family, which founded the Daily Mail in 1896 and listed the parent company, Daily Mail and General Trust (DMGT), on the stock market in 1932, has upped its offer to 270p a share, valuing the newspaper business at £885m including debt. The previous offer of 255p a share, valuing the business at £850m, prompted two top 10 shareholders – Majedie Asset Management and JO Hambro Capital Management, which control or advise on shares accounting for a combined 10.2% of DMGT – to publicly criticise the offer as woefully undervaluing the assets. Rothermere, who has struggled to win acceptance of the deal from shareholders, has also changed the terms, so the family now needs only 50% approval from investors to delist. Those unwilling to sell will be offered shares in the private company. The threshold when the offer was first made had been set at 90%. The family, which initially offered 251p in July to take the company private, control 36% of the company through the Jersey-registered holding company Rothermere Continuation Limited (RCL). DMGT’s independent directors have recommended that shareholders – who have been given until 1pm on 16 December to decide whether to back Rothermere’s offer – accept the new deal. Rothermere’s RCL holds all the vote-bearing shares in DMGT’s two-tier stock structure, and a 33.9% economic interest in the company. Other family-affiliated investors own 2.6% of DMGT’s class A shares. RCL said it has so far received irrevocable undertakings from non-family affiliates shareholders representing 8.6% of the DMGT A shares and 7.9% of all DMGT shares. This means that RCL has received acceptances amounting to 41.8% of all DMGT shares. DMGT was founded by Harold Sidney Harmsworth, the first Viscount Rothermere, in 1922. He set up the Daily Mail with his brother Alfred in 1896, and subsequently launched the Daily Mirror. Jonathan Harmsworth, 53, Harold’s great-grandson, has led the business through huge technological change as print newspapers have had to refocus their business models in the digital age. MailOnline, launched in 2003, has grown to be one of the world’s most popular English language news sites. The publisher of the Daily Mail has been reorganising the business through disposals and targeted acquisitions of its own in recent years, having bought the New Scientist magazine in a £70m deal in March, as well as the i newspaper in a £49.6m deal two years ago.It was a BBC article about a 400-year-old Greenland shark which sparked Kiran Millwood Hargrave and Tom de Freston’s children’s novel Julia and the Shark, which has just won an award at Waterstones. But it was the pandemic which drove its exploration of the fragility of a parent’s mental health. Hargrave’s novel, which is illustrated by her artist husband de Freston, tells of 10-year-old Julia, who travels with her parents to an island in the Shetlands. There for the summer, her marine biologist mother becomes obsessed with finding the elusive Greenland shark. The title was named children’s gift of the year today by Waterstones, described by head children’s buyer Florentyna Martin as “an incredible piece of storytelling” which explores “powerful topics with warmth and honesty”. “I read about Greenland sharks when they discovered one that was 400 years old,” says Hargrave. “Normally with sharks, they date them by their bones, which grow rings like trees. Greenland sharks have very soft bones, so they can’t do that. The way they date them is this parasite that creates crystals in their eyes and in those crystals gets trapped light from hundreds of years ago. So the way that they age them is they date the light in their eyes. It’s so magical. I still get goosebumps – it was one of those alchemical moments you get when you’re like: ‘Oh, there’s a story’.” The pandemic, says Hargrave, then had a “huge impact” on the trajectory of the novel. “It’s a lot more of a hopeful book, and the mental health strand came very much to the fore. During the pandemic, it became so clear, especially for children, you’re navigating such a difficult situation, and you don’t have your usual support structure, and that’s quite similar to how Julia has found herself on this island without her usual support structure around her, in this very strange situation where her mum is becoming something of a stranger.” De Freston, whose dreamlike illustrations sit alongside Hargrave’s text, agrees. “Children pick up everything – in a way their worlds are smaller, and they know when there are things wrong at home, or when their parents are struggling. We felt like this book could be a way to say, there’s a language for these things.” Hargrave won the Waterstones children’s book award for her debut novel, The Girl of Ink and Stars, in which Isabella sets out to save her friend who has vanished into a forbidden forest. “I’ve written books where the child saves the day entirely, and absolutely, a hugely important part of writing children’s literature is giving children agency, but I really wanted to say in this book that it’s not your responsibility to fix things. You don’t have to save your mum. She’s a grownup,” she says. “Often children try and take responsibility for so many aspects of their parents’ lives and their parents’ happiness, which is a lot of what this book is about. Julia tries to be a saviour. But that’s not her job. She’s a kid.” During the writing of the book, de Freston’s studio burned down in a fire, and he created many of the illustrations using the ash and fragments of the artworks which were destroyed. “The fire destroyed 12 years of my work,” he says. “I think since, there’s been a shift in my work in general – now it’s far more full of hope and beauty within darkness. And at a really simple level, that’s what this book’s about – that even in the darkest moments, there’s always hope.” Waterstones book awards are selected by its booksellers, with Ed from the Winchester branch praising Julia and the Shark’s “frank look at the fragility of our minds and our lives (particularly pertinent in an age of pandemics)”. This year two titles were chosen as winners thanks to “equally outstanding enthusiasm”, with Paul McCartney’s The Lyrics, which explores his songs with the poet Paul Muldoon, named Waterstones book of the year. Chief executive James Daunt called the title “magnificent and deeply original”, and “a true joy for bibliophiles”. Previous winners of the prize include Maggie O’Farrell’s Hamnet, Sally Rooney’s Normal People and Philip Pullman’s La Belle Sauvage. “We are awed to be awarded this particular honour,” said Hargrave and de Freston in a statement. “We made this story to celebrate the natural world, to celebrate families, and to celebrate curiosity and strangeness. To think of our Greenland shark swimming into so many hands this Christmas is extraordinary. Thank you to each and every one of the booksellers who help our book find its readers.”Women’s rights have been the focus of many protests in Britain this year. After the rape and murder of Sarah Everard and the killing of the teacher Sabina Nessa, women demonstrated over the lack of safety on the country’s streets. Beyond British shores, when news broke that the Taliban had once again begun restricting Afghan women’s lives and the debate about the legitimacy of abortion restarted in the US, it became clear that the threat to women’s rights was increasing around the world. Among all this discourse over women and their bodies, the fourth anniversary of the #MeToo movement took place this October. This all raises the question: what impact has #MeToo had on the world, if any? The movement has certainly made a difference in Hollywood, leading to the arrest and conviction of powerful men such as Harvey Weinstein. However, sexism and sexual harassment are not only found in Hollywood but also closer to home, in our schools, our workplaces and our everyday lives. A YouGov poll carried out in March 2021 for UN Women UK found that seven out of 10 women surveyed had experienced some form of sexual harassment in public; for younger women the proportion was nearly nine out of 10. A report by a group of British MPs and peers set up to support UN Women UK’s work concludes that “sexual harassment in public places continues to be highly prevalent and concerning”. Laura Bates, the founder of the Everyday Sexism Project in the UK, has said: “Many people would like to think that workplace sexual harassment is a thing of the past. In reality, it is alive and well, and having a huge impact on tens of thousands of women’s lives.” Even more concerning is the number of sexual assault cases in schools. A BBC investigation revealed that at least 13,000 sex offences involving under-18s were reported to police in England and Wales every year between 2018 and 2020, and the education inspectorate Ofsted says sexual harassment has become “normalised” among school-age children. This level of cases creates a dangerous environment and culture among students and a mindset that regards sexual abuse or harassment of any kind as a normal and acceptable part of society; a mindset that can then be carried into adulthood and the workplace. I can attest from personal experience that sexual harassment in schools is scarily common, to the extent that it is considered ordinary classroom banter among boys. What is even more rife within the school environment is the presentation and exchange of nude images. Many of my female friends, and even occasionally I, receive unwanted explicit images that we try to ignore or delete. Making the situation worse is the lack of reports made by students to teachers about the behaviour because, as Ofsted’s chief inspector, Amanda Spielman, said in an interview: “Whether it’s happening at school or in their social life, they simply don’t feel it’s worth reporting.” It has been suggested that this could be the result of a lack of education about what is considered assault, or from a history of schools failing to take cases brought to them seriously. From my experience, I would say that both are sadly true. However, an anonymous system, whereby pupils can submit their cases to a trusted teacher or member of staff without having to go to them in person, has been shown to be effective at allowing students who might otherwise feel uncomfortable sharing their experiences the opportunity to report their cases. However, this has not yet been widely implemented in British schools. I hadn’t even realised how detrimental the culture we have created is until I began researching for this article: I can now see more clearly that the behaviour I would have previously dismissed is dangerous. It shows how far we still must go even after the upheaval the #MeToo movement created. To me, it seems that sexual harassment is still happening, the only difference is that now we’re much more aware of it. But awareness is perhaps the first step in eradicating the threat of sexual assault that many of us feel daily, and in slowly dismantling the dangerous culture created by decades of silence. Rosamund Cloke, from Bishop Challoner school in the London borough of Bromley, has won the Guardian Foundation’s Young Hugo Award 2021 for political opinion writing with this articleIn July 2018, about 24 hours after Richard Bacon quit his safe, but unchallenging, job as the host of a daytime US TV show, he went into a coma. When he woke up nine days later, he found himself not just the survivor of a lung infection that nearly killed him, but jobless. And so, 10 days after that, he was pitching his idea for a gameshow to the BBC. He remembers being in a bedroom at his mother-in-law’s house, trying on shirts to find one big enough to hide the huge plaster covering his tracheotomy wound, just so he could go into a room with commissioning editors and pretend to be a gameshow host. “I couldn’t find one, and then I just thought: ‘It’s been in the papers; they’re going to know I’ve just been in a bloody coma.’” A tiny pause, then: “The commissioners were very surprised to see me.” Bacon is speaking over Zoom from his house in Los Angeles, where he lives with his wife Rebecca McFarland and their two children, having moved there in 2014, after leaving his presenting job on BBC Radio 5 live. He is good company, if somewhat buzzing and chaotic. At one point, he goes off to make a cup of tea. At another, his iPad runs out of charge, and he reappears a while later, smiling and, inexplicably, in a new change of clothes. In Bacon’s entertaining way, everything becomes a funny story, highlighting his haplessness but eventual triumph, even moving to LA without a job (rather, he did have a job but it fell through due to visa issues that he blames on his disorganisation). He barely worked for a year, and was considering coming back to the UK, when a job came up for National Geographic: a hike with Barack Obama, then still US president. Despite his hospital-gauntness and flapping tracheotomy dressing, the BBC turned down Bacon’s gameshow idea, The Hustler, but he ended up selling it to ABC in the US instead. Coming up with new entertainment shows is basically his job now, says Bacon, best known in the UK for being a TV and radio presenter, and – more than 20 years on – still notorious for getting fired from Blue Peter for taking cocaine. His BBC One reality show This Is My House, in which celebrities have to guess which of four people claiming to live somewhere is the genuine owner, was a surprise hit this year. Now he has devised another gameshow, hosted by Jimmy Carr, called I Literally Just Told You, based around the comic fallibility of short-term memory. He had the idea for it while attending a lecture given by Prof Brian Cox. “I remember thinking: ‘Nobody in this theatre could remember most of what he said in just the last five minutes. If we hit pause now and quiz the whole theatre on the last five minutes of Brian saying the speed of light is 186,000 miles per second, and the universe is 14.3bn years old, most people would get most of the answers wrong.’ About a week later, I thought: ‘Hang on, that’s a gameshow.’ Why don’t we just do a show where we give people the answers and they’ll still get them wrong?” Bacon loves ideas: he has them all the time, making notes on his phone, then worrying away at them, sometimes for months, until they take the shape of something he can imagine on TV. The process of “coming up with an angle, getting excited about it, gives me a high. I’ve had quite a few unnatural highs in my life, but it’s a real natural high.” He laughs, and adds: “The sort of high that I’m not going to get fired for!” A diagnosis of ADHD in 2018 helped propel him in this new direction. “One thing the doctor told me is that with ADHD, you get this thing called hyperfocus. People think of it as being a scattered focus, and it is partly that, but when you find something you like – in my case, you hit on an idea you like – everything almost zones out … The way I can obsessively think about an idea is actually quite normal for my dysfunctional brain type.” Bacon realised, he says, that while his intense daydreaming may annoy his wife – “I can walk around the house like a zombie” – it could prove quite useful. “I knew that I wanted to do more of this kind of daydreaming for a living.” Bacon had been having therapy, and it was his therapist who suggested he may have ADHD and encouraged him to seek a diagnosis. He was in his early 40s – he is now 45 – and his doctor implied that he was surprised Bacon had made it that far. Because his manifestation of it could make him prone to reckless behaviour? “It’s partly that,” he says. “There’s definitely a relationship between drinking and drug use, and ADHD.” In the past, Bacon has admitted to addictive behaviours, especially around alcohol, and has sought help from AA. “But I think he was talking more getting by in day-to-day life: you might fall over and bang your head on the kerb; you lose things a lot. I think he meant more that.” Bacon remembers how the doctor put his hand on his wife’s shoulder – crediting her with being the steadying influence – “and said: ‘She’s kept you alive.’ And then three months later, I was in a coma where they expected me to die.” He laughs: “Although it wasn’t related to that.” On a flight back to the UK, the day after quitting his job, Bacon started to feel unwell. When he finally presented himself at A&amp;E at Lewisham hospital, he was so ill he was put in an induced coma. Months later, Bacon went back to the hospital when he was making a documentary for ITV about the impact of Brexit – “I wanted to illustrate that if an immigration quota had come in, Lewisham ICU would have lost a lot of the people who saved my life” – and met the consultant in charge of his care. “He said: ‘We expected you to die. You were lying on the hospital trolley and we were all surrounding you, you’re crashing, and all your signs are terrible. And [your blood oxygen level] went to 58; you turned blue. I thought you were going to go into cardiac arrest and die.’” His condition was so obvious to the other doctors involved in Bacon’s care that they didn’t even have to talk to one another; one of them readied the resuscitation equipment. “He said: ‘Somewhere around that moment, you didn’t go into cardiac arrest when I thought you were going to, and one of the many drugs we put into you started to work.’” They still don’t know what Bacon was suffering from, but he was in a coma for nearly two weeks. He says he thinks about death “more or less every day. It sort of hovers around my life. It took death from being a kind of slightly abstract concept to not an abstract concept.” This might have happened anyway, he concedes, as he settled into middle age, but this way was a shocking realisation. “At some level, when we’re in our teens, 20s and 30s, we think we’re going to live for ever. We know that’s not true, but it’s something inherent in our feeling that it’s just going to go on for ever, isn’t it? I almost don’t know how we all get through life knowing that we’re going to die and, if you’re an atheist, that there is nothing.” How has it changed him? “It’s probably affecting my life all the time. If you’re going to take death from being theoretical to something more real, almost touchable, it must be affecting me, my work, and my relationship to my kids, my relationship to my wife and my family. It must be.” Has it given him a new sense of urgency? “Yeah, definitely. I think it makes me work harder, makes me more impatient, more ambitious. I think it makes me think: I’m going to carry on down this road, coming up with ideas, and take some big risks. Fuck it, let’s see if I can push it, let’s see where I can get to. I’ve always liked changing things in my life, but it’s given me an even greater sense of that.” It was why he was pitching ideas to the BBC while still in early recovery, even though that sounds deranged. “I was in this startlingly new place of: all right, I nearly died and I haven’t got a job, but I do think this is what I want to do.” In therapy he was warned that the trauma might hit him in a few months. “But it never did,” he says. Perhaps because he talked about it so much at the time, and now it has become a bit of an anecdote. “You are almost ‘third-personing’ it. It becomes a story, slightly over there, and I think that helped me deal with it, with my chatty nature.” He did a similar thing with his 2013 memoir A Series of Unrelated Events, making the small catastrophes that befell him into funny stories; it’s also why he’s an entertaining and engaging radio presenter. Even a global pandemic seems to take on a comical quality. “They told me I’d have an increased risk of dying if I got really ill again for the first five years afterwards. They said: ‘Just don’t get another major respiratory illness.’ And then about a year and a half later, you’re like: all right, Covid’s here, is it?” As a child, growing up in Mansfield in Nottinghamshire, where his father was a criminal defence lawyer, Bacon was a radio geek, who knew where all the transmitters were in the county. He started doing shifts at BBC Radio Nottingham when he was 17, mostly doing technical stuff, but sometimes taking the radio car out to interview councillors. After working as a reporter for the cable channel L!VE TV, he got the job on Blue Peter in 1997 and it seemed a good fit with his natural energy and enthusiasm. The following year, a Sunday tabloid exposed him for cocaine use – tipped off by a friend – and Bacon was sacked. Lorraine Heggessey, then the head of Children’s BBC, even went on TV to explain to children how Bacon had let everyone down. Looking back, it was probably fortuitous: it gave Bacon an edge, whereas many Blue Peter presenters disappear. He went on to cooler, older shows such as The Big Breakfast and Top of the Pops. But at the time, it must have been stressful. “I was aware that I was processing it OK,” he says. “When I’ve been through other traumas since then, I think I coped better because I went through that.” A producer told Bacon, then 22, that he would never work in television again. “But I remember thinking: ‘That’s not true.’ I just thought I’d find a way through. The ADHD side of me does lead to certain disorganisation and chaos in my life, and I have many flaws and things I’m bad at, but I’m quite good at getting back up again.” He remembers watching the programme after he’d been fired “and feeling sad that I wasn’t part of the team. I still love Blue Peter. I’m deeply affectionate towards that show.” It must be strange to still be defined by something that happened more than 20 years ago. He laughs: “No matter what I go on to do in my career – I could bring peace to the Middle East – still, when I die, the top line of the obituary will be ‘fired from Blue Peter’. I could cure Covid and still the first line would be: ‘He was that guy who was fired from Blue Peter and the head of BBC One went on telly and said that thing about him.’ It’s irrelevant to what I do now.” That feeling of being publicly shamed stayed with Bacon, and he has watched the rise of so-called cancel culture with interest – he has a documentary on Channel 4 this week about it. “I’m fascinated by this rush to judgment and what it means,” he says. Being sacked for taking drugs probably wouldn’t be such a huge deal now, and obviously social media wasn’t there to pile on him, but the experience has given him “a lot of empathy when I’m watching people who are sort of tumbling out of the sky, and the rush to judgment is happening”. He is more likely to get cancelled for something like fat-shaming (accidentally, he insists) the band the Magic Numbers in 2005, who walked off Top of the Pops after he described them as “a big fat melting pot of talent”. Cancel culture, he says, “is such a big, complex subject. I think if somebody gets cancelled because they wrote a homophobic tweet when they were 15, and you don’t give them a chance to go: ‘I was 15; both my parents were homophobic and I didn’t know anything else’, the idea that you shouldn’t ever have a job because of that, when you may have grown up and completely changed your attitude, is preposterous. There are people losing careers over minor transgressions, and that is obviously where it goes too far. You can see people are getting very stressed about using the right or wrong pronoun.” But then, he says, “elements of it represent progress” for anyone who isn’t a straight white man. “There are people who say it doesn’t exist, who say you don’t have cancel culture; you have consequence culture.” At some point, he says, he would like to host one of the gameshows that he invents but, he says, simultaneously proud and aware of his place: “They keep getting into these really big primetime slots, which means I can’t really do it.” He used to think filming the shows would be the fun bit, but has found he’s happiest alone in his head, coming up with the ideas. “Sometimes, if I’m really excited by something, I’ll wake up at 4am and think: ‘What about that?’” Then he’ll reach for his phone and start making notes. Cancelled is on Channel 4 at 10pm on 2 December. I Literally Just Told You starts on Channel 4 at 10pm on 16 December. Stream the full series on All 4.1) The final of the Copa Libertadores was exactly the quiet night in at the library that we thought it would be. First in the fifth minute of extra-time, poor old Andreas Pereira – on loan to Flamengo from Manchester United – dropped a rick for the ages, fed by David Luiz and dallying on the ball, allowing Deyverson to rob him and score what turned out to be the winner for Palmeiras. To restore the cosmic balance of things, here’s a brilliant goal Pereira scored last month. Anyway, as the clock ran down, Deyverson felt a hand on his back… 2)Arsenal visit Manchester United on Thursday in a fixture that used to be the most important in English football. Here are the key moments from the game in September 2003, a gentle little 0-0 draw, and here are its key flashpoints: Patrick Vieira’s red card, Ruud van Nistelrooy’s missed penalty and Martin Keown’s subsequent joy. And here are highlights of the next Old Trafford game between the sides, in October 2004 – featuring some tasty little challenges – in which Arsenal hoped to make it 50 league games unbeaten and did not; here’s Sky’s Fanzone commentary of the game (how did that not end in violence?); here’s the full-time rejoicing; here’s Cesc Fábregas finally admitting he threw the pizza, here he is giving a more detailed account, here’s Gary Neville talking about Pizzagate and the general animosity between the teams, and finally Rio Ferdinand’s post-match interview. 3) Earlier this week, Vivianne Miedema was named BBC Women’s Footballer of the Year. Here are the 52 goals she scored in her first 50 Arsenal games, here she is generally enjoying her life and having fun at her teammates’ expense; here she takes on Lisa Evans, her partner, in a what do you know kind of game; and here she is playing brilliantly in Arsenal’s recent caning of Manchester City. 4) On this day in 1991, Australia beat England 12-6 at Twickenham to win the second Rugby World Cup. Here’s Le Crunch Classic, England’s last-eight tie with France, here’s the teams playing their semis, here’s a compilation of David Campese ridiculousness, and here are highlights of the final. 5) Fallon Sherrock has been turning heads lately, and with good reason. Here’s her amazing comeback against Dimitri van den Bergh, here she is obliterating Mike De Dekker, here’s the ridiculous clutch 170 that sent her into the last eight of the Grand Slam of Darts and here’s Peter Wright backing her claim to a Premier League spot. 6) Ipswich’s Bersant Celina scores one of the goals of the season against Crewe. There’s an alternative angle, too, of a goal that reminds of this Andy Cole classic, and perhaps this 1975 Mick Walsh classic for Blackpool v Sunderland. Our favourites from below the line last week 1) PSG v Marseille from 1992, the most violent game in the history of the French top flight. 2) Magnus Carlsen pre-moving an entire game to beat Hikaru Nakamura. 3) The origins of chessboxing. 4) AB de Villiers’s music video, Maak Jou Drome Waar. 5) A compilation of amateur football funnies. 6) A three-car photo finish in the Mazda MX-5 Cup. Spotters’ badges: BrownBread74, TarzanofNazareth, whobroughtoranges, DeadBadger, CraftyInnit, germit. Guardian YouTube football channel Do subscribe, if you fancy. Guardian YouTube sport channel Likewise.Julia Figueroa never leaves her house without security. She travels with two bodyguards and an armoured vehicle. Her home and office are watched around the clock. She carefully monitors any devices that might contain compromising information about her clients. As the director of the Luis Carlos Pérez Lawyers Collective Corporation (CCALCP), threats to her life are a daily occurrence. The all-female group of lawyers provides legal representation to small-scale farmers and indigenous communities affected by the armed conflict in Colombia. Their work includes defending displaced peoples and victims of state crime, but also defending environmental rights, including fighting mining companies that seek to extract resources, often at the expense of the local water supply and the surrounding environment. In a country named the deadliest in the world for human rights defenders, the team faces enormous risks, including threats, false accusations of criminal activity and links to illicit armed groups. The CCALCP has its roots in Bucaramanga’s only public university, the Industrial University of Santander, where a group of law students graduating in 2001 bonded over a desire to address the conflict and displacement facing their province, says Figueroa. Santander, in the north-east of Colombia, has a rich indigenous cultural heritage as well as untapped reserves of coal and oil. A collective of human rights lawyers was a novelty in the region at the time, and the group struggled to access funding and attention. The Farc (Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia) was at the height of its power and paramilitary forces were rampant. The group initially comprised men and women but, as time went by, the male members gradually fell away. “The world outside began to notice something that we did not have the time or the means to see,” says Figueroa. “When you have your life at risk and your family, you don’t start doing these differentiated analyses – you just prioritise your life.” More women joined, including Marisol Figueroa, Julia’s sister, who left her corporate job in 2011 to join the collective. Since the government pulled her state-sponsored security for unknown reasons, she says she takes care to spend as much time as she can with her family, since “you don’t know when you might leave this world”. Although she left a relatively tranquil life, Marisol says the all-female environment in the office was a welcome change from her previous workplaces, where machismo and sexual harassment were commonplace. “I think that each one of us comes to this world to contribute a grain of sand,” she says. “And I think you can do it in many ways. One of those ways for me was to get to know the world of human rights.” As the team expanded to the surrounding Magdalena Medio region, they successfully defended displaced families from landowners, protected indigenous groups from oil companies and precious ecosystems from mining. A notable case on the group’s files is that of the Santurbán páramo. The páramo – a frosty, high-altitude wetland ecosystem – is hugely biodiverse and provides water to nearly 2 million people but is threatened by mining multinationals eyeing its mineral resources. For decades mining companies have sought to exploit the area’s gold and silver resources. But in 2017, the CCALCP obtained a ruling in the country’s constitutional court annulling the delimitation process for violating the right to environmental participation of the community. While Colombia’s páramos, important carbon sinks, have been given special constitutional protection they remain vulnerable. The Canadian company Eco Oro Minerals sued Colombia after losing its mining title in Santurbán in a dispute that is still ongoing. Another high-profile case involved fracking in the municipality of San Martín in the Magdalena Medio region. When Colombia announced its first fracking project in the area in 2015 there was a considerable backlash. The CCALCP helped to file the first “popular action” – a legal mechanism to protect collective interests – in a fracking case, and the fracking was suspended in 2018. As its work has grown in importance, the collective has earned recognition at home and internationally, winning awards and funding. But maintaining a local connection remains crucial. “We didn’t want to lose that regional identity, we didn’t want to leave the area when we wanted to expand,” says Julia. “Because really, one of the strengths that an organisation like ours has is knowing how it is here – not having to be monitored from Bogotá.” Currently, the team is made up of 11 women, including four lawyers. “They are a group that is highly respected here in our province,” says Hernán Morantes, a lawyer with the Committee for the Defense of Water and the Santurbán Páramo, who worked with the collective during the 2017 legal dispute. “And they also have an international vision, they’ve achieved national recognition.” The team’s work submitting reports to the Special Jurisdiction of Peace (JEP), a transitional justice system investigating war crimes in Colombia’s armed conflict, has earned them threats and accusations of being allied with terrorists or inventing victims. Julia says the fact that the current administration has been a critic of the peace accords has made matters worse. Often, she says, people will report the collective to the police to trigger an investigation and further intimidate them – particularly in environmental cases. “With the environmental issue, to defend water is to go against million-dollar contracts that have been signed between the state and companies,” says Julia. The government often paints environmental defenders as barriers to economic progress, she adds. The job, she says, comes at the cost of privacy, freedom and personal relationships. She says many women take extended time off to recover and then come back. The group provides psychological support, and time and space for members to deal with the stress. “They have not been able to silence us. They have tried to prosecute us, they have attacked us, they have scared us,” she says. “We are all scared when they threaten us. We are scared of many things, but I think the collective is so hopeful that if Julia can pull through, if the ones before me pulled through, then we will keep going.” Names and faces of members of the collective are not publicised except for the senior leaders. Their office in downtown Bucaramanga is nondescript. There is no signage announcing their presence in the building, only security cameras outside, with many more inside. Everyone who enters must turn their phone off for security reasons. The group has seen enormous political changes in the country since it started. At the beginning, its lawyers travelled to “the most distant, most impenetrable territories” to document human rights abuses that otherwise would never have come to light. Now, Julia says, many communities are better equipped to defend themselves. But there are different challenges – the 2016 peace deal created a power vacuum for paramilitaries, drug traffickers and other armed groups to fill, as the current conservative government drags its feet on implementing the agreement. Competition for land has increased deforestation and the pandemic has brought increased poverty. But the team says it draws hope from the fact that a group of women from a small city can reach the high courts and change policy, and also from the capacity for joy, forgiveness and persistence in the communities they work with. “We always have to hope. We are always fortunate to be positive and purposeful and say ‘Hey, things are going to change’,” says Marisol. “And we have to fight to be part of that change. To contribute our grain of sand.” • This article was amended on 1 and 2 December 2021. Julia Figueroa was not a CCALCP founder, as an earlier version said. The article also said that the CCALCP had obtained a court ruling declaring a licence granted to Eco Oro Minerals to be unconstitutional; that ruling was not against Eco Oro specifically, but was about the páramo delimitation process more broadly. Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresThe UK drugs watchdog has approved a new Covid treatment after trials found it cut the likelihood of hospital admission and death by 79% in high-risk adults. The Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) has authorised Xevudy (sotrovimab), a monoclonal antibody made by GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) and Vir Biotechnology, for people with mild to moderate Covid-19 at high risk of developing severe disease. GSK and Vir Biotechnology said preclinical data showed the drug “retains activity against key mutations of the new Omicron Sars-CoV-2 variant”. The UK government has ordered about 100,000 doses of the drug. It is the second monoclonal antibody treatment to be approved by the MHRA following Ronapreve. Dr June Raine, the MHRA chief executive, said: “I am pleased to say that we now have another safe and effective Covid-19 treatment, Xevudy (sotrovimab), for those at risk of developing severe illness. “This is yet another therapeutic that has been shown to be effective at protecting those most vulnerable to Covid-19, and signals another significant step forward in our fight against this devastating disease.” The drug works by binding to the spike protein on the outside of the coronavirus. This in turn prevents the virus from attaching to and entering human cells, so it cannot replicate in the body. Based on trial data, the drug is most effective when taken during the early stages of infection. As a result, the MHRA said it should be given as soon as possible and within five days of symptoms starting. The drug has been approved for people who have mild to moderate Covid-19 infection and at least one risk factor for developing severe illness. These include obesity, being 60 or over, diabetes or heart disease. Xevudy is administered by intravenous infusion over 30 minutes and is approved for people aged 12 and over. The MHRA said it was working with the company to establish effectiveness against the new Omicron variant. George Scangos, the chief executive of Vir, said: “Sotrovimab was deliberately designed with a mutating virus in mind. “This hypothesis has borne out again and again, with its ongoing ability to maintain activity against all tested variants of concern and interest to date, including key mutations found in Omicron, as demonstrated by preclinical data.” The news came after ministers secured 114m more Covid-19 vaccines from Pfizer and Moderna for potential booster campaigns in the next two years. The boss of Pfizer said annual vaccines to tackle Covid-19 were likely to be needed. Dr Albert Bourla said yearly vaccinations could boost population immunity, adding that the company was already working on a new jab for the Omicron variant. He told the BBC: “Based on everything I have seen so far, I would say that annual vaccinations … are likely to be needed to maintain a very robust and very high level of protection.” Bourla also said vaccines had helped save millions of lives during the pandemic, and without them the “fundamental structure of our society would be threatened”.Amsterdam’s Rijksmuseum has announced a “first and last” exhibition of all the paintings by Johannes Vermeer that are fit to travel, as its director claimed growing museum rivalry makes such international cooperation unlikely in the future. Vermeer, whose most famous work is Girl with a Pearl Earring, dating from around 1665, is thought to have painted 35 masterpieces, of which 23 were shown together 26 years ago at the Mauritshuis in The Hague. Taco Dibbits, the Rijksmuseum director, said his institution would surpass that number but he did not expect such a collection to ever be possible again owing to the age of the works and the intense competition among galleries to draw in visitors. “What I am seeing, if you look since the 1996 exhibition, it is more and more difficult to get the loans because Vermeer is such an iconic painter,” he said. “For museums to part with Vermeer’s work is more and more difficult. Because it is the first [for the Rijksmuseum], it has created a kind of feeling that we have to do it now as it gives an opportunity to compare and study the works together. “The pressure on museums to make exhibitions is larger. There are more and more museums in the world and works from the 17th century are fragile. There is more pressure on the works.” Vermeer, who lived and worked in Delft in the west of the Netherlands, is widely regarded to stand with Rembrandt, Van Gogh and Picasso as one of the finest artists in history, but relatively little is known about him or the subjects of his paintings. He was barely known as an artist when he died at 43 in 1675. The latest technology in the study of art has recently revealed the strenuous preparation and effort he made with his paintings, and the expensive pigments that were used, explaining his relatively small oeuvre of works. From 10 February 2023 to 4 June 2023 the Rijksmuseum will exhibit masterpieces such as Girl with a Pearl Earring, loaned from the Mauritshuis; The Geographer, from the Städel Museum in Frankfurt; Lady Writing a Letter with her Maid, from the National Gallery of Ireland in Dublin; and Woman Holding a Balance, from the National Gallery of Art in Washington DC. The newly restored Girl Reading a Letter at the Open Window, from the Old Masters Picture Gallery in Dresden, will be seen for the first time in the Netherlands. Dibbits said negotiations were ongoing with museums to try to get the maximum number of works. “I think that will be impossible to have them all, but we are getting lots, more than I ever dreamed to have,” he said. “Some works are very fragile.” Dibbits said gathering the paintings together would offer an opportunity to “an entirely new generation of researchers and public who have never been able to study Vermeer in such a way”. He said: “It is incredibly hard for researchers when you move between museums to look at paintings, your brain has done a lot of tricks, it is very difficult to actually compare.” The Rijksmuseum has four masterpieces by Vermeer, including The Milkmaid and The Little Street. Martine Gosselink, the director of the Mauritshuis, said: “The Girl with the Pearl Earring is the most famous Dutch girl in the world. Yes, we will miss her terribly, but a Vermeer exhibition without the Girl is simply not a Vermeer exhibition.”A church harvest supper at a village pub ended in tragedy when one of the congregation was killed and 31 others suffered food poisoning after eating a shepherd’s pie filled with mince that had been incorrectly prepared by a rushing chef. Elizabeth Neuman, 92, repeatedly vomited after eating the pie and died while other parishioners became “unpleasantly ill” and three of those attending only escaped because they were vegetarians, Reading crown court heard. The cook, John Croucher, who at the time was head chef at the Crewe Arms in the Northamptonshire village of Hinton-in-the-Hedges, was given a four-month jail sentence, suspended for 12 months, after admitting a charge of contravening food regulations. Defending himself in court, Croucher, 40, said: “I hate to say it, I really hate to say it, but I think I was rushed. I was rushing.” He said he had worked in kitchens for 20 years and was now “a better chef” because of the “horrible, horrible circumstance”. He added: “Remorse is an understatement. This is something I will never forget. Because of it, I am a better chef and it is just a shame the cost of it had to be what it was.” The judge, Sarah Campbell, said: “On 8 October 2018, 35 villagers went to the Crewe Arms for a harvest meal. Thirty-two people ate the shepherd’s pie. A healthy and well person died of a gastrointestinal haemorrhage induced from vomiting. No sentence I pass can reflect the loss caused to the family. “Croucher was the chef that night. The mince was not cooked properly and was placed into a pan with iced water. Croucher needed to leave, so put the mince in cling film and put it in the fridge overnight. Having left it, he cooked it again and added warm mashed potato. He did not take the temperature when it was served.” The court was told that members of the Holy Trinity church congregation did not want retribution against the pub, its landlord, Neil Billingham, or Croucher, who no longer works there. But the judge raised concerns about the pub’s record, saying: “The Crewe Arms is an important pub to the local community. I have read many references from members of the community. They have all said that this was a one-off mistake but looking at the evidence this was not a one-off mistake. “The pub should have been taking steps to be improving. Inspections in 2015 gave it three stars and in 2017 gave it only a one star.” Defending Billingham and his company, the Bobcat Pub Co, Christopher Hopkins told the judge: “You will see that Billingham went to local residents who were affected shortly after, apologising for the incident. He also asks me to express his condolences to the Neuman family on his behalf.” Billingham, of Northampton, who admitted three charges of contravening food regulations was fined £9,000 and ordered to pay £1,000 court costs. His company was fined almost £3,000.According to independent site esportsearnings.com, the highest-paid esports player has accumulated more than $7m (£5.2m) in winnings across his career. Johan “N0tail” Sundstein is a Danish Dota 2 player and has competed in more than 100 tournaments to amass his fortune. Below him in the rankings, the next 30 highest earners are all male Dota 2 players. But even where other games like Fortnite, Counter-Strike: Global Offensive and Call of Duty begin to appear, the list is still dominated by men. The first woman appears at #367: the Starcraft II champion Sasha “Scarlett” Hostyn. Hostyn has made about $400,000 (£300,000) in prize money during her career since 2011; a far cry from the millions of men above her. Hostyn is joined by only two other women to have made six figures in winnings. Xiao Meng “Liooon” Li won the Hearthstone grandmasters global finals in 2019, and Katherine “Mystik” Gunn has competed in various games. They are ranked #760 and #1,478, respectively. Prize winnings aren’t the only way for esports players to make money, but the disparity extends to other areas of pro-gaming careers. Very few women are in a salaried player position; for example, the only woman to have played in the Overwatch League, Kim “Geguri” Se-yeon, did not compete in the most recent season, returning the league to a fully male player base. Many competitors turn to Twitch to supplement their incomes by livestreaming when they’re not competing, but a recent leak of the company’s financial data revealed that only three of the top 100 paid creators were women. Unlike traditional sports, esports is, theoretically, an equal playing field regardless of gender. So why is there such a distinctive pay gap? To put it plainly, the esports industry struggles with misogyny. In an interview with Polygon, the Overwatch League’s first female coach. Molly “Avalla” Kim, stated that she had once been accepted on to a team as a player, before she “gave up quickly because of the difficulties of joining a team house with other [male] players”. Elsewhere, she said that one team had also rejected her as a coach because “our players don’t want female coaches”. Kim has also spoken about the hurtful comments she has received online about her appearance. Another Overwatch League staff member, Kate Mitchell, general manager of esports team Washington Justice, retired after reporting that her mental health declined after receiving “toxicity and casual cruelty from strangers” over the internet. “I wanted nothing more than to ‘power through’ and succeed in the face of adversity and blaze a trail for other LGBT women to follow me in this space,” she wrote in her announcement, “but [it] turned out to be a bigger challenge than I was able to take on.” This misogyny is related to and compounded by the sexism of wider gaming culture. Studies have shown that voices perceived as female in game chats are many times more likely to receive harassment. Being able to use these features freely is often important to team unity, meaning it can be difficult for women to reach top ranks at all if their team becomes uncooperative or abusive. Others simply prefer not to speak to avoid any negativity, which in turn hampers their ability to play well, as well as their general enjoyment. Where women are discouraged, gatekept or retire early from positions in esports, they are far less likely to compete in and win the major tournaments that make their winners millionaires. This simple fact belies the idea that esports is a meritocracy just because it doesn’t rely on physical strength. The only real cure for the sexism within the culture of esports is to tackle misogyny more widely, alongside related issues such as racism and transphobia. However, in the shorter term, several groups have been trying to open up opportunities for women and non-binary people within esports. These typically focus on getting non-male teams or tournaments together. Earlier this year Dota Valkyries launched to support players at all levels in Dota 2. Given that most of the top-earning esports players achieve this by winning the International, Dota’s biggest tournament, which pays much more than most esports competitions, a Valkyrie alum may well be the first woman to break into the highest earners. Girl Gamer esports festival has been running since 2017, aiming to give female players experience in competitive games including League of Legends and Valorant. Organiser Fernando Pereira told the Verge that the event hopes to make itself obsolete once enough women are playing in major tournaments, but that that might be “quite a long time” away. But these aren’t ideal solutions. In her paper Esports and its Reinforcement of Gender Divides, published last year, the lawyer, visual artist and gender in sports specialist Kruthika NS questioned whether these were “quick fixes for a larger systemic problem in the esports industry”. Fixing those systemic problems is no easy task. First, says Kruthika, the industry has to acknowledge that they even exist. One 2018 study found that responses to the announcement of an all-female team were hostile, in part because fans professed the belief that esports was already meritocratic, despite evidence to the contrary. Kruthika explains that sexist attacks are simply seen as a normal happening in the community. “If the industry continues to stay silent, it will be an active participant in such normalisation leading to no real action,” she says. Any move to tackle the current unwelcoming atmosphere has to start by improving the communities of the games involved. “There’s an urgent need to come up with a code of conduct that includes rules countering sexism, homophobia, casteism and racism,” says Kruthika. “And it is essential that such codes must be drafted in consultation with vulnerable social groups – women, racial minorities, persons belonging to the LGBTQIA+ community, and people at the intersections of two or more marginalised identities.” Implementing and enforcing these codes of conduct is its own struggle. Creating effective moderation is difficult, particularly where conversations are spoken, fast-moving and potentially in any language. However, developers have been working on solutions for some time, and, with proper prioritisation, could significantly improve their games’ cultures. “Finally, the players really need to do better,” says Kruthika. “Any woman can attest to how little bystanders help in situations of violence even in the offline world. Fellow teammates, especially cisgender, heterosexual men, need to step in and call sexist comments out. After all, a community is what a group makes of it.”Good morning. In the wake of yesterday’s supreme court hearing in which a majority of justices appeared willing to significantly curb abortion rights, reproductive rights advocates said they would continue to fight in statehouses and lower courts for the right to choose. While a significant blow to abortion rights is far from a foregone conclusion, questions from the supreme court’s conservative justices yesterday appeared to show a willingness to allow restrictions on abortion at 15 weeks and perhaps earlier in a pregnancy. Julie Rikelman, litigation director at the Center for Reproductive Rights, who argued before the justices, said campaigners would continue to fight if the supreme court went against reproductive choice. “We will continue to make every argument we can in the federal courts, we will continue to litigate in the state courts … we will not stop fighting, because it is just too important,” Rikelman said. What happened yesterday? The supreme court heard oral arguments in Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization, widely regarded as the most important abortion rights case in nearly five decades. A decision is not expected until June 2022. Here are five key takeaways from the crucial court session yesterday. Revealed: how Sidney Powell could be disbarred for lying in court for Trump The Guardian has learned that Sidney Powell, the former lawyer for Donald Trump who filed lawsuits across America for the former president hoping to overturn the results of the 2020 presidential election, has on several occasions represented to federal courts that people were co-counsel or plaintiffs in her cases without seeking their permission to do so. Some of these individuals say that they only found out that Powell had named them once the cases were already filed. During this same period of time, Powell also named several other lawyers – with their permission in those instances – as co-counsel in her election-related cases, despite the fact that they played virtually no role whatsoever in bringing or litigating those cases. Both Powell’s naming of other people as plaintiffs or co-counsel without their consent and representing that other attorneys were central to her cases when, in fact, their roles were nominal or nonexistent, constitute serious potential violations of the American Bar Association model rules for professional conduct, top legal ethicists told the Guardian. Will she be disbarred? The Texas bar held its first closed-door hearing regarding the allegations but investigations by state bar associations are ordinarily conducted behind closed doors and thus largely opaque to the public. What has Powell said? She has not responded to multiple requests for comment via phone, email, and over social media. Ghislaine Maxwell accuser says she met Trump at 14 and flew with Prince Andrew The first accuser in Ghislaine Maxwell’s child sex trafficking trial testified yesterday that Jeffrey Epstein introduced her to Donald Trump when she was 14. The woman, who used the pseudonym “Jane” in court, also claimed that she was on a flight with Prince Andrew. She did not accuse Trump or the Duke of York of any misconduct. When Jane’s testimony concluded, prosecutors called one of her former boyfriends to the stand. The man, who testified under the pseudonym “Matt” to keep Jane’s identity confidential, said she had discussed a godfather-like figure who helped cover her expenses as a child. He said she eventually told him who the man was but did not share details of what happened. Asked how Jane reacted to questions about Epstein, Matt said: “She would say to me: ‘Matt, the money wasn’t fucking free.’” Who is Maxwell? She is the daughter of the late British press baron Robert Maxwell. Prosecutors have alleged that she was Epstein’s “best friend and right hand”. What is she accused of? She is on trial for six counts related to her alleged involvement in Epstein’s sexual abuse of teenage girls. She has pleaded not guilty to all counts. In other news … The Omicron variant has fuelled a “worrying” surge in coronavirus cases in South Africa and is rapidly becoming the dominant strain, local health officials have said, as more countries including the US detected their first cases of the new variant. The United Arab Emirates and South Korea also confirmed cases of Omicron. Republicans are preparing to shut down the American government on Friday, in the latest attempt by the party to thwart White House efforts to increase vaccine take-up, by undermining vaccine mandates across the country. Clamor is growing for Republican senators to oppose a stopgap funding bill, which would fund the government for the next few weeks. Stacey Abrams, the Georgia Democrat and leading voting rights activist, has announced she will launch another campaign to become the nation’s first Black female governor. The announcement could set up a rematch between Abrams and the incumbent Republican governor, Brian Kemp. Beijing has urged US business groups with interests in China to “speak out” and lobby the US government in its defence, warning that as bilateral relations deteriorate they cannot make money “in silence”. The vice-foreign minister Xie Feng, also urged against political boycotts of the Beijing Winter Olympics. Stat of the day: 1,500 unhoused LA residents died on the streets during pandemic, report reveals Nearly 1,500 unhoused people are estimated to have died on the streets of Los Angeles during the pandemic, according to a new report that raises alarms about authorities’ handling of a worsening humanitarian crisis. Authored by researchers from the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), and a coalition of unhoused residents, the report analyzed the LA county coroner’s records to identify 1,493 cases of people who died between March 2020 and July 2021 on the streets and were probably unhoused. The most common cause of death was accidental overdose. Don’t miss this: how the Covid era changed our bodies – from hair loss to weight gain Living through the pandemic has had surprising health consequences – even for people who have not caught coronavirus. It has recently emerged, for instance, that the Covid era has been a global hair-loss event – a clear manifestation of the stress people have been under. What else have these unprecedented times written on our bodies? Sore, blurry eyes, decaying teeth, spreading feet – the strange, difficult years of coronavirus have had unexpected effects on our general health. Climate check: Californian firm touts ‘mushroom leather’ as sustainability gamechanger Vegan alternatives to leather could save more than just animals. The scientists behind fashion’s new latest must-have – the “mushroom leather” handbag – believe that mycelium, a material grown from fungi which can be engineered to look and feel like calfskin or sheepskin, could help save the planet. Speaking to the Guardian, Dr Matt Scullin, CEO of biomaterials company MycoWorks, forecast that mushroom leather could be a sustainability gamechanger, “unlocking a future of design which begins with the material, not with the object”. Want more environmental stories delivered to your inbox? Sign up to our new newsletter Down to Earth to get original and essential reporting on the climate crisis every week Last Thing: Dancing cactus toy that raps in Polish about cocaine goes viral A word of warning before you go toy shopping this Christmas: beware the rapping cactus. The toy, marketed as educational, may teach your children more than you want them to know, as a woman in Brampton, Ontario, discovered the hard way. The miniature, bright green dancing cactus Ania Tanner bought sings in English, Spanish and Polish while squirming to the beat. After buying it for her granddaughter, Tanner realised one of the songs was an explicit tune about cocaine and hopelessness. “It just so happens that I am Polish, and when I started to listen to the songs and I heard the words … I was in shock,” she said.Thursday’s child has far to go, says the popular rhyme. In this case, Thursday’s child has 15 questions to go. They will be about topical news and general knowledge, they will feature Ron from Sparks and Kate Bush and two hidden Doctor Who references, and you will have fun doing them and then let us know how you got on in the comments. It is just for fun – there are no prizes. Enjoy! The Thursday quiz, No 32 If you do think there has been an egregious error in one of the questions or answers, please feel free to email martin.belam@theguardian.com but remember, the quiz master’s word is always final, and I beg of you, take twenty seconds just to think if your email boils down to pointing out that one of the wrong answer options couldn’t have been right.Ticket availability at some of the locations is now limited, but all were still taking bookings for various time slots at time of publication Winning tip: Dazzling glow worms, Wakehurst, West Sussex Glow Wild at Wakehurst Place (administered by Kew Gardens) always puts on an innovative, thought-provoking display across its beautiful grounds. Its gardens boast the UK’s tallest living Christmas tree – a 33-metre giant redwood with 1,800 lights. Some of this year’s highlights include the walled garden illuminated by dazzling glow worms and an animated projection on to natural screens among the trees on “the journey of seeds”. They offer early, quiet sessions for those with autism and other disabilities. There’s a bookable shuttle bus from Haywards Heath tation. £16/£10, selected evenings until 2 January, kew.org L Isles Antrim Castle Gardens, with bouncy elves The Enchanted Winter Garden in the grounds of Antrim Castle is definitely worth visiting. The Barbican Gate, Motte, Italian Tower and other features are stunningly transformed with twinkling lights. And who could resist exploring Wonderland Wood with such enticing features as Sugar Drop Stop and Lollipop Lane? Thrillseekers large and small are catered for with a Big Wheel and other fairground rides (tokens can be bought in advance). Visitors may also meet Fizz the Fairy, Bouncy Elves and other magical characters, thanks to actors wandering the grounds. Adults £6, children £4, until 21 December, enchantedwintergarden.com Kevin McKenna Reflections and hot chocolate, Edinburgh The magical lights of Edinburgh’s botanical gardens at night exude excitement for the festivities to come. Walking through tunnels of warm yellow lights, while sipping on a Baileys hot chocolate, is a real treat. Reflections from floating water lights throw light into dark spaces, and tree outlines and buildings are illuminated with moving theatrical images. Immerse yourself in all of the elements and see the botanical gardens in a totally different light that is simply unforgettable. £20/£14, until 2 January, rbge.org.uk Emma Smith Fishing harbours, Cornwall Cornwall has a history and tradition of lighting up its fishing harbours through the festive period. Our family enjoys an outing to Mousehole on the south-west coast of Cornwall, where the lights carefully displayed around the harbour are an annual highlight. It’s worth parking at the top of town and wandering through the village – bag of chips in hand – spotting lights displaying ships and even a sea monster swimming in the harbour. The annual switch-on event is usually well attended and can get really busy but it’s really is one of the best examples of festive lights in Cornwall. mouseholelights.org.uk Layla Astley Wishes and wellies, Margam Park – near Port Talbot This enchanting light trail winds through Margam Park gardens and past gothic Margam Castle taking 60-90 minutes. The kids’ favourites included glimpsing tiny fairies in lanterns, toasting marshmallows, tying wishes to the Make a Wish Tree and the interactive installations. The adults were particularly impressed with the light show playing across the castle facade, the smoke effects and the atmospheric music. To add to the magic, we even witnessed a sylvan marriage proposal! Weellies advisable. £15/£11, until 2 January, luminate.live Fiona C Winter garden, Wollaton – near Nottingham With its winter garden, light tunnels, illuminated deer park and rainbow walkway, Wollaton creates a beautiful Christmas light event. There are also lights covering the hall and light trails through the woodland areas; the whole thing is amazing. As you’d expect there are also food and drink stalls. £19.80/£14.30, until 9 January, christmasatwollaton.org Rachel Otherworldly York In recent years York’s Christmas lights have expanded to include the historic gates to the walled city: they are draped in curtains of light, giving them an otherworldly quality in addition to their striking medieval appearance. You can walk between each of the four gates and see the Minster and other illuminated sites as you walk. visityork.org Edward Joyner West London windows For the second year the residents of Olde Hanwell in Ealing will be working together to create a huge living Advent calendar. Last year more than 200 homes took turns to light up a window display every night from 1 December until 24 December, and this year looks to be just as big, if not bigger. There’s so much to see and so much creativity on display, from beautiful winter scenes, exploding Christmas crackers, the Grinch and a very tall Christmassy giraffe! There’s something new to see every night and it’s free to visit and walk round as often as you like. It has a lovely festive, community atmosphere. Twitter @w7adventwindows, eventbrite.co.uk Anna Elliott Stockeld Park: wonderment near Wetherby Absolutely magical from the moment you arrive. I’ve never experienced such a wonderful display of lights, magic, mystery and so much interaction to be had at each element. At night the whole park comes alive to lights, creating some breathtaking sights and wonderment not just on the children’s faces but the adults just as much. It’s an enchanting woodland Christmas walk. What more could you want with your family? There is also ice skating, a forest maze and Nordic skiing to be enjoyed here. Stockeld is between Wetherby and Harrogate. From £14.50, until 4 January, stockeldpark.co.uk Nicola Baker Shooting stars, Lake District I know it doesn’t really count but the best light show I experienced was at 4am in the morning driving up to Scotland. On the M6, near the Lake District, I saw at least 11 shooting stars and some faint aurora borealis – it was amazing. The sky was was so dark you could see every star perfectly. It was a wonderful sight. Wendy Wood-FletcherLike the zombie-making virus which is the true game engine of this long-running franchise, the world of Resident Evil keeps evolving, respawning and regenerating extra mutant limbs and organs in different media. First there was the influential shooting-centric computer game from Japan; that begat half a dozen blood-and-VFX feature films from married star-and-director team Milla Jovovich and Paul WS Anderson. Then followed television series, novels, comics, stage productions and even a Resident Evil-themed restaurant. Even if you haven’t played, watched, read or even eaten any Resident Evil product that shouldn’t significantly impair anyone’s ability to at least mildly enjoy and get up to speed with this latest iteration: a reboot story set in the late 1990s in the fictional town, the titular Raccoon City, where the zombie virus first emerges as a threat to humanity. Although gravely disappointed to report there are no raccoons whatsoever on hand, I can reveal that this is a reasonably entertaining, unpretentiously gory horror exercise, although clearly a bit distended with an excess of characters that need to be incorporated into the plot, many of whom feature in older RE lore. The most prominent is Claire Redfield (Kaya Scodelario), a badass tough girl who comes back to the town where she was raised in a dodgy orphanage to see her brother Chris (Robbie Amell) who is now a Raccoon City police officer. Claire also wants to investigate reports she’s seen in so-called “chat rooms” on the “internet” (remember, it’s meant to be the 1990s and all that stuff is new) of shady goings-on connected to the pharmaceutical company Umbrella. Eventually, Claire and Chris find themselves battling drooling pasty undead hordes alongside fellow cops Jill Valentine (Hannah John-Kamen) and Leon Kennedy (Avan Jogia), conflicts seen mostly from a third-person perspective, although there are occasional deployments of first-person viewpoints, a mix that creates a particularly game-y feel. The competence of the action sequences compensates somewhat for the underlying lack of wit or humour throughout, unless you count the smile-inducing call backs to ancient 90s technology. One character, for instance, is spied playing the game Snake on a Nokia phone; elsewhere a key bit of info is related from a videotape. It all serves to remind us that the Hollywood studio Sony, who also own the PlayStation game platform that made Resident Evil famous, was originally a tech company before they expanded into entertainment. • Resident Evil: Welcome To Raccoon City is in cinemas on 3 December.She was a working-class Yorkshire girl who first took to the stage in a high-kicking dance troupe. The political stage followed when Betty Boothroyd was elected to parliament, rising to become the first female Speaker of the House of Commons. Now Boothroyd is to appear on another stage – not in person, but as the central character in a musical drama written by and starring Maxine Peake. Betty! A Sort Of Musical was a celebration of “an extraordinary character”, said Peake. “That generation of women battled through. She worked away through many rejections, and then she made it to the first female Speaker – a working-class lass from Dewsbury.” The “play with songs” will be performed next year as the culmination of the Manchester Royal Exchange’s 2022 programme. Co-authored by Peake and Seiriol Davies, and directed by Sarah Frankcom, it came out of an idea of Peake’s to write a musical about a “northern tripe dynasty”. “Sarah very sensibly said: ‘I’m not sure about that but why don’t you have a look at Betty Boothroyd?’” said Peake. Boothroyd, now 92 and a member of the House of Lords, was the daughter of textile workers in the former West Riding and grew up surrounded by mills. Work was insecure and badly paid; there was never much money in the Boothroyd house. After school, Boothroyd became a shop assistant and then a typist, and then at the age of 17 she successfully auditioned for the Tiller Girls, a dance troupe. She appeared at the London Palladium and in Goldilocks And The Three Bears in Luton before a foot infection ended her short dancing career. In 1973, she entered parliament as Labour MP for West Bromwich, and in 1992 was elected Speaker, a role she performed with warmth, a no-nonsense style and a certain glamour for eight years. Betty! views Boothroyd’s life through the lens of an amateur dramatics group in a Dewsbury village hall. “It’s their work in progress. It goes into all sorts of weird and wonderful places musically, but it’s certainly not Andrew Lloyd Webber,” said Frankcom. It would, however, include “big belters, big dance numbers, big power ballads”, said Davies. Peake has never appeared in a musical before, “but I like a challenge”, she said. Frankcom said: “This is as much about celebrating the talents of the amateur. Particularly in the north-west, there’s such a rich tradition of amateur performance, and we really wanted to celebrate that as well.” The members of the am-dram group “feel very passionately about what they feel [Boothroyd] stands for – fairness, social justice, listening and speaking your truth. In Dewsbury, Betty’s very much admired and loved.” Although Boothroyd’s spell with the Tiller Girls was short, it was a crucial part of her story, said Davies. “The Tiller Girls episode mirrors so many people’s experience: ‘I want to conquer the world. Oh, it didn’t work out, OK, I need to lick my wounds and do something completely different.’ It seems so truthful and universal.” The show would be fun and entertaining, its authors said. “We don’t want to frighten people off,” Peake said. “I don’t want people to go, ‘Oh God, Maxine Peake’s doing it, it’s going to be really political and agitprop’ – it’s not that at all. It’s about a woman who happens to be political, but it’s more about her humanity.” The timing was significant, said Frankcom. “Working on it over the past year or 18 months, it feels that discussion and debate, and people having opposing opinions and views but being able to listen and share, is more important now than ever. We don’t seem to be very good at listening, and we certainly don’t seem to be very good at breaking bread and sharing time and space with those who have differing views. “We’re making a show about a group of people who come from very different places into a collective endeavour that involves them having to rethink some things about themselves and about who they are in relationship to each other. And that as a principle feels important. “The thing I find so moving about Betty is her passion and advocacy for the importance of debate within our society. There couldn’t be a better time to be celebrating that in whatever way we can.” Peake and her collaborators have written to Boothroyd to inform her of their project.The importance of Ben Stokes to England’s Ashes campaign can scarcely be overstated and so the all-rounder’s first outing in the middle for four months was a significant moment for Joe Root’s men as they prepare for next week’s first Test at the Gabba. Stokes makes England’s strongest XI as a batter alone but when fit to send down his brawny fast-medium he offers a balance that is the envy of most opponents. On their first full day of cricket on tour – technically day three of their final warm-up match against the Lions – figures of two for 31 from 10 overs were therefore encouraging. A scorecard that saw the understudies close on 226 for four from 78 overs at the Ian Healy Oval in Brisbane (with three players also retiring) was secondary to the news that Stokes reported no ill effects after a protracted spell out for mental health reasons and finger surgery that can only have softened him physically. As such the wickets of Zak Crawley, caught at leg-gully for a top score of 45, and Chris Woakes, a regulation edge to first slip, were a bonus, even if the former was keen to talk up a performance that could only be watched as potted highlights online owing to Cricket Australia’s disappointing decision not to permit a live stream. “It’s great having Ben back,” Crawley said after stumps. “He has been bowling nicely and batting well in the nets. He makes a massive impact on this group just being here and there is no doubt he will play a big part in the Ashes. “It’s hard to know [if he was bowling at 100% pace] as I have not faced Ben too much but it felt pretty decent to me. He got me out, so I hope he was bowling at full pelt.” Jimmy Anderson, Stuart Broad and Ollie Robinson also got precious miles into their legs thanks to the heavy rains of the La Niña weather system finally relenting – Anderson’s late spell of reverse swing was noted by those present – while Jack Leach twirled away for 18 overs on a pitch that Crawley described as batter-friendly in the main. Overlooked all summer, Leach is the likely beneficiary if Stokes is able to play as a fully fledged all-rounder. But according to Broad, who is heading into his eighth Ashes series, the benefits of a return for Root’s vice-captain go beyond this. “We know what an influential player he is on the field but there’s a bit of fear factor with the Australians and him,” Broad told the Round the Wicket podcast. “The balance of the side is really important but I think the emotional side is more important for us. “We know he’s a warrior, we know he’s a fighter and will stand up when times get tough. To win in Australia, yes, you need runs and wickets but you have to front up in tough times.” There were points during the recent summer when England talked down the prospect of a return for Stokes this winter and it was not until scar tissue was removed from the left index finger he first broke in April that the prognosis changed. According to Stokes, this was a case of a switch being flicked rather than a protracted decision. Stokes said: “I wasn’t ever going to force coming back. I remember the day when I thought: ‘I’m ready to come back, I’m going to start getting my body ready for Australia.’ “I made the phone calls to the people who needed to know what’s going on in my head, and started from there. It wasn’t like: ‘I’m not sure,’ thinking about it for a few days. It was a spur of the moment: ‘I want to get back into it now.’” The comeback does create a logjam in the middle order, however, and though England have said the deployment of Woakes and Mark Wood in the Lions attack relates to their recent emergence from quarantine after the T20 World Cup, Jonny Bairstow making the first XI ahead of Ollie Pope suggests he is favourite for the No 6 spot. Pope did get a bat on Thursday, making 27 before falling to Root’s off-breaks, and top-scored with 81 in England’s most recent Test, against India at the Oval. But Bairstow was down to play ahead of the Surrey man in the abandoned series finale at Old Trafford that followed and it may be that this apparent pecking order holds sway.It went worse than had been expected, and expectations were already low. As the supreme court prepared to hear oral arguments in Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization, a lawsuit over a 15-week abortion ban in Mississippi that constitutes the most serious challenge to Roe v Wade in a generation, many court watchers predicted a massive rollback of abortion rights. But the line among reasonable pundits was that the court, fearing censure from a largely pro-choice American public, would attempt to have its cake and eat it too – allowing states to impose abortion bans earlier in pregnancy, but keeping abortion as a constitutional right intact. The most convincing version of this argument came from Slate’s Mark Joseph Stern, who predicted that the court, like it did in 1992’s Planned Parenthood v Casey, might weaken the abortion right without abandoning it entirely. In Casey, the supreme court lessened the standard of scrutiny applied to state abortion restrictions – from a robust “strict scrutiny” standard to a more malleable “undue burden” standard – and affirmed that states could ban abortions outright after fetal viability, the point of gestation at which a fetus can survive outside the womb, usually at about 24 weeks. Stern, like many others, predicted that the court might impose an even more deferential legal test on abortion restrictions – “rational basis review” – and eliminate the viability standard. The result would be that states could ban and restrict abortions more easily, even before viability, but they would still not be allowed to ban abortions entirely. “The court could move back the point at which states can prohibit abortion outright from 24 weeks to 15 or perhaps 12, the end of the first trimester,” Stern wrote. “A diminished right to abortion would survive, battered but extant.” And yet the end of the viability standard would still have been practically disastrous for abortion access on the ground, as well as for women’s freedom and dignity. This much was elegantly explained by New York’s Irin Carmon, who wrote that attacks from conservatives over the past 30 years have increased the abortion right’s legal reliance on the viability standard, even as developments in pre- and neo-natal care have pushed viability itself earlier in pregnancy. “If a ban on abortion at 15 weeks is allowed for whatever reason, why not draw the line at six?” Carmon asked. Getting rid of the viability standard, but still leaving the right to abortion technically intact, would in practice invite an anarchic scramble, as conservative states rushed to ban abortion as early as possible and push the limit back sooner and sooner in pregnancy. Julie Rickelman, a longtime abortion rights advocate and the lawyer representing Mississippi’s lone abortion clinic in the Dobbs case, put it bluntly: if viability goes, Roe is effectively no longer good law. “If the court upholds this law, it will be discarding the viability line and overruling Roe,” she told Carmon. “That is the key line in the law that has protected people’s access to abortion.” In other words, the best-case scenario was legal chaos, misogynist lawmaking, a diminished right to bodily autonomy for women, and millions more people subject to forced pregnancy. But even these predictions – which pass for “optimism” among legal observers now that the supreme court is held in the chokehold of a conservative supermajority – proved too rosy. At oral arguments in Dobbs on Wednesday, five of the court’s six conservatives showed little interest in maintaining Roe while getting rid of viability. Instead, they were focused on eliminating Roe, and the abortion right, entirely. By the end, it seemed likely that conservatives have a crucial five votes to rule that the constitution does not protect the right to end a pregnancy: Samuel Alito, Clarence Thomas, Neil Gorsuch, Brett Kavanaugh and Amy Coney Barrett. The lone exception among the conservatives was Chief Justice John Roberts, who seemed almost desperate to direct attention to the viability line. Over the course of arguments, Roberts repeatedly returned to the viability question, emphasizing that it was rejected as a possible standard in the initial 1973 Roe decision and only adopted later, in Casey. But none of the other conservatives took the bait. The two “swing” votes – if such an extremely and committedly conservative court can be said to have such a thing – are Amy Coney Barrett and Brett Kavanaugh. In a display of the impotence that has marked his career as chief justice, Roberts was unable to persuade either of them to take up his apparently preferred proposition of maintaining a shell of Roe while gutting the viability standard. Instead, Kavanaugh spent much of his speaking time assuring his colleagues that they need not be bound by Roe’s precedent, listing a long litany of cases in which the supreme court reversed its own prior decisions. Barrett, meanwhile, emphasized the availability of adoption as a supposedly adequate alternative to abortion, at one point asserting that so-called “safe haven” laws, which allow birth mothers to surrender their parental rights and leave their infants in the care of others without punishment immediately after they give birth, offer an adequate remedy for pregnant women who cannot or do not wish to become parents. The idea was that if a woman is pregnant and does not want to be, an acceptable outcome would be for her to gestate and birth a child, and then simply give it away. The hardest-line conservatives, meanwhile, offered even more grim and ominous assessments of abortion as a matter of law, and their sadistic and extremist views give some indication of where the court may be heading in future cases. Both Alito and Thomas referred repeatedly to abortion as “taking a life”, and indicated that they would be open to recognizing fetal personhood. Until now, post-viability abortion bans have rested on the legal idea that the state has an interest in protecting fetal life that overrides a woman’s interest in controlling her own body after that point. But Alito and Thomas suggested that they think that interest belongs not only to the state, but to the fetus itself, and that this interest begins very early. “The fetus has an interest in having a life,” Alito said at one point. “That doesn’t change from the point before viability and after viability.” The suggestion that a fetus might have interests in its own right – interests that can be seen as equal or greater than the interests of the woman carrying it – is a dramatic step in anti-choice jurisprudence, one with dramatic implications for women’s healthcare, freedoms, and access to public life. After Wednesday’s oral arguments, it seems certain that Roe v Wade will soon be overturned. For this court, that’s just the beginning. Moira Donegan is a Guardian US columnistThe Pandora Papers leak shows that the UK is in danger of becoming a corrupt country because it is failing to take economic crime seriously enough, the former chair of the public accounts watchdog told MPs, as she called for more funding for financial crime enforcers. Dame Margaret Hodge, a senior Labour MP, raised the issue in the Commons as part of a debate on the finance bill, highlighting the central role of London in facilitating economic crime. She said the Pandora Papers, leaked to the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists (ICIJ) and shared with media around the world including the Guardian, comprised “the largest cache of documents we have ever received” in relation to tax havens. “The UK lies at the heart of everything revealed there,” she said. “Others have talked about secret property transactions that took place – £4bn identified in the Pandora Papers. There are more UK citizens cited in that tranche of leaks than from any other country. The relationship between the UK and our tax havens is central to the facilitation of economic crime, and again we see the weak and toothless enforcement agencies.” Hodge called for a doubling or tripling of the planned £100m levy for fighting money laundering in order to tackle financial crime. She said it was “absolutely critical that we do start taking economic crime seriously in this country”. She added: “If we don’t, we are in danger of allowing that to seep into our politics, seep into the public domain, and far from being a trusted jurisdiction we become a jurisdiction that is not very different from others to whom we all too often preach that they should tackle the corruption that is endemic in their administrations. We become one of them.” She said the National Crime Agency’s estimate of £100bn laundered through the UK each year was probably an underestimate. Earlier in the Commons, Hodge named some Conservative MPs and party associations who had been given money by companies backed by Viktor Fedotov, the Russian-born oil tycoon linked to an alleged corruption scandal. Anneliese Dodds, the Labour party chair, previously wrote to the Tories asking why almost one in 10 Conservative MPs had taken money from firms, including Aquind, linked to Fedotov. Aquind is currently seeking permission from the government to build a £1.2bn cross-Channel electricity connection between France and the UK, which the business secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, is due to rule on next year. Fedotov’s company has made huge donations to the Conservative party and its politicians. He was revealed in the Pandora Papers to have secretly co-owned a company once accused of participating in a massive corruption scheme. Lawyers for Fedotov and Aquind have previously strongly denied all accusations of fraud and said accusations of corruption aimed at his Russian firm were “completely false”. They said Fedotov did not personally donate to the Tories. They also said the Russian tycoon had “no influence” over donations made by Aquind, which he did not manage, and had “never had any interest in British politics”. Kwarteng, who will make the decision based on official advice, has previously declined to comment on the Pandora Papers’ disclosures about Fedotov’s business activities in Russia.Dressed in a cherry-red suit and accompanied by six sequinned showgirls complete with burlesque feathered fans, the greatest showman of British talent-show pop and cringe dad dancing, Gary Barlow, appears on stage as if magicked out of thin air. A brass band launches into the showtune-inspired Who’s Driving This Thing and the Take That singer is off, tap dancing down the stairs, clicking his fingers and doing his best impression of an exuberant music hall emcee. The roaring 20s are the production’s obvious inspiration and an early run of tracks from the 2020 album Music Made By Humans is given the big band treatment as Barlow leans into theatrics. The autobiographical song Live Those Years Again, which recalls Take That’s early years, is embellished with corny choreography. “For the next three minutes let’s relive those years,” Barlow croons, holding up three fingers, while the line, “My appetite for singing slowly dies, replaced by an appetite for pies” features a comic belly rub. There’s no pretence at playing it cool tonight as the showgirls reappear in Santa hats and, with a toss of a wool scarf, Christmas is literally wheeled on stage. Leaning against a glittering, oversized present, Barlow covers festive classics from his recent album, The Dream of Christmas. “Come on, it’s December, let’s get into that Christmas spirit!” he shouts before climbing aboard a pantomime sleigh with Santa for a spirited rendition of Sleigh Ride. With seasonal whiplash, Christmas fades away after only a few songs and Barlow, now dressed in a black military jacket, reappears on a B-stage at the back of the hall. Joined by saxophonist Mike Stevens, the pair perform A Million Love Songs and Barlow beams with proud delight at Stevens’ solo. Back on the main stage, the set finishes with a speed-run through Take That’s greatest hits. After decades of belting out these songs, there’s still an earnestness to Barlow’s performance of No 1s such as Back for Good and Shine. With not a hair out of place, Barlow finishes the night with the bombastic Never Forget under a snowfall of confetti. It’s pure, saccharine joy.It might be worth hanging on to your flatpack. At a Swedish auction last week, a 62-year-old Ikea Cavelli armchair – described by the design expert Andreas Siesing as “a holy grail for design enthusiasts” – sold for £12,473. It’s hardly surprising: vintage Ikea furniture is now big business. Below are 10 of the rarest and most expensive Ikea items currently available. In the meantime, look after your Billy bookcase. It might be your retirement fund. Kromvik queen bed, £4,977 The Kromvik was an Ikea mainstay, sold in conjunction with the Sultan sprung mattress between 1982 and 1994. It was designed by Knut Hagberg who, along with his sister Marianne, created around 1,600 Ikea products. Only this one, though, has a resale value that could give you a nosebleed. Impala easy chair, £6,210 Designed in the 70s by Gillis Lundgren, the fourth original Ikea employee and inventor of the Billy, this easy chair is made with tubular steel and upholstered in vibrant red. At the time of its debut, Ikea’s founder, Ingvar Kamprad, was convinced that the Impala was too impractical to sell well. He was wrong. And now, if you are richer than God, you can discover why. Johann Bertil Häggström living-room set, £3,691 It is exceedingly difficult to track down a model name for this set, although they were ubiquitous in the 70s. As strange as this may sound, this set is a snip: previously, the sofa alone has sold for around £4,000. Skye chaise longue, £3,300 Designed in the 70s by Tord Björklund, creator of the still-inescapable Karlanda sofa range, the Skye chaise longue is breathtakingly elegant. Fashioned in chrome and leather, it would look good anywhere: in a bachelor pad, in a hipster Airbnb rental, in a New Yorker cartoon about therapists from the 1980s. Åke easy chair, £2,459 Although a lot of the hottest vintage Ikea pieces date from the 70s, the Åke is relatively ancient. Sometimes known as “Muslingestol”, this clam chair first entered shops in 1952, and is vanishingly rare. Part of this might be down to its unusual legs, which, at least these days, look barely able to survive a heavy flop. Bore lounge chair with footstool, £3,269 Visit a branch of Ikea today and you will still see Pöang lounge chairs for sale. The Bore is a massively upmarket precursor. Designed by Noboru Nakamura, this is a chocolate brown, button-back leather chair and matching stool that, on its release, could have been yours for £80. But you missed the boat then, so now you have to shell out thousands. Grace-61 armchair, £1,483 As the name suggests, this chair is 60 years old. There is a chance that if you had Swedish grandparents, they had one, perhaps swayed by the catalogue’s description of it as “the centre of homeliness”. If they did, they paid £16 for it. The price is now 92 times that, which seems excessive. Ladoga sideboard, £2,118 The truth is that a lot of these expensive old Ikea items are priced as they are because of novelty. They’re gorgeous, but clearly of an age. The same cannot be said for the Ladoga sideboard, designed in the 60s by Erik Wørts. It’s a startlingly beautiful contemporary piece. If you were to open the back pages of a Saturday supplement, you’d find dozens of very similar items selling for just as much. Vilbert chairs, £863 It’s easy to see why the Vilbert is now so expensive. It was created by Verner Panton, one of Denmark’s most famous designers. Only 4,000 of them were made, which makes them astonishingly rare. And also, it looks as if it would snap in half as soon as you got your bum anywhere near it, so there can’t be many left. Diana safari canvas chair, £400 Compared with the other items, the Diana chair is an absolute bargain. Designed in 1972 by Karin Mobring, and based on a chair from the 1930s, it was an immediate success and sold well for 11 years before being discontinued. But it seems to be curiously undervalued. You can buy a set of four for £100 each, but they can go for twice that. Maybe this one really is your retirement fund.This vehicle for Ukrainian ballet star Sergei Polunin, created by his former Royal Ballet colleague Johan Kobborg was originally made for the Arena di Verona, a venue that holds 15,000 people, and you have to view it in that light: given to a lot of leaping and bouts of overblown drama in an attempt to reach the back rows, with Canadian sculptor David Umemoto’s monolithic set providing height and different levels for the action. It’s a brave move to bring it to London for a one-off performance. The Royal Ballet regularly performs Kenneth MacMillan’s near-perfect version of Romeo and Juliet and English National Ballet has Nureyev’s production. But such is the draw of Polunin, a dancer as well known for his rebel image and off-stage exploits as for his precocious talent. The result doesn’t touch those well-known versions. Kobborg’s choreography plays to Polunin’s strengths, with long combinations of flying jumps and multiple pirouettes, Polunin’s ease of elevation on display (although Kobborg also finds some unpredictable turns of phrase, especially in the ensemble work). The show is slimmed down to 90 minutes, so it’s out with the villager filler to focus on the prime protagonists, but they inevitably strip out some character-building, shape and depth as well. Cuts are made to Prokofiev’s score, in sometimes disjointed fashion, but occasionally to interesting effect: an apocalyptic crescendo is employed as a motif, as in one short but chilling scene where Juliet is forcibly turned towards Paris, her fate. In fact, Juliet (the divine Alina Cojocaru) is the subject of a few sinister moments, her doomed destiny in the air. Cojocaru brings the usual effortlessness to her dancing. She’s an innocent Juliet, trying to fathom the anxiety and excitement of her unfamiliar feelings. Cojocaru has to do twice the work, since Polunin’s never been the most subtle or complex of actors, the character separated from the dancer, but it’s enjoyable to watch him in a fierce sword fight with Tybalt (Nikolas Gaifullin). After dispatching his rival, he mercilessly tosses his sword on the corpse, only to turn round and see Juliet, and it suddenly hits him what he’s done; this is a show with some strong moments, but it’s not a ballet for the ages.The advertising boss Sir Martin Sorrell has said clients are cancelling Christmas events in response to Omicron, and criticised the UK government for failing to give sufficient guidance on masks. Sorrell, the executive chairman of S4 Capital and the founder and former chief executive of WPP, said event cancellations had gathered pace since the new Covid variant was identified. “What we are seeing our clients doing and other people [doing], the answer is they are … cancelling,” Sorrell told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “There has been quite a sharp series of cancellations since this happened just three, four, five days ago.” Boris Johnson, who is embroiled in a controversy over Christmas parties at Downing Street during lockdown last year, has urged people not to cancel festive parties or nativity plays. The prime minister’s view contradicted the advice of leading scientists and one of his most senior health officials, who advised people to cut back on unnecessary socialising in response to Omicron. Sorrell said: “The guidance we are getting both from the government and the medical community is contradictory. The uncertainty is extreme. To be a little bit sympathetic to the government, it is an extremely difficult situation. But we have been through this before with [the] Delta and the previous variants, so you would have thought the government would have been a little bit more prepared for what may or may not happen in terms of scenario planning.” Sorrell said the government should extend its guidance on where masks should be worn while the UK is in a period of “extreme uncertainty” over the seriousness of Omicron. “The government suggesting we should wear masks in shops or on public transport is one thing but what about restaurants, what about hotels, what about events? I think we are not being given enough guidance by the government as to the simple things we can do,” he said. “We don’t know at the moment how far this will spread. It could become extremely difficult in some scenarios.” He said the public were not taking the current advice to wear masks seriously. “Mask-wearing, I think, to some extent helps, and we are just not implementing it and people are not taking the measures. Going out last night, for example, and seeing what people were doing in restaurants and shops and theatres, really not taking it seriously enough to heart. We should be very cautious at this particular point in time, I think.”The end of December will mark two years since the world discovered an outbreak of a new virus in Wuhan, China. What followed was a difficult time for countries across the globe and many lives have been lost since the beginning of the pandemic. Ahead of the second anniversary of Covid, we would like to hear your tributes to the people you have lost to the virus during the last two years. Wherever you live in the world, we want to hear about your loved one and what they mean to you as part of our coverage. Share your tributes You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.In early 2019 I was teaching French sixth formers on an Erasmus placement when we got into a discussion about immigration. Some girls spoke admiringly of women on the centre-right, some boys were liberal left, though suspicious of the excesses of internet social justice politics, while others might be dismissed as “woke”. They all rolled their eyes when I asked them what they thought of Éric Zemmour, the smirking far-right polemicist running for president. My students thought he was racist and wrote him off as a crank. They hated Marine Le Pen of the far-right Rassemblement National (National Rally) but took her seriously. You had to accept that she was part of the political furniture, but this guy was beyond the pale. He had, after all, been convicted of hate speech. Yet even then he was depressingly mainstream, writing bestsellers containing Vichy apologia and hate-filled screeds against feminism and homosexuality. He had a column at Le Figaro where he penned conspiratorial pieces arguing that Christianity had made France but Islam was trying to break it. Recently, Zemmour has become a semi-permanent TV fixture. A murky infrastructure of donors and online shock troops supporting him has emerged, and he tours France meeting fans. Zemmour’s politics are horribly nihilistic. His ideas are straight from extremist Renaud Camus’ “great replacement” theory of a concerted demographic annihilation of white Europeans by immigration. Although his new book, La France n’a pas dit son dernier mot (France Has Not Spoken Its Last Word), is tinged marginally with optimism, his conclusion about the supposed renaissance ignores living standards and lapses into a war cry against foreigners and those who dare object to police brutality. He is frequently compared to Donald Trump, though politically Zemmour is a different beast. He is, in his own words, engaged in a Gramscian struggle over culture. His strategy seems more considered than Trump’s spasmodic demagoguery. Polls for the presidential election have shown Zemmour at 15% and 17%, placing him ahead of Le Pen and the likely candidates for Les Républicains, the formerly dominant centre-right party that collapsed because of President Emmanuel Macron’s rise and successive corruption scandals involving its leaders. One November poll even showed him in the second round facing Macron, whose frontrunner status appears solid. However, with increased scrutiny in the immediate run-up to announcing his candidacy, his campaign has begun to flag, and he has fallen behind Le Pen. So whether this is a real phenomenon or a media-driven fad is not clear, but the fact that this extremist is able to cast himself as central protagonist of the political spectacle during a pandemic, while prices are sharply rising, reveals a political and media class with no vision. Aurélien Mondon, a researcher of the far right at the University of Bath, told me that he didn’t “buy for a second that it’s actually what the people want … If they had more choice and different sources of mediation and political knowledge, that’s not what they’d go for.” He described his latest research into opinion polling, which found that when you ask people to name the most pressing issues facing their society, immigration ranks highly, but when you ask about the biggest issues affecting their lives, immigration doesn’t factor. Instead, people talk about jobs, pensions or healthcare. Mondon says this is because people can answer truthfully about their own lives, but they can’t speak for all their fellow citizens so they rely on mediated political knowledge, and the broadcasters providing that knowledge have given up. He says they talk about little else beyond “Islam, Islam, Islam”. It is often taken for granted that young people are leftwing, and mostly they are. The leftwing populist Jean-Luc Mélenchon received the most votes at the 2017 election among 18– to 24-year-olds and it’s likely that the majority who abstained hold liberal views, like the students in both the poorer and richer lycées where I taught. But it wasn’t a liberal centrist or mainstream conservative that came second among the young, it was Le Pen. There are echoes of that cycle again. In the recent regional elections 87% of young voters abstained, preferring protest movements to formal politics, but online Zemmour has “le buzz”. It’s important not to overstate things: although growing, the youth movement around Zemmour is tiny. But whether it’s Génération Nation (National Rally’s youth wing) or Génération Zemmour, the online community where predominately young, male users share links to France’s burgeoning fascist YouTube scene and debate Zemmour’s theories, the fact that these ideas are finding any traction with young people should shame politicians. This embrace of nihilism, even if it sticks at 20% for Le Pen or splits towards Zemmour, and the abstention rate, suggest a generation has been created that is deeply political (as any of my French friends who teach will tell you) but sees no hopeful vision for France. Out of electoral opportunism the right is converging around Zemmourian politics. The Macronists have been at it for a while; with the interior minister Gerald Darmanin’s debates with Le Pen and Zemmour revealing a startling amount of common ground between the trio, and the higher education minister Frédérique Vidal’s witch-hunt against so-called “Islamo-leftists” in universities. Les Républicains, perpetually terrified by the fragility of their base, are busy proclaiming that Zemmour is not racist. Their presidential hopefuls are setting out a remarkably similar stall. They seem to have no ideas beyond calculating how to absorb the far right for electoral gain. Meanwhile, the laughing stock that is the French left offers platitudes, or where there is a concrete programme, as in Mélenchon’s case, there is no strategy for overcoming the left’s divisions. The controversial French conservative author Michel Houellebecq’s 2015 novel Submission, in which the 2022 election is won by a Muslim Brotherhood candidate and France becomes a moderate caliphate, captures the tone of French electoral politics well. I disagree, but many took the book at face value as an endorsement of the “great replacement” theory. Submission reflects France’s anxieties; it satirises an overwhelming preoccupation among the elite with Islam and the stifling of any vision beyond decline. Mélenchon also appears in the narrative. He stands in for the left, organising a protest that does nothing. Prices are rising, the pandemic rages, students are queueing at food banks, yet politicians and broadcasters just want to talk about Islam, immigration and Éric Zemmour. Oliver Haynes, a student from City of London University, was highly commended in the Guardian Foundation’s Hugo Young award for political opinion writing 2021, for this pieceI went to a mixed school filled with students of different genders, religious beliefs and identities. The way I was educated may seem typical to some, but in Northern Ireland it is far from the norm. My education is what all young people in Northern Ireland should be entitled to. But our political leaders haven’t taken enough action. More than 90% of schools in Northern Ireland are segregated, meaning most young people are educated in either a state-funded school that predominantly attracts Protestant families or a school funded by the state but maintained by the Roman Catholic church. Despite my mixed upbringing – my mother was raised Catholic while my father grew up in a Protestant household – I knew that young people were somewhat disconnected from each other depending on the school they went to. At a young age, I begrudgingly took first communion classes with the local Catholic school, and at secondary school watched a friend walk regularly to the Catholic boys’ school nearby for Irish lessons. Young people in Northern Ireland are segregated not only by the schools we go to but also by the languages we speak and the sports we play: where some schools offer rugby or cricket, others provide Gaelic football and hurling. My parents, who attended small, segregated schools in opposite communities at the height of conflict, hoped my education would not be framed by such divisions. My nondenominational school made this a reality. But 7% – the number of young people educated in integrated schools – is distressingly low. A fear of violence doesn’t invade our schools as it did when my parents were children. Communities are predominantly peaceful, equal, but still apart. Integrated education in Northern Ireland has never been more important. In April, we saw the worst rioting on our streets in years; buses were hijacked and cars set alight close to my home. There was violence at our peace walls, where petrol bombs were hurled over the divide. The worst part? Children as young as 13 were throwing them. But what we saw wasn’t just disturbance over the workings – or ill-workings – of Brexit. Several of our leaders have consistently shown their willingness to whip up resentment about Northern Ireland’s place in the deal. But a complex trade arrangement did not push young people towards bricks and bombs. What we saw was members of this generation being lured into anger and hostility – a hostility propped up by a system that keeps them apart. Young people are separated in the very place where we learn and build relations. Significantly, segregation disproportionately harms working-class families. The Equality Commission for Northern Ireland has highlighted “persistent underachievement” among Protestant boys entitled to free school meals. And while paramilitary activity is still active in working-class communities, segregation only fosters hostility and harms vulnerable, disillusioned young people who can be misled by violent actors. Integrated education isn’t just needed, it’s overwhelmingly wanted: 71% of people in Northern Ireland think it should be the norm, and integrated schools are consistently oversubscribed. Still, this mandate isn’t new. The Education Reform Order of 1989 placed a formal duty on the Department of Education to “encourage and facilitate” integrated education. It was honoured in the Good Friday Agreement through these very same words. The Education Act created more pressure for shared education. And later, in the New Decade New Approach agreement, which brought our government back from a three-year hiatus, all five parties agreed to an independent review of our fragmented system, a process that’s only just begun. But it’s a testament to both the urgency for integrated schools and the negligence of our political leaders that reform has been driven by community action. The Integrated Education Fund (IEF) has helped several schools that have achieved this status since Northern Ireland’s first school became integrated in 1981. Not one of these 68 schools was integrated through government organisation. Tina Merron, the chief executive of the IEF, tells me: “Every integrated school has come into existence by parents’ groups setting one up or by an existing school transforming to integrated status … the end result is a testimony to months, if not years, of hard work by parents, teachers and governors.” Despite statutory duties and overwhelming support for integration, our political leaders have failed to act on numerous mandates that would allow a new generation of young people to be educated together. Our two largest political parties, the Democratic Unionist party (DUP) and Sinn Féin, have collectively dominated the ministerial portfolio for education, but neither has pushed for integration. For them, keeping schools religiously segregated means keeping their own communities, identities and vote base intact. But these divisions are already broken and outdated, and don’t represent young people in Northern Ireland today. Every year, more young people are ditching sectarian labels, which no longer reflect the subtleties of how we define ourselves. Those engaging in violence are a minority. Support has also fallen for the DUP, and we’re likely to see shifts in voting behaviour at next year’s assembly election, with popular support for the non-sectarian Alliance – the party that has shown the greatest commitment to integration – catching up to the DUP. The cross-community party recently backed the integrated education bill currently making its way through the assembly, which would bring provision for integrated education. Despite popular backing, the bill still faced criticism from several parties for overshadowing the ongoing review, a process set to take at least another year. In the meantime, our political leaders are still issuing harmful threats to collapse the assembly, and young people are still being drawn into violence. As tension still simmers in Northern Ireland, young people need to see active steps taken by our leaders to end segregation, and to respond to decades of mandates for integration. Young people should feel they belong in any school regardless of their religion, or lack of religion. More than that, they should not feel segregated from others based on harmful, obsolete sectarian criteria. Integration is a matter of urgency in Northern Ireland; it must be the norm. Abby Wallace, a student at Queen’s University Belfast, won the Guardian Foundation’s Hugo Young award for political opinion writing 2021 for this pieceAbby Wallace, a student from Queen’s University Belfast, has been revealed as the winner of the 2021 Hugo Young award. Abby’s winning piece – ‘Integrated education in Northern Ireland is a matter of urgency – why don’t our leaders see it?’ – highlights the high proportion of segregated schools (Catholic or Protestant) in Northern Ireland and lack of visible support for integrated education from the country’s main political parties. Of the winner the judges said: “If Brexit exposed the dangerous ignorance and insouciance of many in the UK ruling class about Northern Ireland, here we have the opposite: a warning lent authority by personal experience and persuasive political analysis. “After the worst riots in Northern Island for years it is powerful in its reminder of the ongoing harm inflicted by an education system segregated by religion. It is superbly topical and skilfully prosecutes the argument, offering an alternative vision of integration while landing a blow on wilful political negligence of all stripes.” Abby Wallace, winner of the Hugo Young award, said: “I’m delighted to have won this award. Integrated education is so important in Northern Ireland, and often doesn’t get the attention it needs. I hope my piece will help shine some light on the topic. I’m really honoured to have this piece published in The Guardian and grateful for the time the judging panel spent reading and discussing it.” Abby’s article has been published in the Guardian’s opinion section and newspaper. She will also shadow a Guardian journalist for a week and receive a cash prize of £500. The runner’s up were: Olly Haynes, a student from City of London University, also highly commended by the judging panel for his piece ‘The hype around Eric Zemmour shows that France’s political class has no vision of the future.’ He has also been published in the Guardian’s opinion section. Isabelle Chauzy, a freelance journalist, for her honest and powerful piece titled ‘Rape Culture: Why are women still to blame?’ The award, run by The Guardian Foundation, is now in its fifth year and was created in memory of Hugo Young, a political columnist at the Guardian for almost 20 years and one of the most influential figures in British political journalism. Championing the best political opinion writing among students across the UK, the award celebrates Hugo’s legacy by encouraging fresh voices and new perspectives which, now more than ever, are essential to the future of quality, independent political journalism. Entries were judged blind by a panel of Guardian journalists against a criteria of finding the most topical, thoughtful and well-researched entries. Young Hugo award The Young Hugo award returned for a second year for 16-18 year old students. Entries were judged by chief leader writer at the Observer and a Guardian/Observer columnist, Sonia Sodha, Guardian deputy production editor, Suzanne Warr, and Guardian leader writer, Susanna Rustin. The winning piece was published today in the Guardian’s opinion section. Rosamund Cloke from Bishop Challoner School, Kent was announced the winner of the Young Hugo Award for her article “Has the ‘#MeToo’ movement had a lasting impact on the world?”. Sonia Sodha, chief leader writer at the Observer and deputy opinion editor at the Guardian: “The winning entry made a very eloquent and compelling case for rethinking our approach to sexual assault in schools. It was timely, extensively-researched and well-structured.” The runner’s up were: Chloe Selvester, from Hele’s School in Plymouth for her piece ‘Violence by men: why society’s point of view needs to change’ Sophie Winchm from Camden School for Girls in London for her piece ‘Anger at “Anti-Refugee” bill’ Kelly Walls, executive director, The Guardian Foundation, said: “Huge congratulations to Abby and Rosamund, whose winning articles prove why the inclusion of young people’s voices on these important topics is so essential. This year’s entries were excellent, they came from all over the UK and the subject matters were wide ranging. The winning pieces stood out to the judges as being of a particularly high standard and offering fresh perspectives, so we’re delighted that more people can now read them.” More information about The Guardian Foundation can be found here. -ends- For more information please contact: media.enquiries@theguardian.com or 020 3353 3696 Notes to editors About The Guardian Foundation The Guardian Foundation, an independent charity which supports media under threat, promotes diversity in the media and empowers children and young people to engage with the news. The charity runs educational programmes both in the UK and internationally. It runs an award winning news literacy programme, which includes news media workshops for schools, universities, teachers and families. It also runs the prestigious Scott Trust Bursary Scheme and the GNM Archive, preserving the history of the Guardian.In politics, as in life, there are few more tortured questions than “What if … ?” Defeated parties rake obsessively over the past, bickering over any hint of an opportunity missed. Even ruling parties start looking around as the shine wears off, wondering if they would fare better under someone new. What is perhaps unusual about 2021 is that both seem to be happening at once. Cue Steve Richards’s The Prime Ministers We Never Had (Hodder), a book stuffed full of roads less travelled. His list of politicians who were once widely tipped for Number 10, only to fall short in the end, ranges from Rab Butler to Neil Kinnock to Jeremy Corbyn (and if the latter seems a surprise inclusion, then half the point of a list is arguing about who should or shouldn’t have been on it). Each gets a potted biography, and thoughtful analysis of what ultimately stopped them reaching Downing Street. The author doesn’t try to predict how history might have unfolded had they made it, but a sense of loss hangs over several chapters. As Richards himself acknowledges, it does jar that all of his subjects bar Barbara Castle are men. So read it alongside Mary Ann Sieghart’s The Authority Gap (Doubleday), a study of why women still struggle to be taken seriously in professional life which goes some way to explaining why the default template for leaders is an Oxbridge-educated white man. Crackling with controlled anger, it features some eye-popping stories and a stellar cast of interviewees, from presidential hopeful Hillary Clinton and former Danish prime minister Helle Thorning-Schmidt to the novelist Bernardine Evaristo. Buy it for any woman ever talked over in a meeting, or patronised by a man who knows less than them. Theresa May would probably love a copy, judging by Gavin Barwell’s Chief of Staff (Atlantic), a loyal and sensitive account of her attempts to extract something resembling a workable Brexit from the fantasies of the Tory right. The long-suffering Barwell is notably forgiving of almost everyone in government but Boris Johnson; while more long-standing leavers in cabinet prove surprisingly flexible, he writes, the foreign secretary won’t even acknowledge the existence of any problem to which he doesn’t have answers. The book concludes with a poignant chapter examining whether a hard Brexit could have been avoided. It’s a measure of how toxic things became that, of all May’s negotiations over Brexit, Barwell’s favourite was with union leader Len McCluskey, “the one person who showed some understanding of where the prime minister was coming from and was honest about what he was looking for”. It’s that eye for a deal that makes Always Red (OR), McCluskey’s own juicy, take-no-prisoners memoir, so riveting. The former Unite leader has a reasonable claim to be the architect of Corbynism, having supported the rule changes under Ed Miliband that later helped the left break through in a leadership election, and then supplied funding, staff and strategic nous to an inexperienced Corbyn operation. The book is slippery on the intertwined nature of his private and political lives (Jennie Formby, the mother of one of his four children, ended up as Labour’s general secretary, while his partner Karie Murphy became Corbyn’s chief of staff) and arguably on antisemitism within Labour. But the final chapter on how unions can best exert leverage should be required reading for anyone in politics (or business). While McCluskey blames Corbyn’s thumping 2019 defeat on Brexit, Sebastian Payne’s Broken Heartlands (Macmillan) is a more nuanced take on Labour’s lost northern strongholds. Raised in Gateshead, Payne brings intimacy and depth to his subject, including thoughtful interviews with everyone from Labour’s “king of the north” Andy Burnham to Norman Tebbit reflecting on the miners’ strike. Fiona Hill’s memoir There Is Nothing for You Here, describing how a British coalminer’s daughter from Bishop Auckland grew up to advise Donald Trump’s White House (and testify damningly at his impeachment hearing), ranges even further to explore populism’s relationship with rust belts across Europe, America and Russia. After living with the Covid-19 pandemic for so long, I didn’t think I wanted to read another word about it, but the former Sage adviser Sir Jeremy Farrar’s Spike (Profile), co-written with journalist Anjana Ahuja, is as gripping as a thriller. Combining candour about what the scientists got wrong with horror stories about the chaos inside Downing Street, it concludes with a fascinating examination of why the argument for a lockdown last autumn was lost. Farrar’s is an important account of how judgment can get clouded in a crisis, whether by groupthink, bias or pure stubbornness. Interestingly, Farrar found Dominic Cummings one of the few Downing Street staffers prepared both to ask the right questions of scientists and listen to the answers. So in the spirit of seasonal goodwill, the next recommendation comes via Cummings, who once tweeted that thousands of lives could have been saved if people in government had read it. Julia Galef’s The Scout Mindset (Piatkus), a guide to recognising when you’re wrong and changing course accordingly, may not quite live up to that hype but is the stuff of which New Year’s resolutions are made. She argues convincingly for taking the drama out of changing your mind, seeing it as a process of constant small updates rather than huge mortifying U-turns; just keep regularly checking your beliefs against emerging evidence, and recalibrating. Her chapter on what happens when beliefs harden into identities, or things we daren’t abandon for fear of a broader unravelling, offers useful insights into what drives culture wars. A similar theme reverberates through the Times journalist Sathnam Sanghera’s Empireland (Viking), a fascinating reckoning with a history of empire that he never learned at school. Born in Wolverhampton to parents of Punjabi heritage, Sanghera argues passionately that Britain will never work out “who we are or who we want to be” without confronting its colonial past, ending on a hopeful note with the rise of the Black Lives Matter movement. Any bluff old-school Tories on your Christmas list, however, might prefer the former Conservative chief whip Andrew Mitchell’s Beyond a Fringe (Biteback). Mitchell followed his MP father into parliament via the traditional conveyor belt of boarding school, the army, Oxbridge and the City; the jauntiness with which he skips over the darker edges of all this is just starting to grate when the author, a One Nation Conservative whose great passion was boosting spending on overseas aid, swerves decidedly off piste. By turns funny and thoughtful, it’s an account of how the establishment works written by someone self-aware enough to recognise the preposterousness of it. For a full account of all the last year’s preposterousness, however, there is little to beat John Crace’s latest compendium of sketches A Farewell to Calm (Guardian Faber). Every year should end by looking hopefully to the future, and that’s where James Plunkett’s End State (Trapeze) comes in. Amid a drought of new ideas on the left, the former Gordon Brown aide turned thinktank wonk has produced a cheerful but realistic book arguing that an era of technological and political upheaval could still be harnessed for the public good. Things, as they say, can only get better. • Browse all the featured books and save up to 15% at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.The detained former Qatar World Cup official Abdullah Ibhais has repeated his claims of innocence as he enters the 17th day of a hunger strike in prison. Ibhais was seized by Qatari authorities last month and returned to jail while he awaits the outcome of an appeal against charges of bribery and a prison sentence of five years. The former deputy communications director in Qatar’s World Cup Supreme Committee has been denied communications since his arrest, according to his family. On Thursday, however, a voice note apparently recorded in his cell was published by the Dutch newspaper NRC with an audibly weakened Ibhais discussing his resolve to pursue his hunger strike “until I am proven innocent”. In the note Ibhais said: “I’ve gone on a hunger strike because for me this was the last resort after I was denied the chance to a fair trial. “I was denied the chance to be heard, I was denied the chance to speak up and after all I was detained whilst my trial has not finished yet. I was detained just to make sure that I don’t speak up, that I do not talk, that I do not defend myself, that I do not reveal the true story behind what happened to me. “It is hard, it is very hard, and it is weakening, but this is my last resort and I am going to go through with it until I am proven innocent. Because this is how things are, I am innocent and I have done nothing wrong.” Ibhais was found guilty and sentenced in April in a trial over accusations he had taken payments to influence the awarding of a contract to deliver social media for the World Cup. The Jordanian national signed a confession which he later recanted and he denies the claims. In an interview published with the Norwegian magazine Josimar, Ibhais said the confession had been extracted under duress, that he had not been given access to a lawyer and that the charges had been brought after he raised concerns over striking migrant workers in the country. Days after giving the interview, Ibhais – who had been released pending an appeal – was detained again. The process of his appeal began on 23 November. In a statement released to the Guardian two weeks ago the Qatar Supreme Committee for Delivery &amp; Legacy said: “Abdullah Ibhais’s claim that he was targeted for taking a position on a labour-related matter is a fabrication and a lie. “The allegations presented by Ibhais have no credibility. The case against Ibhais is rooted in evidence [of alleged manipulation and misuse of state funds], and has absolutely nothing to do with personal opinions or actions on labour-related matters.”Last week, the Labour MP Naz Shah observed that “Islamophobia has now passed the ‘mainstream media test’”. The report published this week by the Muslim Council of Britain’s Centre for Media Monitoring shows that she’s right. Consider some of the most egregious cases cited in the report. There was the Times, Telegraph, MailOnline and Express libelling a Scout group leader, Ahammed Hussain, in 2019, using a laundry list of anti-Muslim tropes; these included “allegations about using the Scout group to promote extremism, segregation of children, extensive links to antisemitic groups, and inviting banned preachers to the Mosque”. Or take the Mail on Sunday, which called council worker Waj Iqbal “a fixer” for paedophile taxi drivers in Rochdale. As he put it, his whole world crumbled, he lost his job, his “marriage ended and [he] couldn’t see [his] kids”. The impact of this kind of reporting cannot be overstated. While nothing can repair the harm caused, in both cases, the publishers had to pay very substantial libel damages and print apologies. Many other similar examples published in the report show how Muslims have been compelled to take libel action against newspapers, and have won. If one considers the hundreds of thousands of pounds paid to settle these claims, what does this tell us about the price they are willing to pay to misrepresent Muslims? Some might say those are only the worst cases, not indicative of the media as a whole. Yet the report dispels this myth by showing how widespread the issue is, based on excruciatingly detailed analysis of more than 48,000 print articles and 5,500 TV clips that mentioned Muslims or Islam. Sixty per cent of the articles and almost half of all clips analysed associated negative aspects and behaviour with Muslims or Islam, with terrorism or extremism being the most common theme. Little wonder Islamophobia is so common in society. When we see the scale of the problem and understand its source, silence should not be an option. The easiest step, but one rarely taken, is the calling out of Islamophobes or those who propagate Islamophobia in the media. They are often found in the op-ed pages of rightwing newspapers and magazines, writers for whom Muslims are rarely seen as individuals but are representatives of a homogenous and sinister group. But it can also be seen in the pursuit of specious stories and narratives on the front pages of supposedly serious newspapers. Then there are publications like the Spectator, which is known to have published generous articles about far-right politicians and movements. Rather than falling over themselves to attend the publication’s fancy soirées, MPs and journalists should be holding it to account. It is not all doom and gloom. There are areas where we see improvements. There have been fewer anti-Muslim front pages in recent years, the MCB issues a smaller number of complaints than we have historically, and there have been positive editorial choices from right-leaning news outlets. These include the Sun’s explanatory boxes to provide context for complex topics, the presence of Muslim people clapping for the NHS alongside their work colleagues on the front page of the Daily Telegraph, and the Daily Mail calling out a “far-right activist” on its front page. But while these positives – some of which may be because media outlets know they are being monitored – are tactically valuable and extremely important, long-term change needs to be structural. The start of this journey is acknowledging the problem from the very top. And, in a difficult landscape, it has been important to see the courage of some of Fleet Street’s editors: Gary Jones, the editor of the Express, acknowledged in 2018 his newspaper had contributed to an “Islamophobic sentiment” in the media; Emma Tucker, the editor of the Sunday Times, welcomed this week’s report “in the full knowledge that it contains criticisms of the press, my own paper included”; and Alison Phillips, the editor-in-chief of the Mirror, acknowledged at the launch of this report that things have to change, laying out a series of steps her paper is taking. Structural change also involves newsrooms looking more like the society we live in. Research from 2016 showed that 0.4% of journalists are Muslim (a tenth of what it should be proportionately) – and diversity schemes, such as the Aziz Foundation’s apprenticeship programme, have their part to play. However, ultimately, our hope is for adherence to basic principles of journalism and responsible reporting: the need to be sceptical, with an ear for when stories “just sound wrong” and warrant further checking; the desire to consider the real-world, social ramifications of using certain images or giving certain words prominence in headlines; and the importance of editors taking a holistic view of their coverage to reflect on whether they truly reflect their outlet’s objectives. Editorial will, training, checks and balances, and appropriate policies and style guides can make this happen. We’re asking for fairness, not favours. It’s not too much to ask. Miqdaad Versi is the founder of the Muslim Council of Britain’s Centre for Media MonitoringDirector Matthew Xia’s updated staging of The Wiz – the 1970s “super soul musical” based on The Wizard of Oz – begins, like MGM’s beloved film of L Frank Baum’s children’s book, in a world drained of colour. Kansas is the name of the grey tower block where Dorothy lives with her Aunt Em and Uncle Henry, watching news footage of Black Lives Matter protests flicker across the TV in black and white. Though this opening reflects struggle, Xia’s revival is ultimately an ode to Black joy. From the moment Dorothy lands in Oz – a vivid urban landscape of street art and neon lights – the show bursts into full theatrical Technicolor. Charlie Smalls’ and William F Brown’s adaptation of The Wonderful Wizard of Oz was a 70s celebration of African American culture. Xia and his team shift that celebration to the here and now, adding more recent cultural references, expanding the frame to include Black British experiences, and situating the magic and wonder of Oz firmly within the city environment. Against the brightly painted brick walls of Simon Kenny’s set, Dorothy (an infectiously warm Cherelle Williams) makes her way down the yellow brick road towards the Emerald City. In a strong central quartet of performances, she’s joined by Jonathan Andre’s strutting yet scaredy-cat Lion, Tarik Frimpong’s fluid-limbed, back-flipping Scarecrow and Llewellyn Graham in an impressive professional debut as the Tin Man. They’re backed by an ensemble with serious moves, not to mention some belting vocals. The show’s opening minutes feel a little sluggish, but once we’re transported to Oz the energy rarely lets up. The music (with new orchestrations by Sean Green) and the dancing are the stars here, making up for the patchiness of Brown’s book. Leah Hill’s choreography is responsible for many of the most memorable moments, from the vogueing inhabitants of the Emerald City to the Wicked Witch of the West’s breakdancing gang of winged monkeys. This is smart festive programming from Hope Mill: colourful fantasy with an injection of contemporary popular culture. At the end of a year that’s often felt grey and drab, The Wiz is a welcome escape. At Hope Mill theatre, Manchester, until 16 JanuaryRalf Rangnick will take charge of his first match as Manchester United’s interim manager when Crystal Palace visit on Sunday after the paperwork regarding the German’s employment was completed on Thursday. Rangnick has been granted a work visa and is expected to be in the stands on Thursday when United host Arsenal for an 8.15pm kick-off in Michael Carrick’s third and final game as the caretaker manager. United have dropped to 10th place, 15 points behind the leaders, Chelsea, and six points from a Champions League berth with a game in hand. Rangnick’s brief will be to stabilise the team and aim for a top-four finish before he ends his tenure at the end of the season and starts a consultancy role. “I’ll try to make the most of it,” Carrick told MUTV of Thursday’s game. “But actually it’s about the players, the team and getting the right result.”“This is what it’s all about,” said Richard Bevan, beaming. “To see this many seals when 10 years ago there would not have been any.” Bevan is a zoologist surveying the shore of Inner Farne island off the coast of north Northumberland. As far as the eye can sea there are about 100 female grey seals and their dependant pups. In the water hopeful males splash about, none more obvious than a dominant bull with a roman nose and scar. “We’ve called him Pacino,” said a ranger. It is a joyous, gloriously noisy scene and, experts say, a vivid illustration of a British conservation success story. The Farne Islands are home to one of England’s largest grey seal colonies and have the longest history of seal pup counting. This week National Trust rangers – helped for the first time by thermal imagery technology – were completing a crucial count, which did not take place last year because of the pandemic. In 1956 there were 751 pups counted. In 2019 there were 2,823. This year, the expectation is that there will be many more, making it a record year for grey seals on the islands. “It is looking that way,” said Bevan, a senior lecturer at Newcastle University. “Some of the outer island groups look incredibly dense.” The grey seal was the first animal to be protected by modern UK legislation with the Grey Seals Protection Act of 1914. About 50% of the world population now lives in British and Irish waters. The recent Storm Arwen had a devastating effect on some UK grey seal colonies with more than 800 pups estimated to have died at St Abb’s Head in the Scottish borders. Remarkably, the Farne Islands colony appears relatively unscathed. The population density feels almost otherworldly, Bevan said. “It happens in Antarctica, it happens in the Galapagos islands.” It also happens in the UK. “This is on our doorstep and it is phenomenal.” There is a magic about the animals, said Bevan. “I love grey seals and I love the sound that they make. It’s ethereal… this low keening call. Ooooughoooough…. especially when its misty and you can’t see anything. “To see the mothers with the pups and the pups themselves going from being small white floppy sacks to these bubbles of fat in three weeks. Then they start moulting… they are gorgeous.” The population is growing because grey seals are the opposite of fussy eaters and have no predators. Until the 1980s there might be the occasional orca on the hunt but not today. That’s not to say life is anything but tough for a seal pup with 50% not making it past the first year. “It is just such a harsh environment,” said Tom Hendry, a ranger. “ It is partly down to how good and experienced the mothers are. It’s not nice coming across the dead ones but it’s just part of the job, you get used to it.” For the first time a thermal imagery camera attached to a drone is being used to, it is hoped, improve the accuracy of the count. Rangers count the pups every four days and have continued to physically spray them, a job which comes with an element of jeopardy given how protective mothers can be. “I have had some close calls in the past,” said Hendry. “Because the colony is getting denser and denser it gets a lot more difficult to get in there and spray them safely.” A seal bite is not something anyone would want. “They have got substantial teeth which can do a lot of damage,” said Bevan. Plus bacteria from the mouth of a seal can cause horrific, not for the squeamish, infections. The Farnes, a rocky outcrop of islands about two miles off the coast, have been looked after by the National Trust since 1925. Now is the time of grey seals and in April the puffins arrive for their breeding season. Precise figures from the grey seal count are expected by February next year.EU authorities can cut funds to member states that are corrupt and curb independent courts, a senior adviser to the bloc’s top court has said. In a setback for the nationalist governments of Poland and Hungary, a European court of justice senior lawyer said a law linking EU funds to respect for the rule of law was legally sound. The opinion by an ECJ advocate general called on the court to dismiss a challenge from Hungary and Poland against a law that allows Brussels to block EU funds to member states that fail to guarantee independent courts or institutions that can investigate corruption without fear or favour. The court usually follows the opinion of its advocates general and is expected to issue a final verdict early next year. The law was agreed in December 2020 because net contributors to the EU budget such as Germany and the Netherlands feared that Hungary and Poland were no longer able to guarantee correct spending of EU funds. The governments of the two central European states, which are net beneficiaries of EU funds, have increased executive control over their judicial systems while alleged corruption and conflicts of interest have been left unexamined. The timing of the opinion is acutely sensitive as EU authorities are sitting on billion-euro coronavirus recovery plans for Hungary and Poland but will not release the cash because of long-running disputes on the rule of law. A Polish government minister reacted angrily to the opinion. “This is robbery against the rule of law that they want to defend,” said Sebastian Kaleta, the deputy justice minister. “The opinion of the advocate general of the CJEU [court of justice] clearly aims to sanction an extra-treaty conditionality mechanism. It was naive to trust EU institutions that they would be capable of self-limiting.” The chief spokesperson for the Hungarian government Zoltán Kovács said: “This is not a verdict, just an opinion. We hope that ECJ will base its judgement solely on legal arguments, it won’t follow the AG’s erroneous arguments.” The ECJ advocate general dismissed these arguments, saying there was nothing to prevent the EU from defining the rule of law more precisely in a specific area such as implementing a budget. “The discretion of the EU institutions covers that legislative choice, which cannot be regarded as manifestly incorrect, since compliance with the principles of the rule of law may be vitally important for the sound operation of public finances and the proper implementation of the union budget,” the court said in a statement. The advocate general noted there was a “sufficiently direct link” between the rule of law and budget, as the law did not cover any violation of the rule of law but only those that jeopardised the sound management of EU funds. The opinion puts pressure on the European Commission to step up action against Poland and Hungary. Last month the commission wrote to both governments requesting information about measures to control judges and prosecutors. The letter to Poland asked for statistics on how many cases of fraud and conflict of interest in relation to the EU budget had been investigated, while raising numerous questions about the independence of the judiciary. Addressing Hungary’s government, EU officials reported that they had seen “systemic deficiencies and weakness” in the management of EU funds and raised concerns that Hungarian authorities were failing to act on these problems. The commission’s questions about conflict of interest follow longstanding reports that the prime minister Viktor Orbán’s friends and family have grown rich on overpriced EU-funded contracts. The European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, has promised to defend the rule of law but is facing a growing tide of complaints that she has failed to act. Responding to the opinion, Daniel Freund, a German Green MEP and longstanding transparency campaigner, said sanctions against Poland and Hungary should have been triggered months ago. “Dear @EU_Commission: do not delay it any further,” he tweeted.Mark, 63, Milton Keynes Occupation Retired IT and quality manager Voting record The original floating voter: last time Mark voted Green; on social issues he says he’s centre or left of centre; on economic issues centre or centre-right Amuse bouche Won a national motor racing championship a few years ago Julian, 55, Milton Keynes Occupation Taking a year’s sabbatical from work after surgery for cancer Voting record Mainly Lib Dem, but in the last local elections he spoiled the ballot paper “because I was so disheartened with everybody” Amuse bouche In his youth, Julian too tried to be a racing driver, “but I was much better at raising the money than actually doing the racing” For starters Mark He voted remain, I voted leave, but I’m not one of these people who thinks the EU is a complete waste of time and things were massively better in or out. For me the two main issues were not having to follow EU laws and regulations that we think are not in our interests, and being able to set our own level of immigration. Julian He said immigration takes away from the bottom of the pyramid because people come here and do jobs at a lower rate. And I kind of agreed with him, but you’re taking a very extreme view by saying we’re going to cut our freedom of movement. We’ve cut ourselves off from the people who come here and enrich our culture. Mark I used to be a foster parent, and I have a family member who works in social housing. Many services are struggling and there are a lot of people in difficult circumstances. I can’t see how increasing the population by more than a quarter of a million a year, or whatever it was before Brexit, is going to do anything except make that worse. Immigration should be lower – 50,000 to 100,000 – and based on jobs that are in short supply. The big beef Julian I think the national lottery is a tax on the poorest people in society. As a Christian, I’m not in favour of gambling – I don’t think that’s what we are called to do. Mark I’m a bit biased because I used to work for Camelot. We would see the big winners arrive at the headquarters and you could see it made a massive difference to their lives. Julian The lottery justifies itself by being good for society, but when you look at who funds it, it’s the poorest in society desperately trying to solve their problems by winning the lottery. I feel that it’s fundamentally wrong. Mark The sums of money raised for good causes are vast. Some of that goes to modest things – they might buy musical instruments for a town band, or renovate a house that a famous person lived in. And it’s regulated. You’re not allowed to pay on a credit card, only a debit card – that’s to stop people getting into debt. Julian There are other ways of raising money. I’ve worked in the philanthropic sector for eight years and there is plenty of money if you know where to look for it. Sharing plate Mark On the climate, we agreed there needed to be more incentives to get people to change. Where I live, quite a few people have solar panels and electric cars – but if it’s only 5% or 10% of the population it’s not going to make much difference. Julian I had a 10-year-old diesel. I couldn’t afford to go electric so I changed it for a Ulez-compliant diesel, with less than a quarter of the emissions, yet my road tax is £300 more because it’s a new car. Instead of sticks you need carrots. For afters Mark I wouldn’t be upset if the royal family were just abolished and had to go and live in an ordinary house and not have fancy titles, though it’s useful to have a non-political head of state. Julian Look into the royal family and you realise that things like the Duchy of Cornwall make a profit, so Prince Charles and his staff don’t drain the public purse. And he’s done great things with the Prince’s Trust. Takeaways Mark It’s nice to have a meaty, in-depth discussion and find differences but keep it constructive and pleasant. Julian A divide is not as wide when you meet face-to-face as it is when you meet online. Bringing people together is a great way to create constructive dialogue, especially when you disagree: discourse creates solutions. Additional reporting: Naomi Larsson • Mark and Julian ate at Brasserie Blanc, Milton Keynes Want to meet someone from across the divide? Click here to find out moreBoris Johnson appeared to be at odds this week with leading scientists and one of his most senior health officials, who advised the British population to cut back on unnecessary socialising in response to the Omicron variant. After the prime minister said people should not cancel nativity plays or Christmas parties and focus on getting booster jabs and wearing masks instead, four people share their views about attending seasonal social events, and whether they have concerns about mixed government messaging. ‘Limiting social contact is important’ Simon Nicholson, 60, a lecturer from Derby, is vaccinated, but has some pre-existing health issues and is taking the prospect of a potentially dangerous new Covid-19 variant very seriously. “There are a couple of parties I won’t be going to, and I also won’t be making plans I normally would at this time of year. “The whole concern over this variant is that it might be more transmissible and vaccines do not offer as much protection. So limiting social contact is important.” Amid mixed messaging from the government, Nicholson is paying close attention to information from other sources about the threat of Omicron. “I have friends in the medical profession I listen to,” he said. “They are concerned, not panicking, but they’re definitely saying Christmas parties would be a silly idea. “I’m doing a part-time degree at Oxford University, which is very good at keeping students informed. They have said Christmas parties are currently scheduled to go ahead, but are strongly encouraging people to do lateral flow tests before attending, and to only come in when necessary.” ‘It’s now a personal choice about personal risk’ Ben, 30, a PR consultant from London, disagrees. “I’m absolutely planning to attend parties and social events regardless of the variant, and will be going to as many as possible to make up for the horrendous ordeal last year. “Unfortunately, that decision is being taken out of my hands by employers and policymakers who have been scared into warnings and premature cancellation of parties over very little.” His office Christmas party was postponed recently, an event Ben, who works a hybrid pattern, but goes into the office as much as possible, was looking forward to. “Too many have no sense whatsoever how challenging the last 18 months have been for young people. It’s been genuinely amazing for my mental health to socialise again. In my view, it’s now a personal choice about personal risk.” ‘People really need clarity’ For Carola Becker in the south-west of England, with the exception of one small private gathering where she will be able to socially distance with friends, she has decided to decline all invites to Christmas parties and events. “I’ve been careful from the very start of the pandemic and continue to be,” she said. The 53-year-old nutritionist, who is self-employed, said one of the reasons she would not be socialising as much this year was because she could not afford to lose work. “If I were to catch Covid and maybe even end up with long Covid, I wouldn’t be able to take time off work for weeks, let alone longer. “It’s not that much of a massive sacrifice for me – I like going to parties but I’m not overly sociable. Nobody’s really asked why I’m not going. Thankfully it’s that season where everyone’s so busy people are just assuming I’m going somewhere else.” She had concerns about the advice from Dr Jenny Harries, the head of the UK’s Health Security Agency, to cut back on “unnecessary socialising”. “It’s not particularly clear guidance,” said Becker. “We’re in a very dangerous situation at the moment and people really need clarity. I feel terribly sorry for the hospitality industry – they’re suffering massively – and people of course are suffering with their mental health. But I think we have to go through periods where we reintroduce restrictions, one way or another, in order to bring this country and the world back on its feet.” ‘We don’t know how much the vaccines will protect us’ Gareth Jenkins, 46, from York, works in IT and was undecided about attending his work Christmas party, until news of the Omicron variant hit. The office Christmas party to be held in a pub with around 25 people was cancelled at the end of last week, due to lack of interest in attending, which Jenkins thought was likely to have been fuelled largely by people’s concerns about the current state of play. “They’re normally pretty well attended and enjoyed,” he said. “I was about 50-50 about attending any parties, then Omicron definitely made me decide not to go at all. “I feel at this stage a solid approach of caution is best. We just don’t know how resistant the new variant is to the vaccines.” Jenkins had also cancelled plans to go Christmas shopping in York, opting for online-only shopping instead. “The extra risk doesn’t seem worth it. I have concerns that the government’s mixed messaging is going to cause worry and uncertainty, along with more problems down the line. “Clearly the experts are concerned, and clearly they believe that unnecessary in-person social interactions should be kept to a minimum until we know more about the new variant. It rather seems that the government is prioritising a ‘jolly Christmas’ line over preventing spread of the new variant.”On the surface at least, British TV is finally waking up to race. The success of a new wave of proudly Black British programmes such as Steve McQueen’s Small Axe and Michaela Coel’s I May Destroy You, allied with bold new diversity initiatives such as Channel 4’s Black to Front has had a huge impact in terms of demonstrating the commercial and critical viability of shows centring the Black experience. At this critical juncture for media diversity, the Guardian spoke to five Black and Asian Britons in the industry about their experiences: the discrimination they have faced and whether they have hope for the future. The director After a decades-long career in the arts, I have never experienced such abject racism as in TV and film. Every year, all the channels have commissioning briefings where they talk to the elite Black production companies as if we are amateurs. Often when we pitch an idea they’ll pair us with a major production company, as if we need a helping white hand to make our own ideas work. It’s a world away from the collaborative tone they use with their “preferred partners”, the major production houses with almost exclusively white staff. They speak to us as if we’re just there to tick a box. For a long time the solution to diversity was seen as more visibility, more Black people in roles; add another Black family to the cast of EastEnders or Coronation Street. What’s really needed is a diversity of content made by a diversity of people. People don’t mind you being in front of the camera, as an actor, or presenter; that’s not a threat. But when you’re a producer or director, that’s when the real issues arise. I remember one incident where I was given a later call time than everyone else. The series producer held a meeting before I arrived when he told the entire crew that I was inexperienced, that they weren’t to listen to anything I told them and that they had to check everything with him. Bear in mind I’m the only Black man on set; 99.9% of people on my sets have never worked with a Black director before. The actor Acting is a hard profession that discriminates against everyone across the board. I remember as a young actor, attending a training workshop where they talked about your casting bracket; how the industry sees you basically. They went round, putting the young blond women in “ingenue’’, or a working-class person into “street”. They got to me, the only person of colour in the room, and mine was simply “Asian”. Like a lot of south Asian actors, I ended up in the “geek” box. One agent told me: “It doesn’t matter how good looking you are, you will only play geeks.” Another freaked out in a meeting, saying: “You’re not what I was expecting. You’re far better looking.” Since when was that an issue for an actor? But it’s been a burden my entire career. When they were casting Aladdin in 2019 there was a lot of “we can’t find any brown actors that can play this part”. Can you imagine if they applied that logic to Harry Potter? No, they’re excited to find new young talent. Besides, when they’re casting terrorists they don’t seem to have a problem finding brown actors. Bodyguard, for example, tried to argue that having a Muslim woman terrorist was serving female empowerment. What a reach! Poor representation has real-world consequences, for real Muslims – including people in my family. For them the hijab is not a costume. The film-maker I have been told by powerful people in the industry that only a small percentage of actors have the charisma to be on TV. Is the implication that only white people have what it takes? I think there is a tendency for people at the BBC and ITV to point towards the exceptions, as if to say that there isn’t a problem, that “it is happening for ‘my people’.” I’ve even been questioned as to whether there’s “a talent base” among people of my ethnicity. I have been called an agitator more times than I can count, as if I want to make my life more difficult. As if I don’t realise that speaking out mainly harms me. I’ve accepted now that my career will probably never recover but it’s frankly ridiculous the amount of time us British-born Chinese people have to spend faking a Chinese accent just to make ends meet. Time and time again we are forced to pretend we don’t speak English as a first language. With Asian people a lot of the time we see racism as a mark of shame, like we’re somehow responsible for it. Even within the community, there’s a sense that racism is brought on by the way people conduct themselves. I don’t blame people who think that; it’s a survival instinct as much as anything. They think the route to the top is obvious: be quiet, accept what you’re given. The actor Micro-aggressions are rife on British film sets. As a Black woman, I made a personal decision to wear my hair natural, but the vast majority of hair and makeup departments lack the expertise to deal with afro hair. They don’t know the products, the tools or the styles well enough for us to feel confident that they can do the job. I have had to go on set with hair I’m not happy with; it’s upsetting but you need to be professional because you still have your job to do. It’s particularly hard when you can see that other actors are being catered to; you look in the mirror and know you’ve not received the same level of support or preparation. The problem isn’t with the stylists; I’ve never heard someone say: “I don’t want to learn how to do your hair.” But there’s an accessibility problem; the time to be learning that isn’t on a job. The solution is for education bodies to build this into the curriculum. What invariably happens in the UK is that you’ve been trained on caucasian hair and skin and that goes for the vast majority of minority ethnic artists, too. More diversity in crews would be a positive step towards greater openness, and greater awareness of how to address these issues with the required sensitivity. The drama school graduate You hear a lot about how diversity is a massive thing, that we’re in right now. For me that’s fuelled an identity crisis, because you feel like you’re suddenly going to be treated differently based on the way you look, when that’s exactly what you don’t want to happen. It really fucks with your brain. I am constantly being told that I’m trendy but then if I get a job, was that just because I’m ticking a box? If I’m not working, does that mean I’m completely shit? These are internal thoughts mostly, a reflection of my own prejudices. But it’s something I wouldn’t have to deal with if I was white. It’s great that the diversity conversation finally seems to be happening but there are still hardly any east Asian leads. It does feel like we’re way down the pecking order, so it’s incredible when you get a show like Squid Game. I loved that a Korean show was the most watched thing across the globe. But then it really gets to me; how can that show be so successful and yet it’s still so rare to see a British Asian family depicted on telly? I feel like the people in charge don’t think a show centred around us is relatable to a general audience. But someone’s got to take a chance; it’s not good enough for the British TV industry to rest on its laurels. I have graduated into the industry at a good time. Things are clearly changing. But honestly, I’ve already spent years suffering with my identity, hoping to God I wake up with blue eyes and blond hair – because that would solve all my problems. If you are a performer who experiences discrimination while working in the TV industry, you can report the incident and seek advice by visiting equity.org.uk/contact and selecting the relevant contact.Christmas parties and nativity plays may have been given the go-ahead by Boris Johnson, but a government minister had science on her side when she warned against festive kissing this Christmas. Speaking on ITV’s Peston, the work and pensions secretary, Thérèse Coffey, said: “We should all be trying to enjoy the Christmas ahead of us” but, “for what it’s worth, I don’t think there should be much snogging under the mistletoe.” Experts agree this would be a risky business – and not the only one. “Kissing is likely to pose a risk as you are inevitably in very close contact with each other,” said Catherine Noakes, professor of environmental engineering for buildings at the University of Leeds, and a member of Sage. “However, sharing the same air and interacting together in a poorly ventilated room with multiple people is probably a higher risk because in most events this happens far more frequently than very close contact,” she said. “Inhaling the virus is a key risk, and so taking steps to reduce the number of people in a space and ensure that it is well ventilated are likely to be of greater benefit.” Prof Susan Michie, director of the UCL Centre for Behaviour Change and a member of the behavioural science advisory group Spi-B, also stressed the role of tiny viral aerosol particles in the transmission of Covid, warning these can hang in the air for many hours. “The biggest danger at Christmas parties is therefore people talking loudly, singing and laughing, and this may be from infectious people without symptoms,” she said. Dr Simon Clarke, an associate professor of cellular microbiology at the University of Reading, agreed that a Christmas schmooze is not the only risk to consider. Dancing is also problematic because of heavy breathing. “It’s a good idea to maintain, as much as possible, personal space and good hand and face hygiene. It needs to be remembered that the virus is easily transmitted from person to person in any close contact situation,” Clarke said. “Masks can help, as long as they are properly fitted and clean, but people shouldn’t expect them to be some sort of invincible barrier.” “This is not a matter of being the fun police,” he added. “You can just as easily catch Covid at a well-attended funeral wake as at a party.”England’s biggest theatres including the Royal Opera House, the National and Andrew Lloyd Webber’s sites in the West End have implemented mandatory mask-wearing as owners respond to the threat of the spread of the Omicron Covid variant. Theatregoers have not been required to wear masks but owners are moving to make them a compulsory requirement after the government’s decision to make face coverings mandatory in shops and on public transport from this week. The Royal Shakespeare Company was the first to make the move, announcing on Monday that face coverings are now required at its theatre in Stratford-upon-Avon, except for those under 12 years of age or those who are medically exempt. Other theatres followed, with announcements from the National, which requires masks to be worn in all areas of its building on the South Bank in London, the Royal Opera House, the English National Opera and the Old Vic. Lloyd Webber’s West End theatres also moved to mandatory mask-wearing, having previously operated a policy of requesting, but not enforcing, that theatregoers use face coverings. The RSC said that the impact of implementing the new policy has so far been limited, with only 30 people asking for refunds or to exchange tickets for a future show of the 6,000 who had booked to see its current production, The Magician’s Elephant. Theatre owners are set to keep the policy in place until at least 19 December, the date the government has set for a review of its guidance on face masks. People who are not wearing a face covering can be fined in the form of a fixed penalty notice and ordered to pay £200. Under the current government mask-wearing rules, hospitality venues remain exempt, including pubs, restaurants and cafes. The advertising boss Sir Martin Sorrell has criticised the government for a lack of guidance on masks, saying that it should be extended to settings including restaurants, hotels and events and conferences. “Mask-wearing, I think, to some extent helps, and we are just not implementing it and people are not taking the measures,” he said. “We should be very cautious at this particular point in time, I think.”Austria’s former chancellor Sebastian Kurz, who has dominated his centre-right People’s party (ÖVP) and his country’s political life for the past five years, has unexpectedly announced he is leaving politics. Slick, suave and long seen as a political wunderkind, Kurz became one of the world’s youngest democratically elected heads of government at 31 in 2017, but resigned as chancellor in October after being placed under investigation on suspicion of corruption. On Thursday, he stepped down from his remaining posts as head of the ÖVP and parliamentary group leader, saying he had decided to quit politics in order to focus on his family life. He recently became a father. He pushed back strongly against public and media criticism and the allegations of corruption. “As chancellor you have so many decisions you have to make every day that you know early on that you will also make wrong decisions,” he said. Describing himself as “neither a saint nor a criminal”, he added in an unusually long statement: “You’re always under observation. You also constantly have the feeling you’re being hunted.” Kurz stepped down as chancellor under strong pressure from his coalition partner, the Greens, after anti-corruption investigators searched offices at the chancellery, the finance ministry, his party headquarters and a powerful publisher. Prosecutors suspect that a network of conservative politicians around Kurz used funds from the finance ministry’s public purse to buy favourable newspaper coverage and to “finance partially manipulated opinion polls” to boost his and the ÖVP’s image. The tabloid Österreich has denied it guaranteed favourable coverage of Kurz and his party in exchange for taxpayers’ money, but it was reportedly paid €1.33m (£1.13m) for advertisements placed by the finance ministry over the past two years alone. Prosecutors say Kurz, who is under investigation on suspicion of giving false statements and breach of public trust, has denied any wrongdoing. Nine other individuals close to the former chancellor, as well as three organisations, are also under investigation, suspected of varying degrees of corruption and bribery. Kurz’s fall from grace has been as swift as was his rise. State secretary for integration at 24 and foreign minister at 27, he became ÖVP leader in May 2017 and chancellor six months later, and rebuilt the party around him. He entered into a power-sharing agreement with the xenophobic far-right Freedom party in his first term, a coalition that collapsed in 2019 when the populist party became engulfed in a different corruption scandal. Kurz said in his resignation statement that the accusations had hindered his ability to work, requiring him to spend his last months in office “defending [myself] against accusations and proceedings, and no longer competing for the best ideas”. His successor as chancellor, Alexander Schallenberg, a career diplomat, had been widely considered a placeholder until Kurz could clear his name and return to office. The interior minister, Karl Nehammer, will succeed Kurz as party chair.It’s approaching half-time at Elland Road on Tuesday night and Leeds United have a free-kick deep in the Crystal Palace half, about halfway between the corner flag and the penalty area. It could only be described as “in a dangerous position”. Raphinha stands over it. “This is going to get whipped in with unbelievable pace, that’s my prediction,” says a supremely confident Ally McCoist. The Brazilian raises his right hand and proceeds to smash the ball about 30 yards over everyone and out for a goal-kick. You can hear McCoist start to laugh. “OK,” says a deadpan Jon Champion. “We can wind back and you can redo that bit if you like.” “Well actually I’m standing by it. I didn’t say how high it was going to go … there was a lot of pace on it … ” At which point McCoist creases with laughter. It is impossible not to laugh with him. It’s a wonderful moment. A drab football match brought to life by a master of the craft. It’s a busy week for him – he’s is still trending on Twitter the day after the Merseyside derby. Delivering joyous co-comms is one thing – single-handedly turning a social media platform into a positive and friendly place is quite another. It is interesting that more people are tweeting about the bloke talking about the game than the game itself. It feels harsh on Diogo Jota and Jordan Henderson but the analysis of the analysis often piques our interest more than the thing we’re meant to be discussing. Having hosted numerous shows on TalkSport with him I can confirm that Ally is everything you’d hope and expect – warm, funny, smart, self-deprecating. So there is no objectivity here but he appears to have achieved the unachievable in sports broadcasting – taking obvious historic rivalries aside – to be universally loved. I can say with categoric certainty that I do not know that feeling. But who does? Barry Davies? Jeff Stelling, perhaps? Ally’s prime week follows the increasingly high-pitched debate between Roy Keane and Jamie Carragher about Cristiano Ronaldo on Super Sunday. Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink’s widening smile is a complete joy. The camera zooming in as Carragher yells: “WHAT’S THE POINT OF SIGNING HIM?” with an unyielding Scouse urgency. Having been caught in a Jonathan Wilson loop on the subject for the last few months I find myself firmly in the Carragher camp when it comes to Ronaldo. But the row is so loud and intense you almost forget what they’re talking about by the end. It’s got to be something more important than football. The scene wraps perfectly with Dave Jones patting Keane three times on the thigh – finishing with a gentle clench. “Time to go,” as if he’s trying to get a five-year old to leave a friend’s birthday party. How long did Dave spend debating whether and when to go in for the triple pat? It’s a brave move. We’ve seen Keane react to less. The timing is perfect. And most important it’s great television. How much analysis do you need when you’ve got Roy Keane shouting: “Cups. Cups. CUPS”? The following day the Guardian Football Weekly podcast received more questions about that than virtually all of the weekend’s Premier League action. Are they staged, choreographed and pre-arranged? Is Keane becoming a parody of himself? Should pundits be shouting like Arsenal Fan TV? The real question is does any of that matter – if it’s engaging and entertaining, then crack on. Not many TVs will be turned off during that exchange. At half-time or full time you’re competing with kettles, toilets, pubs, second screens – you have to make an impact. Keane might not be challenging McCoist for universal love – but in broadcasting terms he absolutely has it. There are many ways to be a brilliant pundit. What is your role? How does the team fit together? What’s the chemistry? From the rage of Keane to the joy of Ian Wright. The tactical nous of Emma Hayes or sheer happiness to be at the football conveyed by McCoist. I’m currently in Australia hosting the Champions League coverage for Stan Sport alongside two brilliant pundits – Craig Foster and Mark Bosnich. Foster is a forensic analyst who can pick apart tactics mid-game and explain them in a straightforward and engaging way at half-time, with the Monday Night Football-style touch screen. Bosnich brings an energy and an infectious joy to covering football at five in the morning – as well as the experience of playing at the absolute highest level. They’re very different and that’s why it works. There’s clearly a big disclaimer here – we’ve got at least two and a half more years of working together and I don’t want it to be awkward next Wednesday morning – but it is fascinating to watch them at work: to see what different things they’re looking out for and how quickly they see patterns in the game, how they complement one another, and how they discuss the same game in different ways. We have a wonderful obsession with who is talking about the game and how we talk about it. There’s a brilliant (award-nominated) podcast devoted to and called Football Cliches hosted by Adam Hurrey – painstakingly delving into the ludicrous minutiae of every bit of it. It picks apart the acceptable use of language – “the managers’ merry-go-round”, “downing tools”, “not even getting out of first gear”. If football isn’t a matter of life or death, then talking about it absolutely isn’t. So the key is to not take any of it particularly seriously. Because someone somewhere will hate you and tell you you’ve ruined the show, their day, their radio station, their TV channel, their life – or all of the above. Unless of course, you’re Ally McCoist.The Cabinet Office has been fined £500,000 by the UK’s data watchdog after the postal addresses of the 2020 New Year honours recipients were disclosed online. The Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) found officials failed to put in place “appropriate technical and organisational measures” to prevent the unauthorised disclosure of personal information in breach of data protection law. Prominent public figures who had their home addresses published on 27 December 2019 on the gov.uk website included Elton John, the cricketer Ben Stokes, NHS England’s then chief executive, Simon Stevens, the TV chef Nadiya Hussain and the former director of public prosecutions Alison Saunders. The inadvertently published list also included more than a dozen MoD employees and senior counter-terrorism officers. In its finding, the ICO said the personal data of more than 1,000 people was available online for a period of two hours and 21 minutes and it was accessed 3,872 times. The ICO said in its ruling on Thursday that the Cabinet Office removed the web link to the file once it became aware of the error, but that it was still cached and therefore accessible online to people who had the exact webpage address. At the time of the breach, the former work and pensions secretary Iain Duncan Smith, who was ennobled on the 2020 list and whose address was published, said it was a “complete disaster”. “The Cabinet Office’s complacency and failure to mitigate the risk of a data breach meant that hundreds of people were potentially exposed to the risk of identity fraud and threats to their personal safety,” said the ICO’s director of investigations, Steve Eckersley. “The fine issued today sends a message to other organisations that looking after people’s information safely, as well as regularly checking that appropriate measures are in place, must be at the top of their agenda.” The ICO said it had received three complaints from affected individuals who raised personal safety concerns, while the Cabinet Office was also contacted by 27 individuals with similar concerns. It said the exposure of honours recipients’ addresses was related to the Cabinet Office incorrectly installing a new IT system for processing honours. This meant that the system generated a CSV file – commonly used on spreadsheets – that included postal addresses. The ICO said the Cabinet Office had since improved the security of its systems. The largest fine imposed by the ICO was a £20m punishment for British Airways following a hack of customer data in 2018. Marriott Hotels was fined £18.4m, also following a data breach. A Cabinet Office spokesperson said: “The Cabinet Office would like to reiterate our apology for this incident … We take the findings of the Information Commissioner very seriously, and have completed an internal review as well as implemented a number of measures to ensure this does not happen again.”Chris Woakes has insisted England’s and Australia’s recent off-field scandals will be off-limits when it comes to sledging out in the middle during the Ashes. While the tourists have seen their preparations largely overshadowed by the allegations of racism at Yorkshire from Azeem Rafiq, their hosts will be led by a new Test captain in Pat Cummins after the emergence of Tim Paine’s past indiscretions in text messages. According to Woakes, one of the more mild-mannered cricketers on the international circuit, the seriousness of both matters should ensure that neither side looks to bring them up when the inevitable verbals fly during the heat of battle. “No, they definitely aren’t [trivial subjects],” said Woakes. “What’s happened around both camps, a lot of those issues are personal. Cricket is played best when that sort of stuff is left to the side and you let your skills do the talking. “An Ashes series always raises that rivalry between England and Australia. In my experience of playing in three Ashes series, I don’t think it’s overstepped the line once when I’ve been around. I don’t see it being any different. The cricket is always hard-fought and hopefully it’s a great series to watch.”One of the terrible ironies of the climate crisis is that some of the most beautiful – and popular – places in the world are also the most vulnerable. Which means as temperatures rise, extreme weather events increase, water sources dry up and natural habitats die, these places are facing another devastating loss: tourists. Tourism significantly contributes to the climate crisis – about 8% of global emissions – and hordes of visitors cause many more problems, including overdevelopment and degradation of natural areas. However, the revenue generated by tourists can bring enormous economic benefits to these destinations, many of which don’t have other forms of industry or would otherwise rely on extractive industries like mining or logging. Tourism can also bring awareness to environmental problems, such as coral reef bleaching or animal species at risk of extinction, and provide funding for conservation efforts. This complex relationship was highlighted during Covid-19, when tourism came to a standstill. Carbon emissions plummeted. Wildlife flourished. Leatherback turtles in Thailand laid the largest number of eggs in two decades. But all of this came with a cost. The global tourism industry was hit with an enormous loss, creating an emergency in developing countries. Families struggled to find food. Illegal logging increased in some places, as did poaching. As tourism starts to rebuild, it is becoming impossible to ignore that the future of the industry is inextricably linked to the climate crisis. The Guardian spoke to people working in tourist destinations around the world to ask how the climate crisis is affecting their industries and their worries for the future. Denali national park North of Anchorage, Alaska, US Every year, hundreds of thousands of tourists visit Denali national park, the home to the highest peak in North America. The park, which covers nearly 6m acres in central Alaska, has only one access point: a single winding road that stretches more than 90 miles. As rising temperatures have thawed the permafrost that lies beneath parts of the road, the road has rapidly deteriorated in recent years. In August, landslide movement forced the National Park Service to close the road at the halfway point and evacuate visitors trapped on the other side. “The road closed abruptly in late August, on a Tuesday,” said Simon Hamm, the president of Camp Denali, a wilderness lodge on the far side of the closure. “We were given until Friday to evacuate guests, and a few additional days to evacuate staff.” The closure ultimately cost the business $250,000 in lost revenue, and seasonal staff lost out on wages. A closure like this doesn’t just affect the lodge and the staff, said Hamm, but also the wider community. “We source a majority of our provisions from local fishers and farmers so we were unable to continue to support them.” In addition, the local education system gets funded partially through overnight accommodation taxes. Recently, the National Park Service announced the closure would continue through 2022, as they work on a long-term solution for the road. The climate crisis isn’t just causing landslides in Denali national park, but also tundra shrubification, increased wildfires and subsequent smoky conditions, drying of tundra ponds, electrical storm activity and the advance of non-native pests, such as the spruce bark beetle, which can cause disastrous tree die-off. “All of these degrade the natural environment,” Hamm explained. He predicted the tourism industry across Alaska will see declines in response to tourists’ awareness of climate change: “I can imagine that our clientele will become increasingly self-aware about carbon-intensive travel destinations such as ours.” Evia, Greece North of Athens Marina Valli, the owner of Eleonas hotel on the Greek island of Evia, says that as hotel owners and olive farmers, she and her husband have been seeing climate change in their daily life for years. “The beach is now very narrow as water is coming higher every year. The road that was once next to the beach is now dangerously disappearing. The olive trees do not produce fruits as much as they did a decade before. The flowers bloom earlier or later than we knew.” This summer, as Greece struggled with severe heatwaves and devastating fires, thousands of tourists were forced to evacuate at the height of the summer season. A video clip of tourists leaving Evia on a ferry in August as flames swept the island went viral. Valli’s hotel and olive grove on the northern end of Evia was damaged not once, but twice, by wildfire, forcing the couple to cancel weeks of guest bookings in August. Guests continued to cancel in September and October. “People were hesitant to visit us, fearing that the environmental disaster would prevent them from relaxing.” The cancelled bookings combined with the destruction of their olive groves, which they harvest and sell, resulted in a loss of €42,000 ($48,700). Valli and her husband moved to Evia from Athens 20 years ago to turn an inherited plot of land into an organic olive grove. “We wanted to protect the landscape,” she says. “We live by nature and not at the expense of nature.” To prepare for a future of increasing heat, Valli and her husband are searching for olive varieties that can survive higher temperatures. “We do not know the extent of the changes the climate will bring.” Solomon Islands East of Papua New Guinea The Solomon Islands is not only one of the most beautiful countries in the world, it’s also one of the most vulnerable to the climate crisis. It consists of nearly 1,000 islands, and the vast majority of the population lives less than a mile from the ocean, where they are seeing drastic rates of sea level rise, more than twice as high as global averages. In recent years, at least five islands have become submerged with another six severely eroded. Andrickson Trahair grew up on the Solomons, and now owns and operates a small dive shop and guesthouse with her husband, Andrew. She sees the effects of climate change every day: trees being washed away by the tides, the shoreline creeping closer every year – and when Andrew takes tourists out diving, he often comes home with stories of bleached and dead corals. Trahair says that even the winds are unpredictable and different from when she was a child: “The weather system in the Solomons has changed.” She worries that the climate crisis could have a huge impact on her business. “If there isn’t any coral, there won’t be any fish, then there’ll be less tourists to come to the Solomons as well,” she said. Historically, the main source of industry in the Solomon Islands has been logging; tourism has made up a fairly small part of the country’s GDP. But Trahair says that over-logging has forced more people to find new ways to make an income, such as tourism. “Now we rely too much on tourism because there are no trees.” The Trahairs are doing what they can to preserve the natural habitat of their home. In order to combat overfishing, they don’t allow spearfishing around the boundaries of their land. Andrew has started to transplant healthy corals in areas where the coral is bleached or dead. Some of the diving guests have come to help with the replanting. The Trahairs also speak with neighbors and villagers who live near them and encourage them to replant coral. “The coral replanting is doing really well,” Trahair says. “We try our best.” Victoria Falls The border of Zambia and Zimbabwe Victoria Falls is one of the most striking waterfalls in the world. More than a mile across, and over 350ft (107 meters) high, enormous cascades of water plummet over a ledge of volcanic rock. It’s one of the main tourist attractions in southern Africa, bringing about 1 million visitors a year to the area. But increasingly severe droughts caused by the climate crisis – and visitor concerns about climate impacts – have seen those numbers dwindle, leaving the local tourism sector worried about the future. Sydney Ncube, who works in the food and beverage department of the A’Zambezi River Lodge, says that drought causes food shortages that affect his industry. “Local farms couldn’t produce enough [fruits and vegetables] due to drought,” he said. For local tourism businesses, their fear of drought is twofold: the drought itself and the way the drought is reported in the media, further discouraging tourists from visiting and depriving the region of tourism dollars precisely when they need them most. In 2019, a reporter from Sky News filmed a segment at Victoria Falls showing only a trickle of water, talking about the impacts of climate change. John McMillan, the owner of Where To Africa, a tour operation company, said this segment had an enormous impact on the local tourism industry, even months later when the falls were flowing again. “Everyone was saying that the falls had dried up, which resulted in a spate of cancellations severely affecting [tour] operators.” In countries like Zimbabwe, home to endangered animals such as cheetahs, rhinos and elephants, impacts on the tourism industry can profoundly derail conservation efforts. “Conservation organizations rely on tourists to raise the necessary money to fund conservation and community development programs, and if tourism dries up, to a large extent so does the funding for this,” McMillan said. “On the other side of the coin, when the food sources of the local population disappear, it results in an increase of poaching incidents as the population struggles to find food and survive.” Great Barrier Reef Off the coast of north-east Australia The Great Barrier Reef is one of the most complex natural ecosystems in the world. It stretches 1,500 miles (2,400km) along the entire north-eastern coast of Australia and is made up of nearly a thousand islands and 3,000 individual reefs, ranging from shallow estuaries to deep sea water. In the past five years, the warming ocean waters have caused three major bleaching events. Tony Fontes has spent the last 40 years diving on the Great Barrier Reef and working as a Padi scuba instructor. He says the tourism industry in local areas is inextricably tied to the health of the reef. “A dead reef is not conducive to long term tourism.” Even though he says much of the reef is still in pristine condition, Tony points out that as long as coral bleaching is decreasing the number of healthy reefs, it will eventually end the local industry. “That would be a very sad day indeed. Not only would we have lost the greatest reef in the world, but Australia would lose its most important natural resource. The reef has an economic, social and icon asset value of A$56bn. It supports 64,000 jobs and contributes $6.4bn to the Australian economy.” In order for the tourism industry to advocate for reef conservation, Fontes says they first need to be willing to admit that the climate crisis a problem. “Many tourism operators don’t want to draw attention to the fact that the reef is less than pristine. It is almost like they believe that if they don’t talk about climate change, it will go away.” As the plight of the coral reefs becomes more well-known, that attitude is changing. “More tourism operators are running reef restoration programs, getting their guests involved in repairing damaged reefs and raising their awareness of the serious impact of climate change.” Fontes says he’s also seen operators switch to electric-powered boats, and even knows one operator who is building a boat that can run on hydrogen. Taking care of the reef isn’t just an altruistic act; for many of these dive boat operators, it’s fighting for their livelihoods. “There is no doubt that the health of the reef and the health of the dive industry on the reef are joined at the hip,” Fontes explains. “The reef dies, diving dies.”Sly and the Family Stone emerged in mid-60s San Francisco with a lineup that was trailblazing in its diversity and euphoric in its fusion of rock, soul, gospel, funk, jazz and psychedelia. After acelebrated Woodstock appearance in 1969, the outlandishly stylish bandleader Sly Stone retreated to a Los Angeles attic and much-mythologised drug-fuelled circumstances to record There’s a Riot Goin’ On, an album rich in militant social commentary and groundbreaking production techniques. It is now regarded as one of the 20th century’s finest albums in any genre. As a vinyl reissue celebrates its half-century, stars from different generations discuss the album’s impact on them, and how it continues to reverberate in pop music to this day. Nile Rodgers The statement that the album made to young Black America was one of positivity. A lot of the problems that we were facing – and unfortunately continue to face – we were starting to talk about and deal with directly in our pop music. Black artists traditionally didn’t have the freedom to do that, unlike white artists, but now Sly was at the vanguard of that. It felt like our time had come. You sure can dance to Family Affair, but it talks about the beautiful mosaic of people on Earth. The album was a revolutionary statement. It was liberating and gave a young artist like me, coming up, the ability to dream. PP Arnold I heard about Sly when I was in the Ikettes, touring with Ike and Tina Turner. He was a DJ playing the Beatles and the Stones alongside Ray Charles, soul and R&amp;B. The Family Stone were into fusion, and it felt very connected to unity, peace and racial equality. They were the first band to have a multiracial lineup of men and women. When Sister Rose [Stone, vocals] joined for Dance to the Music and did those great gospel harmonies with [the girl group] Little Sister, it changed the whole sound. They had hippy psychedelic pop, soul and rock. Every album got funkier and they changed the scene. They sang about the truth of what was going on. Towards the end of the 60s, civil rights, the Martin Luther King assassination and Vietnam affected everybody, and the drugs came in and changed things. You’d hear about death-threat rumours, gangsters, rip-offs. Sly had fallen out with the original band, and on songs like Just Like a Baby you can hear his vulnerability. (You Caught Me) Smilin’ is sad even though he’s smiling, because he’s lost. The drugs changed Sly’s voice, so on There’s a Riot Goin’ On there’s a gravelly, haunted vibe. It’s urban blues, but the love, innocence, fun and harmony is still in there. Greg Errico, drums, Sly and the Family Stone All the stories about the Riot sessions are true. It was a tumultuous time. The group was splintering and there was huge pressure on Sly to make another record just as we were breaking up. We had cut Family Affair and Thank You For Talkin’ to Me Africa with the original band the year before. Then Sly wanted to do it all himself, maybe realised it wasn’t such fun but couldn’t back down. It went from a traditional studio to the attic of his house – with all the chemicals. He’d knock on my door at 3 or 4am and say: “Come on, I’ve got this part. Get up, let’s start recording!” Other times he’d call the sessions off. Eventually I stopped going, which got him into using the drum machine. It was the kind of thing the guy in the lounge of the Holiday Inn would use to make lame music, but Sly used it very creatively. Starting the machine’s rhythm on an off beat turned the beat inside out and gave a unique sound. The music was darker because times were darker. When I first heard the finished album, I had a little attitude – “He should have stuck with us” – but gradually I realised it was really creative and lyrically he was talking about what was going on. I started listening with a smile on my face. Bobby Gillespie, Primal Scream The earlier hits such as I Want to Take You Higher or Everyday People were transcendentally joyous party records, affirmations of unity, whereas There’s a Riot Goin’ On is modern blues, a very dark record that reflected the fear, paranoia and disappointment of Black America. There was poverty, homelessness, drug addictions and the Vietnam war. Martin Luther King and Malcolm X had been shot. The American state was waging war against the Black Panthers. Marvin Gaye’s What’s Goin’ On was a plea for some kind of better day, whereas Sly’s record had a negativity to it. He holed himself up behind a wall of drugs and withdrew into himself. It’s very dense: a hermetic sound, not a lot of air in the production. He couldn’t write those joyous anthems any more. Things were too dark, socially and personally. There’s a resignation and understated anger to it, like Family Affair: “One child grows up to be somebody that just loves to learn / And another child grows up to be somebody you’d just love to burn.” Running Away is almost about addiction, maybe a warning to himself. It’s a suffocating record, but addictively intoxicating. Booker T Jones I saw Sly and the Family Stone at the Memphis Mid-South Coliseum in 1966 or 1967. It was just amazing. They had inventive horn lines, electronic sounds on the guitar and a Hammond organ. It was rock’n’roll and R&amp;B, with this boom-boom Sly shuffle groove which was like a locomotive. [The bassist] Larry Graham played high on the fretboard. They had songs with one chord and others that were structurally liberated, a kind of restrained wildness. The hits were so fresh. The social commentary made them important and poignant, with spiritual context. The message in Everybody Is a Star is so simple. His music had a knowledge of the human self. There’s a Riot Goin’ On drew on the music they made earlier, but it has a different dynamic. Sly was mixing genres and sounds from different sessions in the way we now use sampling. When he sings “My only weapon is my song”, in Poet, he recognises that we’re involved in a struggle and the songwriter has a responsibility to the world. To me, Family Affair addressed the big family of the human race and the caste system, which was going on right under our noses. Some people were thriving and others were being destroyed. In 1971, there was some bad shit going on, but he had the dark with this undiminished joyfulness. He was like a JS Bach or Duke Ellington, but in a different genre. Dennis Bovell When I was 17 or 18, this was the most progressive music around in terms of social comment and badass bass lines. It’s a revolutionary masterpiece and everything that came after has been touched by it. Larry Graham had invented thumping with the thumb and slap bass, and the horn riffs were to die for. Sly was the funk Hendrix. He was carrying a multiracial flag and some Black people didn’t want him playing with white guys. When I faced the same attitudes in [the multiracial late-70s band] Matumbi, we performed Thank You Falettinme Be Mice Elf Agin from Riot as a reggae song. I believe the opening line – “Staring at the devil, looking at his gun” – was based on a real life encounter with a cop. In the 70s, one of my friends brought Sly over to play a venue in Cheam [suburban south London]. They drove him to the gig in the limo and Sly said: “Take me back to the hotel. We don’t do bars.” He stood for no nonsense. Suzi Quatro When Dance to the Music came out, I was exactly the right age to listen to the radio and go: “Yeeeeaaaahhh!” Each instrument was like a little solo. He had the charisma, the moves, the horns, and half the band was actually his family. There’s a Riot Goin’ On was a surprise, but I like it when artists do that. Creativity doesn’t follow rules. I do wonder if he had the tools to cope with his fame. When someone like Sly, who was quite normal, gets famous, in his mind, [being] the not-famous one isn’t good enough – so he tries to become the famous one and obliterate the normal person. Steve Vai When I was nine or 10, Sly and the Family Stone’s Greatest Hits felt like an awakening, but even at that age it was obvious to me that there was a profound shift in the music for There’s a Riot Goin’ On. Later in life, I saw how that record was a perfect storm. It was driven by the political protest and social transition at the time, but also his inner demons and vast departures in the production technique. Sly was on a paranoid downer and started surrounding himself with thugs and marching to the beat of his own drum, alienating the band and bringing in Ike Turner, Bobby Womack and Billy Preston. Often, when a band or artist undergoes a big transformation, they can be a little bit more raw and honest. It can be both quasi-disastrous and have great merit, and that’s how I see Riot. His brilliance snuck through the debris. He had the nerve to open it with Luv N’ Haight, which basically falls apart. On some songs you can’t even hear the vocals in places, but that adds to the mystique. When you’re that creative, you see things so differently you’re almost hallucinating. The dark overtone expresses the way he was digging deep into his feelings, but you can feel the energy and be inspired by it. And a lot of people were. Johnny Marr I got into There’s A Riot Goin’ On towards the end of the Smiths. I was aware of the hits, but I’d never heard anything like it before. Sly had invented his own form – part-gospel, jazz, experimental proto-funk – and was way ahead of his time with the idea of a multiracial, multigender band. Family Affair is so laid back he’s almost falling out of the grooves. Greil Marcus called Sly Stone a “cultural politician”, but for me the album puts out a feeling of complete creative freedom – and there’s a power in that. For one of the biggest cultural figures in America to retreat into his own cocoon is very single-minded. The message needed to be heavy in the same way as it did in hip-hop in the 90s, but while the vibe is coming from the death of idealism, there’s not one song that’s explicit. Mere proselytising wouldn’t have connected. It’s genuinely countercultural and revolutionary and takes soul to the cosmos. People say the record sounds like it does because of his drug use, but you could argue that the drugs facilitated the vision. I don’t think such an important record was made by accident. Sananda Maitreya Hearing Riot for the first time led to the rebirth of my own horizons. It’s the perfect bookend to an era rife with inquiry and innovation. Its bold, brash intimacy predates the DIY ethos of hip-hop and lo-fi and its naked abrasions foreshadow the emotional landscape of punk and pushed jazz into another moulting of its feathers. It took massive balls to realise such a visionary achievement, one as mind-blowing then as it is now. It’s a soundtrack of the unravelling of a nation’s fabric, a document of a poet sharing his personal vision of hell but demonstrating that a phoenix from the ashes can shake off the sparks and turn them into stars. Baxter Dury He’d mastered his African and American influences and converged with pop and was galloping somewhere else. It was badly reviewed initially, and you can see why – because it was so dense. He was splitting apart, but the album captures the moment between the brilliance and the crash. Marvin Gaye’s album asked What’s Goin’ On and Sly answered There’s a Riot Goin’ On. He was perhaps more politicised, but devoted to cocaine and PCP [angel dust]. Guns and drug dealers at the house. He had a pit bull called Gun, which would bite anyone who went near him. It’s a grand story of decadence, but at the same time very sad. It robbed him of the great music he might have made later, but Riot – some of the best music ever made – split the atom. Moor Mother I was trying to learn about the music that came before [Riot] and came across a clip of Sly and the Family Stone doing I Want To Take You Higher live. I couldn’t believe how diverse and how good they were. We come from these kind of segregated places in terms of who’s allowed to do what or play what and he just didn’t recognise those boxes. The sense of freedom was so empowering and has inspired me enormously in terms of being free and taking in everything. He wasn’t bound by sound. The music and lyrics on Riot are like a collage. It’s like walking through different neighbourhoods, but makes you realise how connected everything is. It jumps around because we’re all included and it’s about raising our vibrations and calling us to attention. I love what hip-hop has been able to do with his music; tracks like the Roots’ Star, sampling Everybody Is a Star. There are no bad samples from Sly and the Family Stone. The music sounds fresh after 50 years because it’s the truth. When you hear Sly, you go to a different place. Howard Devoto, Buzzcocks / Magazine A friend who worked in a record shop in Leeds gave me a white label of Riot because it “wasn’t his thing”. I liked the singles, Family Affair and Running Away, then filed it away for a couple of years. A few years later, after I’d bought Funhouse by the Stooges, I dug it out again. I remember my flatmate Mark Roberts – who filmed the Sex Pistols gigs in Manchester – and I looking at each other and thinking: “This is a great record.” The darkness, decadence and nihilism resonated with what was going on in me, pre- and then post-punk. The emotional and spiritual terrain felt like familiar turf. It fascinated me how Sly had taken an earlier, upbeat-sounding song – Thank You Falettinme Be Mice Elf Agin – and turned it into Thank You For Talkin’ to Me Africa, almost a relentless dirge. We covered it in Magazine, rebranded with its original title, and performed it at the end of gigs as a “Thanks but no thanks for making me suffer it all again”. I love the album’s nursery rhymes, childish chants, gobbledegook, croaked vocals, mumbling and slurring, rasped asides. Time is my favourite Sly song of all: utterly exhausted, shrieking desperately. The guy sounds turned inside-out. It’s all unhinged – but great tunes and musicianship shine through. Mica Paris I always say the true artists and revolutionaries in music are the ones that create a sound that everyone else copies. In those days Black music was compartmentalised as jazz, soul or gospel. Chuck Berry and Jimi Hendrix were important because they were Black musicians playing rock, but Sly came from nowhere with a really funky soul-rock sound and all these genres meshed into one. Places where musicians wouldn’t normally go. He was one of a kind, totally eccentric, stylish and out there. If it wasn’t for Sly, there wouldn’t be George Clinton, Prince, Rick James. So many borrowed from Sly, but he was the first. Dave Okumu, the Invisible One of the first two albums I bought was De La Soul’s Three Feet High and Rising and they’d sampled Poet from There’s a Riot Goin’ On. The album has since become part of my DNA. So many ideas and so much that has inspired me seems to originate from this record. It’s the ultimate archive. I’m fascinated by the process where your creativity takes you through limitations and into a vision that seems out of reach, but where magical and mysterious things happen. Lee Fields Sly and the Family Stone took it to the edge in technology and music. I Want to Take You Higher was a gospel experience in pop. Riot was gospel, west coast, rock, funk and all sorts on the periphery. He was a millennium away from the rest of us normal human beings musically. Prince and Michael Jackson took his path with technology, along with everyone else. If you listen to music today, you can hear Sly. Nicolas Godin, Air There’s a Riot Goin’ On must be on of the first home studio albums. John Phillips from the Mamas and the Papas had installed recording gear in Sly’s mansion in Bel Air, and the musicians just took cocaine and made the record themselves. Sly bounced so many tracks down that the record ended up as lo-fi. Family Affair is the first [US] No 1 single to feature a drum machine, the Maestro Rhythm King. I have the exact model. It’s primitive, but grooves like a drummer, and he mixed it with live percussion – which of course subsequently became standard. It’s a chaotic album, with free, talented skilled musicians doing everything they have in mind. Half a century later, it’s an album we all listen to. Steve Gunn This album really spoke to me when I was younger, so it was fascinating to learn more about how it was made and the risks that were involved. He’d closed everything off to go into a different place of darkness and hope. He was tired of people giving him a hard time, probably burned out by the triumph at Woodstock and with huge labels breathing down his neck, waiting for this music. So he locks himself in his house and comes out with a fearless, experimental, mysterious record. He’s got a No 1 single [Family Affair] on it, nine-minute songs with drum machines, and the title track is a second of silence because he didn’t want a riot on the record. Speech, Arrested Development In the 90s I kept hearing these great drum sounds on hip-hop records and realised they came from Sly and the Family Stone. Their multiracial, multigender lineup was crucial to our evolution: without them, there would be no Arrested Development. Everyday People gave us a chorus for one of our songs [People Everyday] and so they became very dear to me. There’s a Riot Goin’ On is a ray of sunshine. It shows the humanity of the Black experience in a way that a lot of soul music of that time and today doesn’t. For me, Family Affair is about the ups and downs within a family. Just Like a Baby is so vulnerable and Running Away is so light and airy, yet it’s about hard times in American history for Black people. After the assassinations [of Martin Luther King and Malcolm X], the record to me is Sly Stone as an African American man retreating to the one common denominator, our humanity. Africa Talks to You (“The Asphalt Jungle”) is letting people in the asphalt jungles of Harlem or St Louis or Detroit know that there is hope and a sense of belonging. It was a brilliant, experimental exploration of sound and textures to wake us up. Lee Tesche, Algiers This record comes up a lot in conversation in the van or the studio, particularly with production. I remember listening to it on the way to school with my mom. I turned the band on to it and it seeps into what we’re doing. Sometimes, when there’s a lot of pressure, you rebel. You can hear the sound of stuff splitting at the seams. He had such a cavalier attitude – the weird panning, tape glitches and erratic sound levels, or the yodelling on Space Cowboy. The hi-hat sounds almost electronic, like you’d hear with later-70s bands like Suicide. For the vocals, he used a wireless lapel microphone and recorded them in bed. They’re so laid back, but raw and in your face. • A limited red vinyl edition of There’s a Riot Goin’ On is released on 3 December on Legacy RecordingsHomeowners in Ireland living in houses built with defective blocks that “crumble like Weetabix” say a compensation scheme unveiled by the government will still leave them with devastating bills of up to €80,000 (£60,000). A long-awaited redress scheme for the estimated 6,000 people living in homes that have to be demolished and rebuilt was unveiled by the government earlier this week. The government says the scheme will cost €2.2bn and means homeowners will bear no upfront costs. At first it appeared the government had met many of the demands of campaigners representing people whose homes were built with blocks containing too much of the mineral mica, which caused the blocks to crack and crumble. But after studying the details – in particular the inclusion of a tapering element to the bailout funds – the campaigners condemned the government’s scheme as a cynical attempt to grab positive headlines. Government funds for rebuilding are tapered from €145 a square foot for the first 1,000 square feet (93 sq metres) to €110 a square foot for the next 1,000 and €100 a square foot thereafter. Campaigners said this leaves major shortfalls for those whose homes need demolishing and rebuilding. “Just for the contractor alone this is going to cost me €79,000,” said Angeline Ruddy, acting deputy principal of a school in Carndonagh in Donegal, who lives in a house that will have to be demolished. “If I went to the bank looking for that they are going to laugh at me because my collateral is a house full of holes that is crumbling. “I am absolutely disgusted,” she said. “I cannot believe that after all these years trying to get redress, that the government has decided to treat us like this. This is shocking behaviour. She said she feels betrayed by her local MP, the agriculture minister Charlie McConalogue. “I do not know how he can drive through the town,” she said. “He knows the pain people are suffering yet doesn’t seem to take any responsibility at government level.” Across the town and hinterlands where Ruddy lives, houses are riddled with cracks and falling down owing to defective building blocks containing mica. The scheme announced two days ago was the culmination of a 10-year campaign by homeowners who discovered cracks in their new-build houses in the years after moving in. Many initially blamed the builders but it gradually emerged that the building blocks contained too much mica. The scheme was billed as the solution, with compensation of up to €420,000 a home. Paddy Diver, spokesperson for the Mica Action Group, said: “The only way this is going to be fixed is if the government brings in the housing authority to fix our houses.” He accused the government of acting in “bad faith” and said the sliding scale element was sprung on them and was not part of the consultation process. Campaigners are now talking about bringing a new protest “to close the streets of Dublin before Christmas” with possible support from lorry drivers and farmers. Sinn Féin MP Pearse Doherty, who is from Donegal, called on the government to scrap the sliding-scale plan and “go back to the drawing board”. He said the scheme was “no use to families”. Ruddy said the impact of the mica scandal on the mental health of both parents and children at her school was evident. “I had one child come up to me yesterday to say ‘my daddy is in a dark place’. I do not know where we go from here,” she said.The partner of a millionaire landowner and hotelier was left paralysed from the neck down after her son launched a prolonged knife attack on them both, a murder trial has heard. Anne Schreiber, 66, survived the attack by her son, Thomas Schreiber, an aspiring painter, but suffered damage to her spinal cord, while her partner, Sir Richard Sutton, 83, died after being stabbed repeatedly. Thomas Schreiber, 35, wept in the dock on Thursday as an emotional phone call he made to his older sister, Louisa Schreiber, while he was in prison on remand was played to the jury at Winchester crown court. He begged her not to hang up and said he wanted to hear how his mother was doing. He expressed his regret, saying: “I’m so sorry, it’s completely fucking madness … I’m waking up every day hoping to wake up from this nightmare … I completely lost control.” Louisa Schreiber, 40, told her brother: “She’s paralysed, Tom … from the neck down … She’s on a ventilator … I don’t know what the future holds for her. She’s got a spinal cord injury in her neck … She’s survived, against all the odds, but it’s whether she will ever move.” Schreiber, who accepts that he attacked his mother and Sutton on the anniversary of his own father’s death at Moorhill, the mansion he shared with them in Dorset, said he could not understand why she could not move. His sister told him: “Because she’s had a knife go into her neck.” She added there was a “possibility” that their mother would not be able to breathe without a ventilator for the rest of her life. Schreiber said: “I just completely lost it. That wasn’t me there that day … It was someone else, it was like a demon.” The phone call took place 20 days after the 7 April attack. The prosecution has previously described Anne Schreiber’s injuries as life-changing. Schreiber’s defence team has told the jury he denies murdering Sutton on the grounds of diminished responsibility or loss of control, claiming that long-running family tensions, the loss of his father, David, exactly eight years before the attack, and the stress of the Covid lockdowns contributed to his disturbed state of mind. He also denies the attempted murder of his mother. Schreiber’s other sister, Rose McCarthy, 36, told the court tensions grew as Sutton became frustrated at the “audacity” of the jobless Schreiber for taking handouts, including an allowance of £1,000 a month, while still criticising him and his mother. McCarthy said the relationship between Schreiber, his mother and her partner became a “vicious triangle” with the millionaire “consumed” with “the Tom issue”. Schreiber’s girlfriend, Sathia Pagliuca, said he felt hated by his family and hated them, believing them to be “liars, toxic, gold diggers”. On the day of the attack, he messaged Pagliuca to say he was visiting his father’s grave and was listening to the Queen song I Want To Break Free. After the attack, he rang her and said he was going to kill himself. She told him he should hand himself into the police, but he replied: “Should I live the rest of my life in prison?” Pagliuca replied: “It’s always best to live in prison … than to be a coward and take your own life.” The trial continues.10. Ecstasy (1933) In 1933, the Austrian star Hedy Lamarr (who also had a remarkable parallel career as an inventor) appeared in the Czech erotic drama Ecstasy playing Eva, who gave us the first female orgasm in movie history. This is simply an extended closeup on her face, after her lover’s head has disappeared from the bottom of the frame, as she abandons herself to pleasure and rapture. There were some telling cutaways – to her hand, fondling some material, and also one of her pearl necklace dropping to the floor. Afterwards, Eva languorously smokes a cigarette, doing her bit to establish one of cinema’s great post-coital tropes. 9. Shortbus (2006) John Cameron Mitchell’s sexually diverse hardcore comedy of kink is inspired by the adventurous soirées that the director experienced in New York in the early part of the century – and it revolves around “Shortbus”, a club which its host describes as “a salon for the gifted and challenged”. The opening scene of this film is one of the great moments of auto-eroticism: a gymnastically achieved self-blowjob, complete with happy finish which as well as everything else renders obsolete the joke about why dogs lick their balls. 8. Liberté (2019) Perhaps dogging has been underrepresented in erotic cinema, but Albert Serra’s award-winning historical fantasy gave the whole subject a touch of class. In the years before the French Revolution, a group of bewigged libertines – aristocrats expelled from Louis XVI’s court – gather in their carriages in a forest to watch other aristocrats doing pervy things in a moonlit clearing, and occasionally participate themselves. Like vampires, they murmur Sadeian thoughts to each other while one of their number eagerly submits to being horribly thrashed. 7. The Lion King (1994) Disney isn’t well known for eroticism, but one moment from this classic frankly alluded to the sex life of its hero, Simba. After being tricked and made an orphan by the wicked wiles of his evil uncle Scar, Simba escapes into exile where he grows into lionhood and is reunited with his childhood pal Nala, who is now a comely lioness. They fall in love and romp to the song Can You Feel the Love Tonight. That’s a resounding yes. At one point, Nala reclines in an obviously sexual come-hither pose. 6. The Beast (1975) The tricky subject of human-animal relations has been dramatised in various movies, including in Woody Allen’s Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex* (*But Were Afraid to Ask) (sheep), Nagisma Oshima’s Max Mon Amour (chimp) and Robinson Devor’s Zoo (horse). But the most purely outrageous depiction had to be in The Beast by arthouse-erotic master Walerian Borowczyk. A young American woman inherits a fortune on condition that she marries a strange French aristocrat and horse breeder whose forebears had a strange relationship with an enormous priapic beast that lives in the forest. This creature’s sexual needs soon become horribly apparent. 5. The Counselor (2013) The concept of sex with cars has cinephile connoisseurs nodding thoughtfully over David Cronenberg’s Crash and the Palme d’Or-winning Titane by Julia Ducournau. But Ridley Scott outdid all those Cannes snobs with the gobsmacking scene in his thriller The Counselor. In this, Cameron Diaz has sex with a sports car – a yellow Ferrari California – belonging to Javier Bardem’s character while Javier looks on stunned from the driving seat, as she spreads herself intimately across the windshield without underwear. Bardem later ungallantly describes it as resembling “one of those bottom feeders you see going up the side of the aquarium”. The scene was shot at Stoke Park golf course in Buckinghamshire. 4. Moonraker (1979) As 007, Roger Moore returned to Earth in triumph after saving the planet from the evil intergalactic plans of Hugo Drax, played by Michael Lonsdale, and so the assorted bigwigs of American and British intelligence were patched through to what was going on in his spacecraft via a live video link – to find Bond having celebratory zero-gravity sex with Nasa scientist Dr Holly Goodhead, played by Lois Chiles. “My god, what’s Bond doing?” splutters a top diplomat. “I think he’s attempting re-entry, sir” says Q – one of the most cringe-making final gags in Bond history. 3. In the Realm of the Senses (1976) This film was always far more bizarre and satirical than sexy (although it is said to have popularised the risky practice of autoerotic asphyxiation in the US). Food sex plays a big part. Innkeeper Kichi (Tatsuya Fuji) begins an obsessive affair with servant girl Sada (Eiko Matsuda), raises the subject of food being moistened with each other’s bodies and then prevails upon her to insert an egg intimately and then “lay” it again like a hen. This is part of the surreal and strange theatre of sexuality that is enacted by the two of them. 2. Team America: World Police (2004) Here it is: what many believe to the finest puppet sex scene in history, or simply the finest sex scene in history, and easily one of the most explicit. In this puppet drama, Gary (voiced by Trey Parker) is a sensitive Broadway actor recruited to the elite special forces group, Team America, so that he can infiltrate an international criminal cell using his powers of thespian empathy. Lisa (voiced by Kristen Miller) is the beautiful psychologist who masterminds Team America’s sophisticated counter-terrorist strategies. The two have wild sex, in a scene which brutally exposes how coyly and evasively Hollywood shoots non-puppet human sex scenes. Lisa’s resemblance to Thunderbirds’ Lady Penelope has made it even more popular in the UK. 1. Y tu mamá también (2001) A genuinely chaotic, romantic, comic and affectionate sex scene. Two young guys Tenoch and Julio, played by Diego Luna and Gael García Bernal, head off on a crazy road trip in the company of a glamorous, free-spirited older woman, Luisa, played by Maribel Verdú, who has secret troubles of her own. They are enamoured of her, and she has sex with them individually in an attempt to relieve the hormonal atmosphere of tension and competition. But she senses that there might be something else going on as well and in the showstopping scene, they gather for a threesome in a motel room during which she ducks out – leaving the two boys passionately kissing and having sex.A slew of the cheapest deals on PCR tests have been removed from the government website amid concerns travellers are being misled by companies advertising the coronavirus testing service for less than a £1. It is understood officials acted on complaints from within the industry after concerns that certain providers were manipulating the rankings. Private companies offering day 2 tests for travellers are listed on a government website for consumers to search. At the weekend ministers reintroduced PCR tests for travellers because of concern about the Omicron variant of the virus. As a result anyone returning to the UK from abroad must take a test by the end of the second day after arrival. The Guardian queried how the list was being managed after a sample taken from the website on Tuesday showed tens of deals priced at £1 or less from companies including !!++0044 Tests and !Covid Testing Direct.com. The list of 450 companies is in price order so those offering the cheapest deals are at the top. However, the top ranking deals are not suitable for most travellers as they are often in just one location, on limited dates and only available to those who could attend in person. For example A YCT MedLabs has a 75p day 2 test offer but there are no test slots at its Maidstone site available in December or January. !!++0044 Tests, which is no longer at the top of the rankings, had £1 tests available but only in Kendal in Cumbria. By Thursday morning the majority of these promotions were no longer listed with the number of deals at £1 or less reduced to just two, with 14 fewer deals available. The list is managed by the UK Health Security Agency and a spokesperson said: “We regularly audit the providers listed on gov.uk and remove providers when they are promoting misleading test prices.” In the summer, Competition and Markets Authority sent an open letter to PCR test providers warning that a range of harmful practices, including advertising cheap tests that are only available in very small quantities or not at all, could breach consumer protection law. Francis Ingham, the independent director of the Laboratory and Testing Industry Organisation (LTIO), a trade association, welcomed the move and said it would increase confidence in testing. He suggested ultra cheap deals were “too good to be true”, adding: “It’s only if you go to a certain part of the country on a certain time on a certain day, otherwise it isn’t available.” Ingham said the way the travel testing system was being managed by the government meant it was constantly being “played” by companies and urged people to look for the LTIO’s Kitemark when booking. Its members speak for 80% of the country’s testing capability. “There’s a code of conduct that says the prices they advertise are accurate. They’re transparent about the process and the terms and conditions,” he added. Avi Lasarow, at the testing firm Project Screen by Prenetics, which is LTIO member, said low-priced offers were a “false mechanic to convince folks to go to their websites” because once the person was on the website “they were more likely buy a more expensive test”. He suggested price information should be removed altogether. “That way consumers can see an approved list of providers and it’s up to them to navigate the list to find the one that suits them best.” YCT MedLabs said its 75p products were incentives for the local community and the sudden changes at the weekend meant all the tests available for December had been snapped up. “We intend to release more slots however you’ll appreciate these are at a loss and also need to consider the staffing on the site, which is currently our only site at the moment, as we are only a small provider,” the company said. The Guardian approached !!++0044 Tests, and !Covid Testing Direct for comment.The number of people dining out across the UK has fallen to the lowest level since the reopening of indoor hospitality, according to restaurant industry figures covering the first few days since news broke about the Omicron coronavirus variant. The seven-day average estimate for UK seated diners fell six percentage points in the week to 29 November, reaching the lowest point since 17 May when indoor dining reopened in England, Scotland and Wales. While the number of people eating out remained above levels recorded during the equivalent week in 2019 before the onset of the pandemic, at 111%, the figure was down from a level of 117% in the previous week, according to the figures from the booking platform OpenTable. The figures, which are tracked by the Office for National Statistics for early signals from the British economy, also cover a week when Storm Arwen triggered a decrease in economic activity. Separate figures from the ONS showed a drop in road traffic levels and daily ship visits to UK ports towards the end of last week. “This may in part have been because of adverse weather conditions towards the latter end of the week caused by Storm Arwen,” it said. The volume of vehicle traffic on Britain’s roads also fell on 29 November, by five percentage points from the previous week, decreasing to 92% of the level recorded in the first week of February 2020 before the spread of Covid-19. Numbers of people eating out continued to fall on Monday and Tuesday this week, according to daily figures from OpenTable. In a potential sign of consumer caution after the news of Omicron broke, seated diner numbers fell to 4% and 7% below pre-Covid levels on the first two days of this week compared to equivalent days in 2019. Although the number of people eating out is typically lower at the start of the week, this was the weakest daily figure since July. It comes as hospitality bosses report a wave of cancellations of bookings for Christmas parties and events following the emerging news, late last week, of the Omicron variant just as pub, restaurant and hotel operators were hoping to welcome many customers during the crucial festive season. The snapshot from the ONS largely covers the week to Sunday, meaning only a handful of days since news of Omicron have been assessed so far. Boris Johnson announced measures at the weekend to limit the spread of the Omicron variant, including compulsory face coverings from Tuesday in shops and on public transport in England, though he stopped short of including the hospitality sector. However, businesses fear tougher measures could soon follow. Alan Thomas, the UK CEO at Simply Business, a small business insurer, said: “The return of Covid-19 restrictions amid growing fears around the Omicron variant will leave many small business owners worrying about the risk of a bleak Christmas. Not only could they signal further, tighter, restrictions, but they may also dampen consumer confidence – with many in the hospitality sector already reporting cancelled bookings.”Police Scotland has paid £1m in compensation to the family of a woman who died after being left for three days in a crashed car on the M9 motorway. The force has settled a compensation action taken by the family of Lamara Bell, 25, after they sued over its failure to respond to a call from a farmer who had spotted a crashed car lying off the hard shoulder in 2015. When police finally arrived at the scene three days later, after a second call from the public, they found Bell in critical condition and her partner, John Yuill, 28, dead alongside her. She died in hospital four days later, leaving two children, aged 5 and 10. The Record newspaper has reported that the children, now in the care of grandparents, will be awarded £500,000 each. The force has already admitted there were avoidable failures in its call-handling system which “materially contributed” to her death, and issued an unreserved apology. It was found guilty in September of corporate criminal liability. The family’s lawyer, David Nellaney of Digby Brown, said they welcomed Police Scotland’s compensation payment but criticised the force for failing to settle the case at a far earlier stage. “The Bell family has endured things very few people could ever comprehend but the patience, resilience and compassion they have shown at all times cannot be understated,” he said. “It is unfortunate that Police Scotland did not admit its failings sooner as it might have spared them unnecessary distress, but at least we do now have a conclusion and the Bells can rightly focus on themselves and times ahead.” In a statement, the Bell family said the settlement was the end of “chasing answers, recognition and justice for six years”. They added: “Our pain and loss won’t stop just because the legal proceedings are over, but there is at least a sense of peace that comes with their conclusion. But that peace is fleeting because ultimately we are still without Lamara. “We are without a daughter and sister and her children are without a mother – such an outcome cannot, and should not ever, go unheeded in a fair society and we are glad to finally have attained that which we sought.” The deputy chief constable, Fiona Taylor, said: “Lamara Bell and John Yuill’s deaths were a tragedy and our thoughts remain with their children, families and friends. “The chief constable has been very clear that Police Scotland would engage with any legal process which may take place. It would not be appropriate to comment further at this time.”Imagine a reform school for baddies, where Captain Hook and the Big Bad Wolf are taught the errors of their ways. That’s the setting for this show by Sleeping Trees, who have made fairytale mashups their festive stock-in-trade. Adding two (and more) stories together may not multiply the narrative impact: a great story Sleeping Beauty and the Beast is not. But under Kerry Frampton’s direction, the show effortlessly connects with its juvenile audience – and always promises a decent joke around the next corner. The show is framed as the outcome of a disagreement between pompous James Dunnell-Smith, avid to stage his pretentious script, and his four co-stars, who want to improvise. The script, to James’s disgust, has gone AWOL – but instead of improv in its place, we get this slung-together, dressing-up box confection, in which Joshua Smith’s Beast and Jamal Franklin’s Belle run a “goodie-versity” for penitent villains. We’re deep into act one before the emergence of a plot, concerning a sleeping draft administered to Beast and the threat that this year’s “good-uation” may not proceed. But the stakes remain low: who wants Big Bad Wolves to be reformed anyway? In all its talk of goodies and baddies, there is none of the thoughtfulness brought to bear on that subject by Baddies: the Musical, in 2015. Nor is the dramatic action always coherent: it’s unclear why a set of scales gets treated as an incriminating clue to the poisoner’s identity. There are missed opportunities in the staging, too: Beast’s dance routine, set up to be a showstopper, is – when finally performed – a squib. The pleasure, then, has little to do with story or characters, which are flimsy. It’s found instead in the irreverent gags (Captain Hook being recruited as the school’s head of IT) and apropos-of-nothing sequences – Cornflake Colin’s cameo in Dreamland, or the enforced casting of wannabe auteur James as a stroppy spook, christened by an audience member as “Nicegirl the Ghost”. There’s no danger of Sleeping Beauty and the Beast joining its component folktales in the Christmas canon. But – particularly for kids – its dotty, knockabout charms are ample compensation. At Battersea Arts Centre, London, until 30 December.Steven Spielberg’s West Side Story 2.0 is an ecstatic act of ancestor-worship: a vividly dreamed, cunningly modified and visually staggering revival. No one but Spielberg could have brought it off, creating a movie in which Leonard Bernstein’s score and Stephen Sondheim’s lyrics blaze out with fierce new clarity. Spielberg retains María’s narcissistic I Feel Pretty, transplanted from the bridal workshop to a fancy department store where she’s working as a cleaner. This was the number whose Cowardian skittishness Sondheim himself had second thoughts about. But its confection is entirely palatable. Spielberg has worked with screenwriter Tony Kushner to change the original book by Arthur Laurents, tilting the emphases and giving new stretches of unsubtitled Spanish dialogue and keeping much of the visual idiom of Jerome Robbins’s stylised choreography. This new West Side Story isn’t updated historically yet neither is it a shot-for-shot remake. But daringly, and maybe almost defiantly, it reproduces the original period ambience with stunning digital fabrications of late-50s New York whose authentic detail co-exists with an unashamed theatricality. On the big screen the effect is hyperreal, as if you have somehow hallucinated your way back 70 years on to both the musical stage for the Broadway opening night and also the city streets outside. I couldn’t watch without gasping those opening “prologue” sequences, in which the camera drifts over the slum-clearance wreckage of Manhattan’s postwar Upper West Side, as if in a sci-fi mystery, with strangely familiar musical phrases echoing up from below ground. The original story was famously based on Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet, but with one very important difference. The Jets and the Sharks, unlike the Montagues and Capulets, are not “both alike in dignity”: the Jets are white, with a structural advantage over their Puerto Rican enemies, and this production, with consistent Latino casting for the Sharks, points up the white cops’ tribal similarity to the Jets, in a kind of co-belligerent neutrality. Corey Stoll plays Lieutenant Schrank and Brian D’Arcy James is the sweaty, resentful Officer Krupke. The scene is the rubble of the Upper West Side in 1958 where decaying tenements are being bulldozed for the fancy new Lincoln Center. Ansel Elgort plays Tony, a young white man and ex-Jets member who this movie imagines to be just out of prison for an act of violence which has scared him away from getting involved in gang warfare. Now he’s staying at Doc’s drugstore: or rather his landlady is the widow of the late Doc, Valentina, marvellously played by Rita Moreno, who was Anita in the original 1961 version. This was an Anglo-Latino love match, the future that Tony and María should have had. Tony’s best buddy is Jets’ leader Riff, played by Mike Faist, whose sharp face has the wizened, coarsened look of someone much older, and Riff desperately wants to enlist Tony for a new planned rumble with the Puerto Rican Sharks who are encroaching on their territory in growing numbers, and this new movie lets us see that queasy subtext of Protestant distaste for Catholic growth-rate. The Sharks’ leader Bernardo (David Alvarez) has a fiery relationship with his girlfriend Anita (an exuberant, smart Ariana DeBose) and oppressively protective of his sister Maria: a gentle, wistful performance from newcomer Rachel Zegler. Tony and Maria meet and fall for each other at a local dance and their transgressive affair for a microsecond shows everyone the possibility of a modern, non-sectarian future – but ends in violence. And in fact, the tragedy of errors that concludes the drama is more plausibly plotted than anything Shakespeare wrote. Elgort and Zegler are a more real pair than Richard Beymer and Natalie Wood in the original: but they have the same fundamental innocence and quaint pre-pop, pre-youth-culture 60s unworldliness. West Side Story is contrived, certainly, a hothouse flower of musical theatre, and Spielberg quite rightly doesn’t try hiding any of those stage origins. His mastery of technique is thrilling; I gave my heart to this poignant American fairytale of doomed love. • West Side Story is released on 10 December in the US and UK, and on 26 December in Australia.As Kira Hodgson, 33, rereads the “love letter” she wrote a year ago to the owners of the Portland, Oregon, home she now lives in, she starts to cry. “I can’t believe how vulnerable I was,” she says. “I don’t know any other situation in which you’d sit down and write a gushing letter like this to a stranger.” Hodgson, a product designer, was living in San Francisco and had been looking for a home in Portland, to be nearer her family as she recovered from breast cancer treatment, when she found a house she loved. “I was seeing other houses go in two or three days on Zillow,” she says. “I knew I had to move quickly and give the sellers whatever I could.” Her agent told her to use her real estate “love letter”, the buyer’s offer letter, to connect with the sellers who were emotionally attached to the home. Hodgson wrote how she could see herself cuddling her cat by the fireplace (she’d spotted they also had litter trays), baking cookies in the kitchen with her nieces, celebrating life with her friends under the back yard’s pergola. Via LinkedIn, she discovered one of the owners was a reiki healer. “I wrote in the letter that part of me was craving the healing community of the Pacific north-west and that I loved the energy of the house,” she says. “That was definitely true – but I wouldn’t have put it in if I hadn’t thought it would help get me the house.” The home received three offers. Financially, Hodgson wasn’t offering the most, but the house went to her. When she moved in, the sellers left her a big sage stick and said they’d cleansed the house daily. “I think the letter made the difference,” she says. From one perspective, the use of these letters is crucial in helping sellers make personal connections with the best buyers in high-demand markets. Brad Twiss, owner of Neighbors Realty in Portland, says: “In any market, sellers are very curious about buyers – some express a desire to find someone who can properly maintain the home or be good neighbors. The buyer letter really scratches that itch for a lot of sellers who wonder about these people on the other side of an offer.” Many sellers include a picture of themselves with their families and pets. But from another perspective, the letters can introduce discrimination into the home-buying process. “A buyer can hurt their chances of winning if they choose to write a personal letter that forces them to disclose their race, gender, family status, etc.” Twiss explains. “For every client of mine who’s won because of a letter, that means there was another buyer who lost.” Under a new law that comes into effect on 1 January in Oregon, real estate love-letter writing will be banned in the state. The legislation was sponsored by the Democratic state representative Mark Meek, a real estate broker himself, and states that sellers’ agents can no longer accept communication from the buyer other than customary documents “to help a seller avoid selecting a buyer based on the buyer’s race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, national origin, marital status or familial status as prohibited by the Fair Housing Act”. Oregon has a history of redlining districts and discriminatory housing policy that kept Black people from living in certain neighborhoods. The new law aims to eliminate conscious or subconscious gatekeeping by sellers when they select who gets to live in their home and their neighborhood after they leave. Equal housing advocates argue that this will help create a more level playing field for people who might otherwise lose out on a home or living in a neighborhood because of who they are. But the legislation is being challenged by a real estate firm in Bend, Oregon. “Oregon’s ban prohibits this first amendment– protected form of expression,” says Daniel Ortner, an attorney representing Total Real Estate Group, who filed the injunction. “It does so without any justification or any real evidence of discrimination.” Ortner says that the letters actually help less privileged buyers compete with investment firms looking to buy rental properties, as they can show they will love and cherish the property even if they can’t offer as much cash. “Sellers love their properties, neighbors and communities and want to find someone who will take good care of the house and be a good neighbor,” he says. “Oregon is treating buying and selling a home as nothing more than buying a pair of pants at the self-checkout line at Walmart.” Ortner works for the Pacific Legal Foundation, a non-profit that says it defends Americans from government overreach and abuse. Twiss counters: “Of the people challenging this law, I’ll venture to guess that none of them have ever been passed over for a home or job and been forced to wonder if it’s because of the color of their skin or who they love. Privilege makes it hard for people to understand why this is so important for prospective buyers.”The French parliament has voted to make school bullying a criminal offence punishable by up to three years in prison, as MPs said society needed a wake-up call on the seriousness of children targeting their peers. The proposed law was supported by Emmanuel Macron’s education minister, Jean-Michel Blanquer. Blanquer said the law sent a strong message to society that “we will never accept the lives of our children being shattered”. As many as one in 10 French children are estimated to have been affected by bullying, and social networks are increasing the potential for public taunting and humiliation. Blanquer said the draft law was “a way of enforcing the values of the republic”. The draft measure was approved by the lower house on Wednesday and will now go to the upper house, the Senate. It is expected to be adopted in February, giving France some of the harshest penalties for bullying in the world. Erwan Balanant, the Brittany MP from the centrist MoDem (Democratic Movement) party, who drafted the legislation, said the new law and high penalties were a way to “engage with the whole of society”. He said it sent a strong message and a “shock wave” through society to raise awareness of the devastating effects of bullying. He argued that the new legislation would help educate people on bullying and prevention. “It’s not about sending children to prison,” Balanant stressed. “There is a justice system for minors that takes into consideration the accused’s age and powers of discernment.” But he said that criminal laws can set “the value system of a society”. The new crime of “school bullying” applies to children and adults in schools and universities, including students as well as staff such as canteen service teams and break-time monitors. It would carry a maximum three-year jail term and a fine of up to €45,000 (£38,300). If a victim of school bullying kills themselves, or attempts to, the maximum penalty could rise to 10 years and €150,000. In reality, the law would be unlikely to result in a rush of children getting custodial sentences – instead there would be new, community schemes to raise awareness on bullying that could be proposed as alternatives. The legislation also increases resources for prevention and education, as well as improving the provisions for children to take part in community educational schemes about bullying. Some MPs argued that the risk of jail and a criminal record would serve chiefly as a deterrent. Broadly, most of the political right and centre have supported the bill. But some MPs on the left have criticised it as too repressive. “We are not in favour of criminalising minors and increasing repression,” said Michèle Victory, a Socialist MP. Sabine Rubin, an MP from the leftwing party La France Insoumise (France Unbowed), called it an “illusionary and demagogic over-reaction”. Other MPs questioned whether it would be effective. Bullying can already be prosecuted in France under laws criminalising harassment, opponents said. Delphine Bagarry, a doctor and MP who was elected in 2017 under Macron’s centrist banner, but is no longer part of that parliamentary group, told the house that creating a new criminal offence was an inadequate response to the specific mechanics of bullying – “namely the powerful effect of groups” in targeting their peers – and the fact that bullying took place in every school, often by children without powers of discernment. She said that the law, by grabbing the spotlight, could weaken other crucial forms of action, such as the responsibility of headteachers to stamp out bullying. Several bullying cases that have ended in tragedy have made headlines in France this year, including the suicide of a 14-year-old girl in the eastern Alsace region in October. The girl’s mother told local media that her daughter was subjected to racist and homophobic bullying, and was isolated and excluded by classmates. She was physically pushed and her possessions thrown on the ground. Macron’s wife, Brigitte, who is a former teacher, has made combating bullying a focus of her charity work at the Élysée.Facebook’s owner has taken down a Chinese misinformation network that attempted to spread claims about coronavirus using a fake Swiss biologist. Meta, the parent organisation of Facebook and Instagram, said it had taken down more than 600 accounts linked to the network, which it said included a “coordinated cluster” of Chinese state employees. Meta said the network focused on a fake Swiss biologist named Wilson Edwards who first emerged on 24 July 2021, claiming in Facebook and Twitter posts that the United States was pressuring the World Health Organization to blame the virus on China. Within a week, Chinese state media outlets, including the Global Times and People’s Daily, ran headlines linked to Edwards’ posts about US “intimidation”. The details were included in Meta’s “coordinated inauthentic behaviour” [CIB] report, which also revealed it had taken down networks in Palestine, Belarus and Poland. Meta describes CIB as “coordinated efforts to manipulate public debate for a strategic goal where fake accounts are central to the operation”. Meta said the “sprawling and unsuccessful” Chinese misinformation network targeted audiences in the US, the UK, and Chinese-speaking audiences in Taiwan, Hong Kong and Tibet. It removed 524 Facebook accounts, 20 pages, four groups, and 86 accounts on Instagram related to the network, which Meta said was linked to individuals at Chinese state infrastructure companies around the world – including civil engineering, power generation, telecoms and transport businesses – and employees of a mainland information security firm called Sichuan Silence Information Technology, which works with state bodies including the Ministry of Public Security. Meta said Wilson Edwards’ Facebook post was a lengthy text which claimed that “WHO sources and a number of fellow researchers” had complained of “enormous pressure and even intimidation” from the US over the WHO’s plan for a renewed Covid origins investigation. It was then amplified in a coordinated manner by the network using a mix of fake and authentic accounts. Meta said the campaign appeared not to have worked because “these efforts failed to attract any noticeable authentic engagement”. On 10 August the Swiss embassy in Beijing said it had no record of a citizen called Wilson Edwards and Facebook removed the account. Meta said the account had been created on 24 July, 12 hours before the fake biologist started posting on the social network. The company added that some of the 200 fake accounts that boosted the Wilson Edwards content within hours of it being posted had profile pictures created by an artificial intelligence programme. “In essence, this campaign was a hall of mirrors, endlessly reflecting a single fake persona,” said the report. “Our investigation uncovered that almost the entire initial spread of the ‘Wilson Edwards’ story on our platform was inauthentic – the work of a multi-pronged, largely unsuccessful influence operation that originated in China.” Meta said it identified Chinese state involvement in the proliferation of the Edwards content. It said the operation involved the original fake account, several hundred other fake accounts and a “cluster” of authentic accounts, including ones that belonged to employees of state infrastructure companies around the world. There were also links to an information security company called Sichuan Silence Information Technology. “This is the first time we have observed an operation that included a coordinated cluster of state employees to amplify itself in this way,” said the report. The investigation also found that Chinese government officials interacted with the content less than an hour after it was first posted. Elsewhere in the report, Meta said it took down 141 Facebook accounts and 21 Instagram accounts from the Gaza Strip in Palestine that “primarily targeted people in Palestine” and were linked to Hamas, with many of the personas being young women in the West Bank or Sinai in Egypt. Meta said: “The individuals behind this activity posted news stories, cartoons and memes primarily in Arabic about current events in the region, including the postponed Palestinian election, criticism of Israeli defence policy, Fatah and Mahmoud Abbas, and supportive commentary about Hamas.” In Poland the company took down 31 Facebook accounts and four Instagram accounts that targeted Belarus and Iraq. Meta said it found the network “as we monitored the unfolding crisis at the border between Belarus and the EU”. The network appeared to be trying to dissuade people from trying to enter the EU. “These fake personas claimed to be sharing their own negative experiences of trying to get from Belarus to Poland and posted about migrants’ difficult lives in Europe. They also posted about Poland’s strict anti-migrant policies and anti-migrant neo-Nazi activity in Poland,” said Meta. In Belarus, the border crisis was the main factor too, as Meta removed 41 Facebook accounts and four Instagram accounts targeting the Middle East and Europe. Meta linked the network, which used fake accounts of people posing as EU journalists and activists, to the Belarusian KGB. Meta said: “These fictitious personas posted criticism of Poland in English, Polish, and Kurdish, including pictures and videos about Polish border guards allegedly violating migrants’ rights, and compared Poland’s treatment of migrants against other countries.”It’s hard to pinpoint exactly when the classical music world fell in love with Jamie Barton. Perhaps it was the 2013 Cardiff Singer of the World competition, when as an up-and-coming mezzo-soprano from Rome, Georgia, she carried off both first prize and the song prize – the first woman to do so. It was certainly a full-blown affair by the time of the 2019 Last Night of the Proms, when, dressed in the blue, pink and purple of the bisexual pride flag, she gleefully brandished a rainbow flag on stage as she sang Rule, Britannia!. And to be in her Wigmore Hall recital that autumn was to witness an audience reaction inspired not by mere affection or respect, but by actual love. Now, it’s the morning of Thanksgiving, and while her family back home in the US are preparing to celebrate, she is getting over jetlag in an apartment in Amsterdam. This year, she wouldn’t have it any other way – as for so many of her colleagues in the music world, the chance to work internationally again is worthy of its own celebration. The recital programme she’s in Europe to perform, with the composer Jake Heggie as pianist, is a jubilant response to the return to live music (even if news of the new variant, breaking just after we speak, may mean hopes of a full return to normality are premature). Alongside songs by Purcell, Schubert, Brahms and Florence Price, it showcases plenty of music by Heggie himself, one of the US’s most prolific composers of song and opera – Barton has sung Sister Helen Prejean in his opera Dead Man Walking. The recital includes several works from the CD she and Heggie made together in 2019, Unexpected Shadows, recently nominated for a Grammy; there’s also the UK premiere of a new song cycle, What I Miss the Most. The idea for the latter, she says, came from Heggie. “A month or so into the pandemic, Jake suggested we ask others to tell us what they missed the most. Between us we solicited replies from about 30 to 40 people, a whole gamut – from my mother to Patti LuPone! The five responses he ended up setting were the ones that really called to him.” One of those was from the late Ruth Bader Ginsburg. “What she said was exactly the core of what brought this recital together: ‘What I miss the most is music. Music made by many … Music in unison.’ As she was such a lover of classical music and opera, and a woman who changed the world in the best sort of way, to be able to have her voice in this is a real honour.” “Music made by many” might be cautiously going again, but the big Verdi and Wagner operas to which Barton’s full-bodied voice is so well suited are still thin on the ground, due in part to the sheer size of the forces they demand. Barton, characteristically, thinks there’s a silver lining. “What I do see already happening, and am really interested in being a part of, is telling new stories that highlight perspectives that haven’t been highlighted before. You’re seeing all sort of stories being written about life right now, and I love that. This is such a necessary part of the way forward, one that opens the doors to more people.” Opening those doors doesn’t have to mean creating new works. In September, in concert in Chicago, Barton sang Carmen for the first time; the role is ideal for her voice but as a plus-size woman she had never been offered it. Her Don José was Stephanie Blythe, who after a long career as a mezzo-soprano has begun singing tenor roles – she describes herself as “a straight, cis woman with a genderfluid voice” – and who performed dressed as a man, complete with beard. “The response was just overwhelming,” says Barton: “the messages I got from people, saying, ‘I never thought that I would see a body like mine playing a role like that,’ or, ‘I never thought I as a non-binary or a trans person would see something that showcased a non-normative voice.’ We were touching people in a real way, an important way, and you can do that with the classics. “I’ve been saying for so long: ‘Can I please do an Orfeo where it’s a lesbian love story? Can we do a Don Carlo where Eboli or Rodrigo are queer? Can we open up the doors of representation so that the vast majority of our Black artists aren’t just doing Porgy and Bess? Can we open the doors of storytelling and make it as inclusive as is possible?’ And I do see that as something going forward out of this. I think the world has changed in such a way that we can’t go back – and thank God, because we are better off on the path we’re on now.” Her own path has changed direction slightly too, she feels. “I’m not going to say that I’m never going to sing them again, but I’ve spent a lot of years doing roles where I’m the third person in a love triangle, which is always perpetuated by the man, and the lead soprano almost always has to kill herself in order to be ‘redeemed’, and those are stories that are 1,000% created by the patriarchy, and I’m not interested in them any more. Now, give me a director who can take that storyline and make it less tragic for the women involved – I’m here for that.” Barton has become a poster girl for inclusivity and diversity on the classical music stage, with potentially the power to nudge that world in a more progressive direction. Is that ever a burden? “There was a point in my career after Trump was voted in when I asked myself: ‘Is what I’m doing important enough? Do I need to quit this and go work in social justice, in something that really has an impact?’ It took me a long time to suss out what I wanted to do, and what it came down to was how lucky I was to be given a platform where people literally want to listen to my voice.” Not everyone has been supportive. Barton remembers particularly the headline of a blog post in advance of her 2019 Proms appearance: “BBC Proms are over when the fat bisexual lady sings.” “Five years prior to that, if somebody had written those words about me, it would have sent me into a tailspin. But the first thing that came to my mind was: heck, yes, they are correct – it is not over until the fat bisexual lady sings! Just by being my queer, fat, womanly self and by being unapologetic about any one of those words, I can show up for others where they don’t feel like they’re showed up for. That’s the only pressure I feel – to show up in the best way I can for the people in my life and the people who are following me.” • Jamie Barton and Jake Heggie are in recital at Saffron Hall, Saffron Walden on 3 December and at the Barbican, London on 5 December.In a dusty basement in Soho Square, the British Board of Film Classification (BBFC) has been poring over a new report. The regulatory body that decides the UK age ratings for film and TV is making adjustments, based on the findings of a study it commissioned about on-screen depictions of racist language and behaviour. Certain tropes will in future warrant higher age ratings. Specifically, films containing the N-word will automatically receive a 12 rating unless there are significant mitigating circumstances; where, for example, “historical racist language” is deemed to be appropriately contextualised. Older films that contain racism won’t be cancelled, or worse, edited to remove it – but there are still concerning glimmers of the BBFC’s history as the official, paternalistic censor that shine through in its new rules. The BBFC is attempting to reckon with the identity politics of the current moment, and with good reason. The explosion into the mainstream of the Black Lives Matter movement and the struggle for Black liberation has meant that many organisations are under pressure to present tangible action plans for tackling racism. Yet in this case, change is largely cosmetic. The BBFC study was conducted by a marketing agency called We Are Family, which asked a sample of the public to consider their own age ratings for films containing depictions of racism. It’s worth noting that the number of people surveyed was just 70. There is one particular part of BBFC vice-president Kamlesh Patel’s statement accompanying the report that troubles me: “We recognise that our role isn’t just about protecting children from harmful content,” Patel said: “it’s about helping parents who might want to use depictions of discrimination and racism as a potential teaching moment.” But classifying films is not the same thing as setting a curriculum. Films have value beyond their educational content. Art should not have to be justified on the basis of the lessons it successfully imparts, particularly not those deemed important by an out-of-touch organisation. The study’s 70 participants watched a curated series of clips, presumably out of context, from more than 37 different films, including Breakfast at Tiffany’s, Won’t You Be My Neighbour, Race, and Crocodile Dundee. Yet they were asked to watch only four films in their entirety: Ava DuVernay’s Martin Luther King biopic Selma, Stem propaganda Hidden Figures, the James Baldwin documentary I Am Not Your Negro, and Gurinder Chadha’s Blinded By the Light, a cloying coming-of-age comedy in which Bruce Springsteen’s pop songs provide an escape from Thatcherite Britain. What these films apparently have in common is racism. Of course, no programme of four films can fully represent the lived experience of structural racism, in all its nuance and complexity. I’d be interested to see how more challenging and less celebratory examples might have fared. Would Barry Jenkins’s masterful miniseries The Underground Railroad receive an 18 for its graphic content? One of its many haunting images is of a Black enslaved man hung and burned alive by his white master. Or would its period setting and educational value as a literary adaptation perhaps soften the certificate? What about Kathryn Bigelow’s Detroit? The ultraviolent – and to my eyes, coldly dispassionate – depiction of racist police brutality is rated 15 due to “strong threat, violence and language”. The Oscar-winning Green Book was robustly criticised upon its release for its tone-deaf take on race relations (recall the scene where Viggo Mortensen teaches Mahershala Ali how to eat fried chicken), but remains rated a cuddly 12 for “infrequent strong language, moderate violence, discriminatory behaviour”. Perhaps what would be more useful than these gestural changes to age ratings is a more widespread use of content warnings. Appearing at the start of podcasts, TV shows and (ugh) social media posts, these warnings briefly signpost that the material ahead might be offensive to, or distressing for certain viewers, rather than arbitrarily deciding who those viewers might be. The BBFC, founded in 1912, once boasted the strapline “age ratings you trust”. In 1916, the BBFC published a list of 43 grounds for deletion with recommendations ranging from “gruesome murders and strangulation” to “scenes laid in disorderly houses” and the pesky depiction of “relations of labour and capital”. The organisation has undergone something of a makeover in the years since, changing the C-word in its name, in 1985, from “censors” to “classification”. In 2019, its strapline shifted to “view what’s right for you”. It’s a head-scratcher of a mission statement that gestures towards individual empowerment, while conveniently erasing its own nanny state paternalism. A bracketed clause should follow: “View what’s right for you (based on what we say is right for you)”. • This article was amended on 2 December 2021. An earlier version said that the BBFC was profit-driven, when in fact it is an independent not-for-profit organisation set up by the film industry. Simran Hans is a film critic for the ObserverOne of the biggest unions representing BT workers has urged the business secretary to ensure any potential takeover bid protects the telecoms company’s 100,000 staff, its hundreds of millions in research spending and the national interest. Prospect wrote to Kwasi Kwarteng days before BT’s largest shareholder is allowed to make a potential offer under UK takeover rules. Patrick Drahi, the French-Israeli telecoms billionaire known for cost-cutting at businesses he controls, is free to make his next move from 11 December with the expiry of a no-bid clause that was triggered when he took his £2.2bn stake in June. Mike Clancy, the general secretary of Prospect, said: “The business secretary must take personal charge of making sure that any proposed takeover supports growing that investment, not a flight of money or skills overseas. We need a clear focus on protecting both our national interests and jobs while boosting private sector research and development (R&amp;D), all of which could be at risk with a controversial takeover.” Prospect said that any acquirer of BT, which is one of the UK’s biggest private sector tech and R&amp;D investors, spending £720m annually, could seek quick profits through cuts to jobs and research focusing on “a short-term pay out rather than long-term returns”. Clancy said: “Media reports over BT’s future ownership will unsettle staff in the run-up to Christmas, especially given the amount of change that the company has seen and continues to experience. BT is one of the jewels in the crown of UK innovation and tech R&amp;D, despite a tough economic environment.” There are growing concerns about the threat to Britain’s economy and national security from a string of recent takeovers of UK companies by foreign rivals and private equity firms. Any move on BT is certain to result in scrutiny from the government, which has already ordered a number of investigations into nationally sensitive deals including the $54bn (£40.6bn) takeover of the Cambridge-based chip designer Arm by its US rival Nvidia. From January, the government will gain tougher powers to block the takeover of key national assets under the National Security and Investment Act 2021. Drahi may consider options less controversial than mounting a full-scale takeover bid. For example, he could attempt to increase his direct influence by asking for a seat on BT’s board, like Deutsche Telekom, BT’s second-largest shareholder. He could also move towards increasing his stake by looking to acquire the 12% controlled by DT, which it has held in a passive capacity since as a legacy of BT’s takeover of the mobile operator EE in 2015. Tim Höttges, the chief executive of DT, has said he “entertaining all options” regarding BT’s future.Earlier this year, in June, somewhere in the vast expanse of the central Mediterranean, a Médecins Sans Frontières team on board a rescue vessel received a distress call. The motor of a small boat carrying asylum seekers from Libya had broken down, and the vessel was taking in water. These are the first dramatic scenes in Unsafe Passage – a Guardian Documentaries film by Ed Ou for the Outlaw Ocean Project, released today – but they are also the first moments in a race against time that repeats itself again and again in the stretch of sea separating Europe from Africa. If the Libyan coastguard makes it to the boat before the rescue crew, the refugees will be pushed back to Libyan detention centres at gunpoint. And if neither MSF nor the Libyans reach the vessel, other lives will be lost in this giant watery graveyard that has already claimed thousands of asylum seekers: more than 1,300 have died or gone missing while attempting to cross the central Mediterranean so far this year alone. But Europe has not only cast a blind eye on the horror, it has also made the rescue of these people, and the lives of the rescuers, increasingly complicated. In February 2017, Europe ceded responsibility for overseeing Mediterranean rescue operations to Libya. The deal, struck between Rome and Tripoli, aimed at reducing migration flows across to Europe. Since then, Italy has spent millions of euros to train the Libyan coastguards, and to supply them with numerous patrol vessels. The goal is to help them stop migrants from reaching Sicily and return them to Libya, where they frequently suffer violence and torture in detention centres. The result has been disastrous, exposing the contradictions of that agreement and the hypocrisy of the EU toward the migration crisis. The foremost paradox is represented by Libya, a politically unstable country still licking its wounds after its civil war. Italy has indirectly defined Libya as a safe country, even though the Italian authorities have often granted humanitarian protection to asylum seekers in recognition of their having been subjected to torture and sexual abuse in Libya. While Rome criticises Libya for its abuse of refugees, just last year Italy renewed its agreement with the the country’s coastguard. The coastguard is made up of many ex-militia men with allegedly strong ties to human traffickers. In October 2020, authorities in Tripoli arrested Abd al-Rahman Milad, known as Bija, a coastguard commander, over allegations of being behind the drowning of dozens of people. In 2018, the UN alleged Bija was a facilitator of human trafficking and part of a criminal network. Libyan authorities dropped the charges against him in April, citing a lack of evidence, while Milad has denied any links to human smuggling. Last year, an investigation by the Italian newspaper Avvenire claimed he was present at a series of official meetings in Italy in May 2017. Their methods are reported to have been brutal. In July of this year, footage emerged appearing to show the Libyan coastguard firing on a small wooden boat in distress carrying families, and trying to ram it. The coastguard vessel was PB 648 Ras Jadir – one of several patrol boats supplied to Libya by Italy. Since Europe washed its hands of Mediterranean rescue operations, NGOs have covered the void. Thanks to donations, dozens of charities have put crews on board ships and saved thousands of people. MSF alone has assisted more than 80,000 people. Yet, over the past four years, charities have been the subject of dozens of investigations launched against them by Italian prosecutors, accusing aid NGOs of complicity in people smuggling. With Europe cracking down on migration, aid workers found themselves facing prosecution, as rescuing refugees became increasingly criminalised. In 2019, Italy introduced a security decree imposing fines of up to €50,000 (£42,700) for boats bringing asylum seekers to Italy without permission. Most of these investigations are eventually dropped, but the ships remain under seizure in Italian ports, unable to assist people at sea – who continued to die by the day. Since 2017, the Iuventa, a former fishing vessel run by the German NGO Jugend Rettet, has been rotting on a quay in the port of Trapani after prosecutors ordered its seizure. During the course of the investigation against Iuventa, the Italian police wiretapped some conversations between the Libyan and Italian coastguards. Among the various recordings, which laid bare the indifference of many Libyan officials to the plight of asylum seekers and to international law, was the response of one Tripoli coastguard commander responding to a mayday call: “It’s a day off. It’s a holiday here. Perhaps we can be there tomorrow.” (The coastguard has since said that he is unable to answer questions relating to this because “it would be too hard to find the recordings of these events”.) In a just world, with this evidence, a country that calls itself democratic and respectful of human rights should have reversed the trial – putting the Libyan authorities in the dock and the charities on the witness stand. Instead, we are still counting the deaths: an estimated 18,580 since 2014, in this most unsafe passage to Europe. Lorenzo Tondo is a Guardian correspondent covering Italy and the migration crisisMatthew McConaughey has a lot going on at the moment. He has spent the last few months toying with the idea of running for governor of Texas. He has come under fire for his hazy attitude towards vaccinating children. He wrote a self-help book, Greenlights, that remained on the New York Times bestseller list for almost a year. So it goes without saying that the big McConaughey story right now is about how he smells. To look at McConaughey is to have a rough idea of what he smells like. Wet hemp, perhaps, or maybe clothes that you left in the washing machine for a couple of days. However, it turns out that this assumption would be incorrect. McConaughey apparently smells amazing. This is something we recently learned during his appearance on the Kyle and Jackie O radio show. “All the leading ladies always say how great you smell,” gushed Jackie “O” Henderson to a man who, until very recently, wanted to run a US state three times bigger than the UK. But the real revelation was still to come. McConaughey, you see, makes his own scent. Describing the source of his smell as a “concoction”, he went on to call himself a “mixologist”, but stopped short of explaining how he made his own cologne. When pressed, his publicist jumped in and ended the interview. McConaughey is not alone in this. Shailene Woodley is also known for creating her own personal beauty products, including toothpaste made of clay and coconut water, and lip stain made of beetroot. And this can only mean one thing: we are now living through the fourth wave of movie star beauty standards. Wave one, you’ll remember, was when cinema was in its infancy and movie stars looked like slightly more genetically fortunate versions of normal people. This is when beauty standards were so low that you could never tell if a given performer was 16 or 50 or anywhere in between. You are right to miss those days. Wave two, meanwhile, was when movie stars started licensing their likeness to sell existing beauty products. This didn’t require much of them – take off some clothes, lounge around listlessly like an elaborately abandoned corpse – and it paid well. You will still see examples of wave two in the media although, if you have ever seen that perfume advert in which Johnny Depp plays Wild Thing on an electric guitar to a wolf in the desert, you will know that they are generally absolutely mortifying. Wave three was where we were until recently, where movie stars tired of being show ponies for big brands and started their own companies. So Gwyneth Paltrow has Goop, Jessica Alba has The Honest Company and Rihanna (who counts as a movie star because she was in the live action Battleship film for about 45 seconds) has Fenty. These companies made the movie stars wealthy beyond their wildest dreams. But that’s so gauche. And that may be why we have arrived at wave four. Now, like in wave three, the movie stars are making their own beauty products, but they’re choosing not to market them. And that’s actually quite refreshing. Woodley can’t trademark clay, for example. Clay is clay. Beetroots belong to everybody. Equally, McConaughey gives so much to the public, it’s important that he keeps some things back for himself. And if that means he can’t tell us the precise combination of sandalwood and donkey spit that he rubs on his body every morning, then so be it. Good for him.The 50th anniversary last year of the death of Roberto Gerhard passed almost unnoticed, at least in the UK, where the Catalan-born composer lived for the last 32 years of his life. Since Opera North staged his opera La Duenna in 1992, very few of Gerhard’s major works have been heard here; his brilliantly coloured, incident-packed scores have effectively vanished from our concert halls. Even the London Sinfonietta has hardly programmed any Gerhard since it put on an ambitious festival devoted to all the instrumental and ensemble music by him and his teacher Schoenberg in 1973, three years after his death. But it did offer a belated anniversary tribute by including Gerhard’s last ensemble pieces, Libra and Leo, in its latest concert alongside works by contemporary Catalan composers Joan Magrané Figuera and Raquel Garcia-Tomás, and the Australian Lisa Illean. Gerhard’s two astrological pieces (Libra was his own star sign, and Leo that of his wife Poldi) are chamber symphonies in all but name, combining different movement-types into a seamless musical span. If some of their pointillist moments now seem dated, the Sinfonietta performances, conducted by Edmon Colomer, showed that they still come across as brilliant ensemble showpieces, full of diverting incident, with touching moments of lyricism. A flute threads a folk-like melody through Libra and a guitar adds an unmistakable Iberian flavour, while both works end with the same haunting lullaby. Alongside Gerhard’s exuberance, the newer pieces mostly seemed pallid and uninvolving. Most impressive of the three was Illean’s Januaries, a spare, understated evocation of the Queensland landscapes she remembers from her childhood. Figuera’s Faula, based upon the novel of the same name by the Mallorcan poet Jaume C Pons Alorda, is an intricately interwoven single movement, perhaps too intricate to be effective, while Garcia-Tomás’s Aequae is a series of six tightly controlled, percussion-dominated snapshots - concerned with “temporal perception” apparently, but hard to come to terms with.The Duchess of Sussex called for a reshaping of the tabloid newspaper industry and said she had been patient in the face of “deception, intimidation, and calculated attacks” as the Mail on Sunday lost its appeal in its three-year privacy battle with her over a letter to her estranged father. Meghan sued Associated Newspapers Limited (ANL), also the publisher of Mail Online, over five articles reproducing parts of the “personal and private” letter to Thomas Markle, 77, in August 2018. The duchess, 40, won her case earlier this year when a high court judge gave summary judgment in her favour without need for a trial. But ANL appealed on the grounds the case should go to trial on Meghan’s claims including breach of privacy and copyright. Dismissing the appeal, the court of appeal judges Sir Geoffrey Vos, Dame Victoria Sharp and Lord Justice Bean upheld Lord Justice Warby’s decision to grant summary judgment, and ruled that the duchess had a “reasonable expectation of privacy” in the contents of the letter. “Those contents were personal, private and not matters of legitimate public interest,” Vos said in a summary of the ruling read aloud. In a statement, the duchess said: “This is a victory not just for me, but for anyone who has ever felt scared to stand up for what’s right. While this win is precedent-setting, what matters most is that we are now collectively brave enough to reshape a tabloid industry that conditions people to be cruel, and profits from the lies and pain that they create. “From day one, I have treated this lawsuit as an important measure of right versus wrong. The defendant has treated it as a game with no rules. The longer they dragged it out, the more they could twist facts and manipulate the public (even during the appeal itself), making a straightforward case extraordinarily convoluted in order to generate more headlines and sell more newspapers– – a model that rewards chaos above truth. “In the nearly three years since this began, I have been patient in the face of deception, intimidation, and calculated attacks. Today, the courts ruled in my favour– – again– – cementing that the Mail on Sunday, owned by Lord Jonathan Rothermere, has broken the law. The courts have held the defendant to account, and my hope is that we all begin to do the same. Because as far removed as it may seem from your personal life, it’s not. “Tomorrow it could be you. These harmful practices don’t happen once in a blue moon– – they are a daily fail that divide us, and we all deserve better.” ANL said it was is considering an appeal to the supreme court. A statement said the publisher was “very disappointed” by the decision, and its “strong view” was “judgment should be given only on the basis of evidence treated at trial” in “a heavily contested case, before even disclosure of documents”. Before the appeal Meghan’s costs were estimated at £1.5m, but that figure will have increased with the appeal. Rejecting ANL’s argument that publication of the extracts was justified to correct a negative portrayal of Thomas Markle in US People magazine, the judges said it was “not a justified or proportionate means of correcting” any inaccuracies. They agreed with Warby that just one paragraph of the letter could have been “justifiably deployed” to rebut People magazine’s allegations against Markle. During the appeal hearing in November, ANL said Meghan had written the letter with the knowledge it could be leaked. In her written evidence, Meghan denied she thought it likely that her father would leak the letter, but “merely recognised that this was a possibility”. ANL argued it had new evidence in a witness statement, texts and emails from the Sussexes’ former communications chief Jason Knauf that showed she had sent him a draft of the letter, writing: “Obviously everything I have drafted is with the understanding that it could be leaked so I have been meticulous in my word choice.” The court of appeal also heard Knauf provided information to the authors of the Sussexes’ biography, Finding Freedom, and that Meghan had provided him with a list of “background reminders” on her life story before his two-hour meeting with them. Knauf’s witness statement prompted the duchess to apologise for unintentionally misleading the court over whether he had given information to the book’s authors. She had not remembered the emails between her and Knauf, she said in a statement. The court of appeal noted the duchess’s apology, and said that “this was, at best, an unfortunate lapse of memory on her part, but did not bear on the issues”. It said it found the “new evidence” provided by ANL “of little assistance”. Upholding Warby’s “careful” decision on summary judgment, the appeal judges said it was “hard to see what evidence could have been adduced at trial that would have altered the situation”. Vos said: “The judge had correctly decided that, whilst it might have been proportionate to publish a very small part of the letter for that purpose, it was not necessary to publish half the contents of the letter as Associated Newspapers had done.” Meghan’s barristers had argued that the letter was “deeply personal” and “self-evidently was intended to be kept private”. Texts released by the court in November showed Meghan expressing her frustration with the royal family, describing them as “constantly berating” Harry over the negative publicity surrounding her father before their wedding. This was a catalyst for her writing the letter, to protect Harry from his family, she wrote to Knauf. Emails also showed her wanting to counter stories about an alleged row over which tiara she could wear at her wedding, and denying reports of any row saying the Queen chose the tiara for her. ANL argued that Markle was entitled to publish extracts from the letter to counter the negative image of him portrayed by five of Meghan’s friends in an article in US People magazine. The case was discussed in the House of Commons on Thursday after the SNP MP Martin Docherty-Hughes asked Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the house, if he would congratulate the duchess. Rees-Mogg said: “It is concerning that the rich and powerful can use the court to protect their private life when others can’t. I would be deeply concerned about anything that undermines freedom of speech.”Gianluca Scamacca had a vision for how he wanted this season to play out. Asked in August whether he could earn a role for Italy at next year’s World Cup, the Sassuolo striker demurred, reminding the interviewer from Gazzetta dello Sport that he was still in the under-21s. “One step at a time,” said Scamacca. “But if I manage to play out the season that I have in my mind, the opportunity will arrive.” He probably did not imagine back then that Italy might struggle to reach the tournament, finishing behind Switzerland in their qualifying group. Scamacca had been spell-bound as he watched Roberto Mancini’s side win Euro 2020, calling the experience “magic” and defining it as a moment of “rebirth” for Italian football. Four months and four draws – with Bulgaria, Switzerland (twice) and Northern Ireland – later, the Azzurri have dropped into the play-offs for Qatar 2022. Now, after watching Scamacca score two brilliant goals in the space of four days against Milan and Napoli, Italians are starting to ask whether he could be the man to fire them past North Macedonia then either Portugal or Turkey in March. His strike on Sunday was beautifully taken, crashed off the underside of the bar from 25 yards. It felt even more noteworthy for the fact that it arrived at San Siro, with one of his great footballing idols, Zlatan Ibrahimovic, playing for the opposition. Yet his goal on Wednesday was even better. Milan’s defenders had given Scamacca all the time and space he could want to line up his shot. By contrast, there were three Napoli players surrounding him inside the penalty area when he controlled Georgios Kyriakopoulos’s cross on his chest at an awkward height, manoeuvring it away from the first before bisecting the other two with a volley that arrowed into the roof of the net. Both goals helped turn games around. Sassuolo had trailed 1-0 to Milan before Scamacca struck and he was in effect responsible for the second goal as well, his shot from a corner blocked by Mike Maignan but ricocheting out off the keeper to hit the defender Simon Kjær and bounce backward over the line. His team went on to win 3-1. Another comeback against Napoli seemed implausible. This time Sassuolo found themselves 2-0 down after 70 minutes, against opponents who had conceded seven times in 14 games. Scamacca himself had been largely anonymous, starved of space and possession by the central defensive pairing of Kalidou Koulibaly and Amir Rrahmani. But goals change games. Scamacca’s moment of individual brilliance created a window of opportunity and Sassuolo crashed through it in the 89th minute, Gian Marco Ferrari heading home from a Domenico Berardi free-kick. The Neroverdi thought they had taken all three points when Gregoire Defrel slammed a left-footed shot into the bottom corner in injury time, but this strike was rightly boverturned after a VAR review. Berardi had won possession by fouling Rrahmani before delivering the assist to his teammate. Still, four points from two games against title contenders is nothing to sniff at. This is a transitional season for Sassuolo, who finished eighth in each of the past two under Roberto De Zerbi before he left to take over at Shakhtar Donetsk. His replacement, Alessio Dionisi, was heralded as one of the bright young minds of Italian coaching after leading Empoli to the top of Serie B, but this is his first time coaching in the top flight. He has implemented several changes, swapping De Zerbi’s 4-2-3-1 for a 4-3-3 and moving towards a more controlled style of play than his predecessor, whose tactics were founded on lightning transitions and an often reckless commitment to playing one-touch football out from the back. Yet it may turn out that his most meaningful choice was giving Scamacca his chance to shine. Sassuolo signed the striker from PSV in January 2017 but had sent him out on loan every year since. Their intention to give him space this season was signalled when they let Francesco Caputo – scorer of 32 goals over the past two campaigns – leave for Sampdoria in the summer. It was a gamble. Scamacca’s qualities were evident – physical power, extravagant technique and rare height at almost 6ft 5in. But the step from there to becoming a consistent scorer is still a significant one. He netted a modest nine times at Genoa last season – though that number starts to look more impressive when you see that it was one goal for every 104 minutes he spent on the pitch. That is not the only area where closer scrutiny casts Scamacca in a more favourable light. His decision to join PSV at the age of 16 was the subject of much comment, with accusations that he had betrayed Roma after growing up in their academy system, yet his own explanation for the move is eminently reasonable. “I always thought in Italy that there was a limit in the mentality when it came to launching and valuing a young player,” he said. “I was convinced that going abroad I would grow as a young man and as an athlete.” Then there is the story of his father breaking into the Roma training ground this May, reportedly causing damage to buildings and parked cars before being arrested by police. The player was forced to explain publicly that they are not close, telling reporters that he grew up with his mother and sister and that is who he considers his family. The court of public opinion can be fickle. Scamacca himself has speculated that some people see trouble in him just because he likes tattoos and does not shy away from confrontation on the pitch, arguing that if you are meek in character and “wind up between Bonucci and Chiellini, you will never see the ball”. There was also a 2017 incident in which he and Moise Kean were sent home from an Italy Under-19s training camp for what were reported as practical jokes taken too far. Yet coaches speak highly of his work ethic and commitment to fulfilling his potential. Davide Ballardini, one of his managers at Genoa, likened him to a young Christian Vieri, adding: “He will get better. He’s a big clean kid with a desire to improve.” Italians hope it will be a sharp upward trajectory. The No 9 spot was a tricky one for the national team even when they were winning. Now, given the World Cup situation, it is a riddle that urgently needs to be solved. Perhaps those games come too soon for a 22-year-old who is yet to start a senior international. But Scamacca had a vision in his head of how this season could end with him playing at a World Cup for Italy. Only he knows exactly what the journey there looked like.Hello, and Happy Thursday, Over the last few months, we’ve seen lawmakers in several states draw new, distorted political districts that entrench their political power for the next decade. Republicans are carving up Texas, North Carolina and Georgia to hold on to their majorities. Democrats have the power to draw maps in far fewer places, but they’ve also shown a willingness to use it where they have it, in places like Illinois and Maryland. But something uniquely disturbing is happening in Ohio. Republicans control the legislature there and recently enacted new maps that would give them a supermajority in the state legislature and allow them to hold on to at least 12 of the state’s 15 congressional seats. It’s an advantage that doesn’t reflect how politically competitive Ohio is: Donald Trump won the state in 2020 with 53% of the vote. What’s worse is that Ohio voters have specifically enacted reforms in recent years that were supposed to prevent this kind of manipulation. Republicans have completely ignored them. It underscores how challenging it is for reformers to wrest mapmaking power from politicians. “It’s incredibly difficult to get folks to say, ‘OK, we’re just gonna do this fairly after years and years and decades and decades of crafting districts that favor one political party,’” Catherine Turcer, the executive director of the Ohio chapter of Common Cause, a government watchdog group that backed the reforms, told me earlier this year. “I did not envision this being as shady.” In 2015 and 2018, Ohio voters overwhelmingly approved two separate constitutional amendments that were meant to make mapmaking fairer. The 2015 amendment dealt with drawing state legislative districts and gave a seven-person panel, comprised of elected officials from both parties, power to draw districts. If the panel couldn’t agree on new maps, they would only be in effect for four years, as opposed to the usual 10. The 2018 amendment laid out a slightly different process for drawing congressional districts, but the overall idea was the same. Both reforms also said districts could not unfairly favor or disfavor a political party. Something started to seem amiss earlier this fall when the panel got to work trying to create the new state legislative districts. The two top Republicans in the legislature wound up drawing the maps in secret, shutting their fellow GOP members out of the process. After reaching an impasse with Democrats, Republicans on the panel approved a plan that gives the GOP a majority in the state legislature for the next four years. When it came time to draw congressional maps, things did not go much better. The panel barely even attempted to fulfill its mission, kicking mapmaking power back to the state legislature. Lawmakers there quickly enacted the congressional plan that benefits the GOP for the next four years. The new map benefits the GOP by cracking Democratic-heavy Hamilton county, home of Cincinnati, into three different congressional districts, noted the Cook Political Report. It also transforms a district in northern Ohio, currently represented by Democrat Marcy Kaptur, the longest serving woman in Congress, from one Joe Biden carried by 19 points in 2020 to one Trump would have carried by 5 points. The maps already face several lawsuits, and their fate will ultimately be decided by the Ohio supreme court. Republicans have a 4-3 advantage on the court, though one of the GOP justices is considered a swing vote. We’ll soon see if voter-approved reforms will be completely defanged. Reader questions Please continue to write to me each week with your questions about elections and voting at sam.levine@theguardian.com or DM me on Twitter at @srl and I’ll try to answer as many as I can. Also worth watching … Few places better encapsulate the new Republican effort to undermine American elections than Wisconsin. Some Republicans there are calling for the removal of the non-partisan head of the state’s election commission. Georgia saw a jump in the percentage of rejected mail-in ballot requests in one of the first elections after Republicans imposed new requirements. Many of those who had their ballot requests rejected didn’t ultimately vote in person, according to the Atlanta Journal Constitution. The Justice Department on Tuesday filed a statement of interest in voting rights lawsuits in Arizona, Texas and Florida. All three filings significantly defend the power and scope of section two of the Voting Rights Act, one of the most powerful remaining provisions of the 1965 civil rights law.What is hip-hop? Downage It is the sound of the rebellious. I’d say it’s the universal language of the youth. And whether it’s teenagers to people in their 20s, 30s, 40s to 50s, there’s no age limit on it. It’s what brings people together. You can go to a concert and it’s everybody in that motherfucker! So yeah, it is a universal love language. Why do I love that you love Kate Bush so much? (Big fan of both of you) Stronzo123 If I had to pick a favourite, I gotta say The Dreaming – that album was so moody. I just go on my phone and type “Kate Bush” and let it cycle through all of it. Before you know it, I’ve spent my whole day listening to Kate Bush. I love Experiment IV. That was so underrated. Even like The Wedding List or Babooshka – those music videos were ahead of their time. She’s the best. As a lifelong Outkast fan, I have two questions. First, what was it like filming [Depression-era musical] Idlewild? Second, as a rapper with one of the most unique flows in hip-hop, what were your influences? DM3000 I might be up late at night and Idlewild comes on HBO and I’m like: “Wow, we really did that!” Just like the Outkast music, man; some things were light years ahead of their time. I think that film and that experience is something that is a cult classic. From the music to the wardrobe to the story to the messages. It was cool [to explore our blues roots]. The prohibition era and all that? With the hooch. It is one of those things that’s going to be here for ever. In terms of the flow, there’s something of everything. I’ll give you my top artists of all time: 1a is Bob Marley, 1b is Kate Bush, and then right behind her is NWA. So, that tells you where I am at with it. As far as MCing, we listen to everything from A Tribe Called Quest to 8 Ball and MJG, the 2 Live Crew. UGK. MC Ren was one of the hardest motherfuckers ever! Definitely E-40. You just sort of find your style … and it’s a hodgepodge of everything. I can go out of different corners and crevices of the beat and catch the guitar lick. Then I jump back on the snare and ride the bass for a minute. It is definitely a gift from God. What was it like working with George Clinton? PhilipJMRebbec People ask me: is George Clinton like the dude on the Mothership Connection album cover in real life? Abso-fucking-lutely. The first time we worked with him was on Synthesizer on Aquemini. The last part of the song, he says: “Said she’d lapdance on your laptop / while your laptop’s in your lap!” He came up with that on the spot. To me, he is really a rapper. He just went in the booth and started going. A one taker. A funk god. Where have you enjoyed performing most? Bleakdouglas Super Bowl was one. And the other one was the album of the year performance we did at the Grammys. It was crazy to perform with Earth, Wind and Fire. What were your feelings as you took to the stage to accept your best new artist award at the infamous 1995 Source awards? DeJongandtherestless The east coast and west coast beef was happening. It was weird, but it was exciting too. This was our first big awards show and we were nominated, and for us to actually win, it was like: “OK, they know what time it is for us in the south!” But when we got booed, it was like: “OK, y’all thought this was a novelty or a one-time thing? Wait till we show you what else we can do.” It put the batteries in our back to just keep going harder as Outkast. Tupac actually wanted to work with us on his unreleased One Nation album, which was all about uniting everybody. I remember him barking to me and Andre 3000 down the phone like: “Yo, I need you on this compilation! I got my group the Outlawz. Yo, we gotta do it maaaaan! We’re gonna change the world.” That kind of talk. We lost someone special. What is your favourite meal? Yousoonice Gotta be some lobster. I am a pescatarian who occasionally indulges in turkey and chicken. I ain’t eaten beef or pork in almost 30 years. I cut that out of my diet. It has to be like a lobster tail. A rice pilaf. Some black-eyed peas … seasoned correctly, that’s important. Throw on a butter bean or a liver bean. Yeah. I’m a real bean guy. Could you please detail your bathing regime and recommend body products keeping you So Fresh, So Clean? McScootikins I was born with the drip, son. I come from a long line of pimps, hustlers, now-and-later gators, exquisite fabrics and designers. That is all part of it. I always thought that Outkast’s production had drum’n’bass and other electronic music influences in it way before that was a thing in hip-hop. Where did that come from? Donkeyhorsegoat What really got us into drum’n’bass was when we went to London and we was going to all the clubs. Seeing and hearing these sounds. 808s have always been in our music, but the whole drum’n’bass thing, and matching that tempo, well, it was a crazy challenge. That influence was just from being overseas and in Europe and just seeing the different atmospheres and the way people moved to this music. We wanted to bring some of it back to Atlanta with us. I might have to be hypnotised to remember what the name of those clubs were, though. Hmmm. We were smoking so good back then. Do you miss the 90s? ManofStone17 I miss the creative bubble. Where, like, you could have 10 artists come out and nine of them will sound completely different. Now you’ve got 10 artists and 10 of them sound the same. You gotta switch it up and evolve. That is what is gonna stabilise you and give you longevity. You cannot stay in that one spot as they’re gonna catch up with you and they’re gonna mimic. You gotta carve another path in the grass, you know? If you built a Big Boi’s Atlanta-themed miniature golf, what Atlanta landmarks would you choose as obstacles? robotdoggy Def gotta use the Dungeon, the original house. Maybe Stone Mountain. [Strip clubs] Magic City and the Blue Flame. The new ferris wheel at Centennial Park, throw that in there, as that is some new shit. Maybe Stankonia studios? Places like Magic City are more than just a strip club. That’s where the next sound plays. The strip club DJ is gonna set the tempo of what is happening in the city as everyone is in that motherfucker! If it rings off there, you’ve got a hit. What do you think is the future of hip-hop? Giantfunkymonkey It depends what these labels are doing. Right now, the artists have more control, ’cos of social media. There’s more direct access to your fanbase. That is the future. Peer-to-peer. Give it straight to them. Get rid of the middleman. I saw you at a Burger King with Terry Riley at an ATP festival once – what did you talk about? Rubberechoes What’s crazy is I didn’t even know who Terry Riley was at first. That is the only time you might catch me at a Burger King or McDonald’s … when we are in Europe and can’t get a chef cooked meal. People were like holy shit, it is Terry Riley! Honestly, the dude’s beard was majestic. Real life Lord of the Rings. Gandalf type-shit. What was it like to work with the Atlanta ballet? ericah I was the first rapper to rap with the ballet and have four sold-out shows. I did something different; it was one hell of an experience. It is something I am thinking of bringing back – I am actually thinking of taking it to Las Vegas. To create a musical and play those classic trap songs would be beautiful. How many Outkast songs/albums do you and Andre 3000 have in the vault? MaximFlath [Smiles from ear to ear and nods enthusiastically] Yeah, boy! There is a lot of unreleased music around here, man. Will OutKast reunite for a new album? Manicm You would have to talk to the Lord Jesus. Only he knows. Big Boi and Sleepy Brown’s album The Big Sleepover is released on 10 DecemberThe privacy victory over the Mail on Sunday has seemingly exacted a toll on the Duchess of Sussex, who in vigorously pursuing the case went far further than any other present-day royal in taking on the tabloid culture. The court of appeal stressed “no expense” was spared in fighting and defending the legal action over publication of extensive extracts of her private letter to her estranged father. As losers, Associated Newspapers Limited (ANL), publishers of the newspaper and Mail Online, will bear the brunt. But Meghan paid a personal, emotional price after finding herself up against a formidable foe. Her statement, issued after Thursday’s ruling, spoke of being “scared”, of being “brave enough to reshape a tabloid industry”, of being centre stage in a “game with no rules”, of facing “deception, intimidation and calculated attacks”. By suing, she risked a full trial – which is what ANL sought at appeal – and with that the potential prospect of her, Prince Harry, and her father, Thomas Markle, 77, all being cross-examined in the witness box with no control over personal questions levelled at them while under oath. It is for this very reason royals, if possible, avoid such scenarios. Even without a trial, as the appeal court upheld the decision to judge the case by way of summary judgment without the need for one, Meghan saw personal information forced into the public domain by way of texts and emails, released by the court, showing her and Harry pleading with her father, and between her and her former communications chief Jason Knauf. They showed Meghan resorted to writing the letter as a way of appeasing the royal family, who were expecting her to rein in her father and his habit of talking to the press. Senior royals were “constantly berating” Harry over why she couldn’t stop Markle, so the letter was to protect her husband, she said, to show she was doing everything she could. She fought applications by ANL to reveal the identities of five friends, who spoke favourably to US People magazine about her, though, she said, without her consent. Days after her lawyers fended that off, successfully winning anonymity orders, she miscarried her second pregnancy, her witness statement revealed. Her doctors advised her to avoid stress, she said. But the process was “extremely stressful, and it took its toll physically and emotionally”. When she discovered she was pregnant for a third time – with daughter Lilibet – she applied for and was granted a delay in proceedings. She felt, she said in one witness statement, that ANL was “doing everything it could to make this litigation as intrusive as possible”. Her determination to take on the defendant, she said after Thursday’s victory, was because she saw the lawsuit as an “important measure of right versus wrong”. One member of her legal team, Jenny Afia, of Schillings, has said the Mail on Sunday’s publication of extensive extracts of the letter was “almost the final straw after this long pattern of disturbing behaviour by the tabloids”, for whom the Sussexes were “big business”. Meghan and Harry, who is pursuing legal action against the Sun and the Mirror over alleged phone hacking, have made no secret of their loathing of some elements of the media. The couple has been attacked for legally seeking to protect their privacy, while at the same time appearing on chat shows, and publishing their views in various publications and forums. “They have taken steps when there have been blatant violations, unlawful violations of privacy. Of course then they have challenged it, because that’s in line with their values,” Afia told the recent BBC documentary The Princes and the Press. “But that doesn’t mean, just because you assert your human rights, that you then become some kind of Trappist monk and take a vow of silence, you’re not allowed to discuss anything. “That’s not how privacy works. Privacy is about the right to own and control what personal information you choose to share with somebody.”Symone Sanders, chief spokesperson and a senior adviser to Kamala Harris, is to leave the White House at the end of the year, Politico has reported, renewing speculation of chaos and dysfunction within the vice-president’s office. The departure of Sanders is the second high-profile exit from Harris’s staff within two weeks, following the resignation of communications director Ashley Etienne. It also comes amid reported friction with Joe Biden’s team over the role of his vice-president, and stories that Harris feels “sidelined” in the job as the president prepares to launch his campaign for a second term. Sanders, in a farewell note to staff reported by Politico, gave no reason for her exit, and did not say where she intends to go next. Some political observers, however, noted that the news of her leaving came the same day as Stacey Abrams, another highly visible Democrat on the national stage, launched her campaign for Georgia governor. Sanders, 31, joined Harris’s office after spending the 2020 presidential campaign as a senior adviser to Biden. The former political commentator has been one of the best-known faces in the administration, and a vocal defender of Harris in recent weeks and months as the vice-president faced criticism, particularly after a rocky trip to Guatemala in the summer. Harris, plagued by the same sinking approval ratings that have plagued Biden, has struggled with messaging, and drawn flak from prominent figures on both wings of the Democratic party, including the moderate West Virginia senator Joe Manchin and the progressive congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. This contributed to mounting frustration among Harris’s team, and from the vice-president herself, who has reportedly told aides that she feels badly positioned to take over from Biden, even as the 79-year-old president mulls whether to run again in 2024. Conversely, according to CNN, Biden’s staff is watching closely for any signs of disloyalty within the Harris camp, despite outward messages of support. Such stories of tension between the two prompted the White House press secretary Jen Psaki to issue a rare defense of the vice-president last month, calling Harris, the first woman and person of color to reach the office, “a bold leader”, and suggesting at least some criticism of her was rooted in sexism. In a statement to the Washington Post, a spokesperson for Harris paid tribute to Sanders. “Symone has served honorably for three years. The president and vice-president are grateful for Symone’s service and advocacy for this administration. She is a valued member of the White House and a team player – she will be missed,” it said. Sanders previously served as press secretary to the Vermont senator Bernie Sanders during his 2016 campaign for the Democratic party’s presidential nomination that year, which was ultimately won by Hillary Clinton. She became a regular political commentator and analyst on CNN and elsewhere before joining Biden’s team as an adviser and strategist for his 2020 defeat of Donald Trump. After becoming Harris’s chief spokesperson, she traveled often with the vice-president and was quick to highlight her work despite evidence of escalating dysfunction among her staff.Where does Ivo van Hove find the time? The ubiquitous Belgian director’s newly announced version of The Human Voice by Jean Cocteau will be staged in London in March, starring Ruth Wilson. His subterranean take on Tennessee Williams’ The Glass Menagerie, made for the Odéon in Paris, has just run at his ensemble’s home, the Internationaal Theater Amsterdam. Several of his shows for ITA’s repertory continue to tour. His epic revenge drama Age of Rage – about the Trojan war – is planned for spring at the Barbican, where his take on Thomas Mann’s Death in Venice was scuppered by the pandemic. He is one of Europe’s most in-demand stage directors, but while his reputation was made on radical, virtuoso versions of ancient Greek tragedies and weighty American dramas, his rise is also inseparable from his passion for cinema. Ingmar Bergman, John Cassavetes and Luchino Visconti are among the auteurs whose films he has reimagined for the stage with his partner, the designer Jan Versweyveld. Those collaborations have become the subject of an exhibition, All About Theatre About Film, put together by the duo at Amsterdam’s canal-side Eye Filmmuseum. It’s a show that leaves you giddy: desperate to watch or rewatch the films that inspired them, vexed about the stage productions you missed, and bowled over by their development of intricate, thrumming worlds – culminating in the TV studio-cum-working restaurant that filled the National’s Lyttelton theatre for Network in 2017. In the museum’s vast gallery space, the pair have created a number of immersive rooms each with its own distinctive mise-en-scène to evoke the cinema-inspired stage productions. You walk from the detached, cool-blue room memorialising their Antonioni Project – based on three films by the Italian director – and on to the messy domestic realm of Bergman’s Scenes from a Marriage, where you sit on scattered cube chairs to watch footage of Van Hove’s actors unleashing accusations, festering resentments and murderous dreams in his sprawling adaptation. The rooms contain original props, costumes and sound recordings – played on directional speakers – as well as photographs and notebooks. Many of them also juxtapose scenes from the original films with corresponding footage of the stage versions. What comes through is the consistency not just of Van Hove’s style – he has developed an increasingly sophisticated use of live video on stage – but also of his themes. In a 2004 fax to Bergman, exhibited in the Scenes from a Marriage room, he writes: “Family life … has always been the central core of my work as a director … The inevitable burden and haven it presents in man’s life are a central starting point to speak about society and politics.” He could be talking about the Wingfield family who have burrowed underground in Versweyveld’s earthy set for Tennessee Williams’ The Glass Menagerie. Or the cocoon-like court of Ludwig II of Bavaria, whose tragedy – filtered through Visconti – he staged in Munich in 2011. Or the hardscrabble family who settle in Milan in Visconti’s Rocco and His Brothers, which he staged with the audience surrounding a huge square that doubled as dining table and boxing ring. That table dominates one room of the exhibition, holding piles of dirty dishes and a pot of spaghetti bolognese. In Rocco, the actors came together to eat a meal on stage and this exhibition attracts our senses, too. A citronella diffuser is used in the first room, which marks Van Hove’s 1999 production India Song, based on Marguerite Duras’s experimental film. With warm lighting from above and a carpet beneath our feet, it evokes the woozy romance spun by Duras, whose characters are represented by a black gown and a white linen suit, both by Dries van Noten, hanging on mannequins. The installation complements the rather grainy archive footage of the original staging (a reminder how far filmed theatre has come) to give an idea of what it would have felt like to watch the intimate production, which invited audience members to sit on the stage. A later room, devoted to Van Hove’s version of Visconti’s thriller Obsession, is filled with a heavy rusty smell. A huge grimy engine is suspended from the ceiling, as in the 2017 production, in which Jude Law played a drifting mechanic whose passionate affair leads him to murder. Here, the engine resembles a projector as it hangs in front of a screen with clips from the production; a huge shadow cast on the floor bringing to mind the oil that was spilled on stage. I found much of the Barbican show tacky, not least Law’s frantic getaway on a treadmill. But in the tighter space of the exhibition room, with clips of the show at cinema-screen size, you see the quality of the performances. A sense of claustrophobia encroaches in a manner that is perhaps impossible on the vast, exposing Barbican stage where Obsession was presented. The hulking engine could be an installation in itself and seems charged with the essence of Obsession: a sweaty, pungent and rather lumbering production. The idea that objects can encapsulate a play is a notion pursued in speeches chosen from Van Hove’s adaptation of After the Rehearsal, and the original film by Bergman, which are screened next to each other. The director Henrik tells actor Anna that the furniture around them in the theatre that has previously been used for Strindberg productions – a stool from Miss Julie, chairs from A Dream Play – are “acquaintances all” and that these objects bring with them resonances of their previous uses on stage. This is an idea explored by Strindberg himself in A Dream Play, where an old shawl is said to have absorbed years of sorrow. But actors bring a residue of their old roles, too – something that is felt all the more profoundly in an ensemble like ITA whose core actors reappear from room to room in the exhibition, inviting us to make connections between their roles. We watch the clips from After the Rehearsal while sitting on “the Hedda Gabler sofa” – that is, the stained Ikea-style couch used by Van Hove in his version rather than the elegant sofa used by Bergman. Linger for long enough and memories come back of the interiors in Van Hove’s Hedda Gabler with Ruth Wilson at the National: the solemn piano, the framed gun, the flowers stapled to the walls. The exhibition’s room for Bergman’s Persona, which he staged as a double bill with After the Rehearsal, presents another installation, this time using an artwork that inspired Van Hove. A waxy torso sculpted by Berlinde de Bruyckere is presented in a cabinet that stands on a flooded stage, its reflection in the water rippling to evoke melting flesh and chiming with Persona’s inquiry into blurring identities. As well as the copious handwritten notes by Van Hove and the meticulous model boxes and photos by Versweyveld, we are given a hands-on sense of their approach to theatre-making, with clips from a documentary about the making of Husbands, one of three John Cassavetes stagings represented together in a single room. We watch footage of rehearsals from rows of old cinema-style seats but a huge blown-up photo on the adjacent wall reminds us of Van Hove’s radical immersion of audiences into the world of his plays. Theatregoers for Faces reclined together on beds to watch the drama unfold around them. It’s a reminder of an age before social distancing and the threat that the pandemic continues to pose to theatre. The day after I saw the exhibition and Van Hove’s Glass Menagerie, the Netherlands brought forward its curfew for evening entertainment, leading ITA to cancel shows for the weeks ahead. The exhibition remains open daily and deserves a European tour of its own (the Barbican would be the natural space in London, considering its past presentations of the duo’s pair and their stylish merging of design, film and theatre). But part of the exhibition’s achievement is how well it fits the space of the stunning Eye Filmmuseum. Its final coup de theatre is how you emerge, from a room containing the news desk of Network’s mad-as-hell Howard Beale and footage of the huge working restaurant at the Lyttelton, into the museum’s own restaurant, with its tiered seating, cool angular lines and installation-style lighting clusters by Olafur Eliasson. It is a world as if imagined by Van Hove and Versweyveld themselves. All About Theatre About Film is at the Eye Filmmuseum, Amsterdam, until 23 January.We’re not back into lockdown, of course, or anything even vaguely resembling it yet. Instead we are tumbling once again down the rabbit hole of uncertainty, into that wearily familiar world where every plan feels made to be potentially broken. It’s back to the constant pinging of WhatsApp groups, just wondering if everyone’s still comfortable with the plan for getting together at the weekend; back to the Covid-era maths of counting backwards from whichever social highlight you really don’t want to miss this Christmas and then strategically cancelling anything in the run-up that might risk you getting infected, which explains why some firms are now scrapping the office party. Who wants to end up sadly self-isolating on Christmas Day, just for the sake of a night making awkward small talk with the boss? Unless, that is, you work in Downing Street, where aides were allegedly popping corks last December as intensive care beds were filling up. No 10 insists that reports of after-work drinking sessions featuring secret Santas, Christmas quizzes and letting off steam into the small hours were all within the rules that banned social gatherings at the time, which suggests it was defining parties in much the same creative way that Bill Clinton defined sex during the Monica Lewinsky episode. Parties are what other people were getting fined £10,000 for having. A few dozen people boozing in a packed room – well, that’s just government. How reassuring it is to know those responsible are still in charge as we head back into another fraught winter. Meanwhile, for those working in the NHS, or running a small business that wouldn’t survive another lockdown, or remembering how they struggled with their mental health during that last lonely winter, the knotted dread in the pit of the stomach is back. Since we still know so little about the Omicron variant of Covid-19 currently causing exponential growth in South Africa, the hope remains that all this could still be a false alarm. Perhaps it really will turn out to be less infectious than feared, at least in a highly vaccinated country such as Britain, or else a cause of mild infections only. It could be weeks before we know whether it really is the big one – the mutation scientists always half-expected to come along and make a mockery of our confidence that the pandemic was over – or just another damp squib. But until we know, the work and pensions secretary, Thérèse Coffey, is right to warn against snogging under the mistletoe. Whatever happens with Omicron, the underlying reality is that Britain is still surfing into winter on a wave of existing Covid infections with all the red lights on NHS dashboards flashing. The sight of ambulances queueing outside A&amp;E is a telltale symptom of a hospital system struggling to cope with both a backlog of non-Covid cases and a growing crisis in social care, meaning frail elderly patients can’t be discharged because they have nowhere else to go. (Stopping people having to sell their houses to fund care, still the centrepiece of the government’s reforms, feels like the least of anyone’s problems this winter.) The scenario most likely to prompt more restrictions now isn’t mass Covid deaths but rising infections causing the NHS to buckle under pressure, which would risk people dying from lack of prompt medical care for all sorts of otherwise treatable illnesses or accidents. But that’s a more abstract threat than the visceral fear of a killer virus, and more complicated for public health experts to convey. Last week, after riots in Holland at the prospect of lockdown there, Chris Whitty told the Local Government Association that his biggest worry now was whether “we can still take people with us” if further restrictions were needed. On the surface, that seems surprising. Time and time again, Britons have proved more willing to put up with drastic constraints on their lives than anyone could have imagined. Polling shows that the handful of noisy keyboard warriors moaning this week about the return of masks in shops and on public transport are woefully at odds with the public mood. But if more painful restrictions were needed this winter, there are reasons to think it would be an uglier argument this time round. Before the vaccine, millions were genuinely afraid either of dying from Covid, or inadvertently killing those we loved. But the jab has made us bolder, and that’s what makes this winter different from the last. This time, a government trying to shut down pubs, restaurants or socialising would be grappling not just with exhaustion – the sense that people are tired of living like this – but anger from those who were repeatedly told that vaccination would set them free. They did their bit and got their jabs, so why should they sit around watching their livelihoods go to the wall, just because the virus still poses a very real threat to those who stubbornly refused the vaccine? The current wave of Covid-19 surging in Europe has seen a growing backlash emerging against unvaccinated people, the most obvious scapegoats for the fact that the virus still hasn’t gone away, and this is increasingly seeping into policy. In Austria, unvaccinated people were locked down last month while everyone else enjoyed their freedom. In Latvia, lawmakers who refuse the vaccine have been barred from voting on new laws and taking part in debates. In Singapore, unjabbed individuals are told they’ll have to pay for their hospital treatment, effectively a punishment for not doing the responsible thing. Here, such naked discrimination still seems as unthinkable as refusing to treat smokers for lung cancer; it’s a core principle of medicine that doctors treat all comers without judgment, no matter how distressed they may get about having to cancel much-needed operations because ICU beds are full of Covid patients realising too late they should have got the vaccine. But if new restrictions prove necessary, either to suppress Omicron or whatever variant comes next, don’t be surprised if there is a backlash against the idea that vaccinated and unvaccinated people should all be in it together – especially if the Treasury proves reluctant to offer the kind of generous support that cushioned the pain of past lockdowns. All this, of course, still feels very theoretical now. Many South Africans were baffled by the rest of the world’s heightened reaction to Omicron, and maybe in a few weeks’ time we too will look back and feel sheepish for worrying. But whatever happens, it would be wise to start thinking now about the shifting dilemmas of the post-vaccinated era, and to stay one step ahead not just of the virus itself but of its uncanny ability to disrupt and confound. For almost two years, the pandemic has been tearing up much of what we thought we knew about the way a modern economy and society functions. It may not be done with disconcerting us just yet. Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnistIt’s the morning after the night before, the night in which the 11-strong, Belfast-based Array Collective, along with two babes-in-arms and one tiny golden-haired child, stepped on to the podium at Coventry Cathedral in their sparkling finery to receive the Turner prize. Three of them – Emma Campbell, Sighle Bhreathnach-Cashell and Stephen Millar – have volunteered to brave hangovers and speak for this group of friends. Each has their own artistic practice, but they won the prize in their guise as a collective, through which they campaign on such issues as women’s rights, language rights and LGBT rights, with wild costumes, clever banners and a great deal of dark humour. When you enter their section of the Turner prize exhibition, at the Herbert Art Gallery and Museum in Coventry, you are enfolded into the dark, cosy and faintly anarchic arms of a lovingly recreated síbín, or illicit bar, where every detail – from the banners hanging from the ceiling to the ashtrays painted with Ulster’s red hand – has some story, some significance in their history of campaigning, on often difficult and painful issues such as abortion. “Our síbín,” says Bhreathnach-Cashell, “is almost like a self-portrait of Northern Ireland. When tourists come to Northern Ireland, even English tourists, people always say how friendly the place is, sitting alongside the conflict. The irony of that is not lost on us. But we were also consciously thinking, ‘Let’s make [our part of the show] a comfortable place, so that people can sit there and absorb it and take time with it.’” The warmth of the space is a way of defusing the tensions and traumas inherent in Northern Ireland’s past and present – and inviting visitors not to move on, to sit and think about them in a context that doesn’t feel too worthy or didactic. As Millar puts it: “Where would you rather be, the pub or a gallery?” The previous evening, asked what they planned to do with the £25,000 prize as they stood on the platform, mention was made of doing something about the perilous state of the studios they share. This morning, the reality of being part of a collective is more judiciously taken into account: “Well, of course, we’ll have to have a meeting about it,” says Campbell. She had tried, before the prize ceremony, to get everyone to think about what they’d do if they won, but no one wanted to jinx their chances. (Making decisions as a group is, they hint, just as difficult as you might expect. It’s even hard to find time for meetings, as everyone has a paying job to support their art. “There are no trustafarians in Array,” says Campbell.) After they had been nominated for the Turner prize, news came that the building they occupy in Belfast had been sold and they needed to be out in 18 months. It’s not just the old story of gentrification following in the wake of artists, says Bhreathnach-Cashell, but “terrible town-planning and capitalism gone mad”. There are loads of buildings pointlessly standing empty in the city centre, they say, but the rents have gone crazy. They’d like to stay central: that way anyone can drop in quickly and make, or pick up, a banner if there’s a march. It’s an intriguing year for the Turner prize, the judges having made the decision to solely shortlist collectives. That was partly pragmatic, in the face of the cancellation of many of the exhibitions that would normally have been considered (officially the prize recognises an artist’s shows in the year prior to nomination). But it was also a political gesture, to foreground communal, social action during the pandemic. Some found it a quixotic decision – a continuation of an odd period for the prize, since last year it was commuted into a series of bursaries; and the year before, the shortlisted artists refused to be set against each other, claiming the prize jointly. “The explosive, neoliberal individualism of the Young British Artists has given way to the notion of art serving a social purpose,” Jake Chapman, who was nominated with his brother Dinos in 2003, told the New York Times. “I’m just wondering at what point will it merge with Social Services.” Some will not mourn that “explosive neoliberalism”, though. Nevertheless, the result is that the first Northern Irish artists to win the prize are not superstars Willie Doherty or Cathy Wilkes, but a group of ordinary, non-starry artists for work that some might say stretches the definition of art to breaking point. Array shrug off this criticism. After all, says Campbell, “all art is political, even if the artist doesn’t think it is.” That is, all cultural production is bound up in its political context, not least in how it is funded. On the other hand, there is plenty of artistry in the way Array draw attention to the causes they espouse. On show in their síbín in Coventry is a film of an event they held in Belfast this year, the Druithaib’s Ball, which involved a phantasmagoria of performances, stories and wild costumes bringing a carnivalesque lightness to an often dark, difficult and divided political backdrop. Not all those there were from the collective – the event was a wider celebration of art in Belfast and beyond, marking “in our own way” Northern Ireland’s centenary. Gay rights campaigner Richard O’Leary, for example, told a moving (and true) story about the “fairies” of Northern Ireland, deliberately fusing the implications of the word to give his tale a mythical undertow. Members of Array, which includes both Catholics and Protestants, also use the language of pre-Christian Irish folklore to burrow beneath a more recent history: that of the legacy of British colonialism, and the sectarian divide, that otherwise besets them at every turn. “We want to show an alternative voice to the sectarian green or orange,” says Bhreathnach-Cashell. “But at the same time, it infuses everything. It’s within us from living there.” The image of the Sheela-na-Gig – an ancient feminine symbol who holds open her vulva – has accompanied them on marches for reproductive rights, which are still in a parlous state in Northern Ireland as Westminster and Stormont tussle over abortion laws. And then there’s the Morrígan, a shapeshifting character from Irish folklore who, says Campbell, was a “very good representation of the ‘virgin, mother, crone’ idea; this very restricted idea of womanhood, especially from the likes of the DUP, who restrict what women can be.” The Morrígan (AKA Campbell) took herself off to Westminster recently “to beg for reproductive rights”. Millar has devised his own character, the Long Shadow, the shadow being the unresolved trauma of conflict that no one ever properly sees, which continues to have serious repercussions on suicide rates and mental health in the region. As he says: “There was a civil war here. And nobody ever talks about it.” Sometimes, the mood is airier and more mischievous. One banner in the síbín reads: “Prepared for peas, ready for sausage war” – a reference to perhaps the most notorious of Belfast’s paramilitary murals which, accompanied by a sinister image of armed, hooded men, reads: “Prepared for peace, ready for war.” Array’s rewording is a dig at the “sausage war” and the DUP’s concern earlier this year that British bangers would struggle to find their way to Northern Ireland owing to Brexit. It’s a typical move from Array – to disarm, in all senses, the violent symbols of the region’s past. “Sometimes the culture here just hands you a joke on a plate,” says Campbell. Whatever you think of the Turner prize, and the direction it has taken this year, it’s hard not to be uplifted by the collective’s sense of hope, their passion for change and their hard-won humour – a flicker of light in the dark.Alcoholic drinks companies have issued fresh warnings that the Christmas supply of wine, spirits and beer could be disrupted, after the government refused to provide an update on efforts to resolve the shortage of HGV drivers. In an exchange in the Commons, the trade minister Ranil Jayawardena said he was “not going to provide a running commentary on numbers”, after being asked how many of 5,000 temporary visas earmarked for non-UK drivers had been issued. The shadow trade minister Bill Esterson described Jayawardena’s refusal to provide an update as “extraordinary”. He said: “The reality is that the Wine and Spirit Trade Association warns of delivery chaos, of major delays on wine and spirit delivery times - up to five times longer than last year - and increases in freight costs; no doubt it won’t affect parties in Downing Street. “I have to ask the minister: does he want to be responsible for cancelling Christmas celebrations elsewhere, because if he doesn’t, he needs to give a much better answer than the one he’s just given.” The Labour MP cited a letter sent last week to the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, by 48 firms including Pernod Ricard, Moët Hennessy and the Wine Society, which said rising costs and supply chain “chaos” had increased the risk that supermarkets run dry and festive deliveries arrive late. Drinks companies told the Guardian the situation was leading to extra costs and causing delays. The wine and spirits supplier Kingsland Drinks, which counts the large supermarket chains among its clients, fills about 185m bottles of wine every year, about one in eight drunk in the UK. Its managing director, Ed Baker, said the driver shortage was slowing down the company’s supply chain just as it was preparing for the busy Christmas period. “At this time of year our business trades 2.5m-3m litres of wine a week, most of which comes in bulk containers into UK ports and travels by rail to a rail hub near our Manchester site or to the port in Liverpool,” he said. “HGV drivers then transport the containers of liquid wine to our factory and are used to take the finished products to our customers, including major supermarkets. We, along with others across the wine and spirit industry, are experiencing hold-ups along the way.” Baker said the nationwide logjam in the supply chain had led to high demand for container spaces at the rail hubs. “We would normally expect to have 80 to 100 tank spaces but at the moment we can be down at 10 to 20,” he said. “This is limiting the amount of liquid getting to our plant and comes on top of the HGV driver shortages doing the deliveries. The driver surcharges will drive up costs and if products are turning up late it could lead to some festive drinks not making it on to supermarket shelves for Christmas.” Sam McMeekin, the founder of the Gipsy Hill brewery in south-east London, said the driver shortage was adding to his costs just as the business faced a hit from fears about the Omicron variant of Covid-19, which was making some people stay away from pubs, particularly in the city centre because of increase in home working. “We’ve finally managed to hire our own HGV driver, internalising that cost to hopefully save on the soaring cost of outsourcing it,” he said. “As a result the only impacts on us are ongoing super-high lead times for everything and lack of any flexibility in the market.” However the UK’s largest wine merchant, Majestic, insisted last week that “our shelves will remain full”.One day in 2018, the prolific documentary producer John Battsek received a call from Diane Weyermann of Participant Media, asking him if he would travel to the East Sussex village of Ditchling to meet a 69-year-old director named Luke Holland. Weyermann said that Holland had spent several years interviewing hundreds of Germans who were in some way complicit in the Holocaust, from those whose homes neighboured the concentration camps to former members of the Waffen SS. The responses he captured ran the gamut from shame to denial to a ghastly kind of pride. Now he wanted to introduce these testimonies to a mainstream audience, and he needed help. “Luke wasn’t consciously making a film,” Battsek says. “He was amassing an archive that he hoped would have a role to play for generations to come. We had to turn it into something that has a beginning, a middle and an end.” As soon as he saw Holland’s footage, he knew it was important: “It presented an audience with a new way into this.” At the time, Holland was in remission from myeloma, a form of bone marrow cancer, which had previously killed his brother, and B-cell lymphoma. In late 2019, while the film was in postproduction, he told Battsek that he had been given a year to live. That prognosis turned out to be optimistic. He died on 10 June 2020 at the age of 71, shortly after Weyermann visited him in hospital to tell him that Final Account had been selected for the Venice film festival. “He wanted the film out in the world,” Battsek says. “He wanted his work to be appreciated.” When Holland embarked on the project in 2008, he wrote a mission statement in the form of a semi-haiku: “My grandparents were murdered / I want to shoot old Nazis / I am a film-maker.” His Jewish mother had fled Austria for England just before the German annexation in 1938; her parents had not. Holland had previously explored the period in his films Good Morning Mr Hitler! and I Was a Slave Labourer. Now he wanted to build an archive of interviews with perpetrators, coaxing often reluctant men and women in their 80s and 90s into unearthing uncomfortable memories. “The main driver was: ‘If we don’t get these voices now, soon we won’t have the opportunity to do so,’” says Sam Pope, an associate producer of Final Acccount. Pope, who grew up in Ditchling, had known Holland since he was six. When they reconnected in 2011, Holland showed him some of his interviews, and Pope had the same reaction as Battsek would seven years later. “The raw power of it leapt off the screen and I wanted to be a part of it,” he says. “None of this was easy. But he’d set a mission for himself.” The interviews began in October 2008 and continued off and on until 2016. Holland travelled alone on a shoestring, living off donations from friends such as the composer Michael Nyman, because funding was hard to find. “Jewish organisations said: ‘Herr Holland, we’re not going to pay for you to speak to old Nazis,’” Pope explains. “So Luke went to the German organisations and they said: ‘Herr Holland, how would it look if we gave you money to speak to old Nazis?’” Eventually, the Pears Foundation, a Jewish charitable trust, agreed to help finance the archive. Pope describes Holland as charming, persuasive and “a very active listener”. The reflections and confessions that the director elicited are testament to his ability to listen, but also to probe and thus get people to reveal more than they had intended. “When Luke sat down opposite these people, he was always conscious of the door,” Pope says. “If he pushed too hard too early, then it could mean the shutters come down. But at the same time, he couldn’t let them get away with mitigating or downplaying their involvement. It’s a slow unravelling of someone’s tightly knitted personal history.” In one scene, Holland softly coaxes a man named Heinrich Schulze into admitting that the escapees from Bergen-Belsen who hid in his family’s farm were recaptured because Schulze himself reported them to the camp guards. “He [Holland] was very skilful,” Battsek says. “There are various moments when someone will say, ‘I wasn’t there’, and he will very gently ask questions that enable them to make it crystal clear that they’re lying and they were there.” He adds: “We wanted to present their view of their experiences in such a way as to enable an audience to come to its own conclusions.” There are many such indelible scenes in Final Account, all the more chilling for taking place in small-town living rooms on quiet afternoons: knobbled fingers fondly stroking old medals and Nazi insignia; eyes flashing with pride at belonging to the SS’s elite band of brothers; a croaking voice saying of Kristallnacht that “I didn’t feel any pity for the Jews”. Cutaways are used sparingly so that we can see whether the interviewees unapologetically meet the camera’s gaze or flinch and turn away. Some tremble on the precipice of acknowledging their guilt before retreating into denial or excuses. “The faces are the most interesting part,” Pope says. “You see their emotional responses to these memories as they’re dredging them up.” One of the few interviewees who accepts the full weight of guilt is a former SS member named Hans Werk. In the film’s standout sequence, Werk meets young Germans in the Wannsee villa where the ”final solution” was plotted, and loses his temper with one man who sounds like a neo-Nazi. In that moment of raw emotion, the reason for the film’s existence is clear. “I feel like the film has a spooky relevance to the times we’ve been living in, and how easy it is to be swept along by ideologies,” Battsek says. Working with Pope, Battsek, co-producer Riete Oord and the editor, Stefan Ronowicz, Holland had to whittle a lean, 90-minute film out of almost 600 hours of footage, comprising around 300 interviews. These ranged from one-off half-hour conversations to those spanning 16 separate encounters. “He was insatiable,” Pope says. “If he was still around, he’d probably still be looking for more. He was doing it for his grandparents, but it took on a larger significance when he screened some material for survivors. One said that to hear it coming from the mouths of those who were responsible confirms your own suffering.” The unseen footage survives in the archive, which is available to researchers via three institutions in London and Paris, with more to come. That may ultimately prove to be a more enduring legacy than Final Account itself. “There were three founding pillars for this project: education, research and memorial,” Pope says. “Perpetrator – as opposed to survivor – testimony is a relatively new field, so we’re taking great care that it’s properly contextualised.” Holland was diagnosed in 2013 and lost a year to chemotherapy. At one point he was given just days to live, before a successful course of stem-cell treatment. He recovered enough to see the film through to its final stages, but didn’t live to see it find an audience. In a horrible coincidence, Weyermann died of lung cancer in October 2021. “Diane’s vision and courage are 100% the reason this film got made,” Battsek says. “Nobody else would have done that.” Pope only wishes that his friend was alive to see the reactions to the film that occupied his final decade. “It was tragic,” he says. “There were so many doubts along the way: are we doing the right thing? Is it going to be understood correctly? I wish he could have had this feedback.” • Final Account is released in the UK on 3 December. This article was amended on 4 December to reflect the contributions of co-producer Riete Oord and the Pears Foundation.Military personnel have arrived in Aberdeenshire to assist with welfare checks on remote communities still affected by Storm Arwen, as Downing Street confirmed that across the UK about 19,500 homes remained without power six days after high winds caused damage and disruption. About 120 personnel will be deployed to 12 locations across Aberdeenshire, going door to door in communities that have lost power and water. Aberdeenshire council said that following a formal approach to the UK government, military personnel would be supporting “ongoing resilience efforts in the aftermath of Storm Arwen”. The deployment comes comes as wintry showers fell across the north and east of the UK, with more snow expected to hit Scotland on Friday before moving across towards the south-east. These snow flurries have added to the painstaking task of repairing overhead cables snapped by falling trees and branches. Scottish and Southern Electricity Networks confirmed on Thursday that there were 3,100 homes without power in Aberdeenshire, Moray, Angus and Perthshire and that it was hoping to restore power to 1,500 homes by the end of the day. The power company has described the storm damage as a “once in a generation event”. For low voltage areas, including individual homes and groups of properties, the company said “extensive damage” had taken place, and it was hoping to restore power to homes by Friday. There are still pockets of disconnection in the Scottish Borders, where the council leader, Mark Rowley, said there had been a lack of communication from the power firm. In the north of England, about 11,000 Northern Powergrid and “fewer than 3,000” Electricity North West customers, mostly in Cumbria, are still without power, where residents have criticised both companies for “woeful” communications. The prime minister’s official spokesperson said on Thursday that a further 7,949 homes had had power restored since Wednesday – meaning 98% of the 950,000 homes originally affected now had electricity – and that he expected most homes to have power restored by the end of the week. “We are in hourly contact with network operators to reconnect power,” the spokesperson said. “We are working urgently to ensure welfare and shelter is provided to those households that need it.” On Wednesday afternoon, Scotland’s deputy first minister, John Swinney, confirmed the Bellwin scheme, which gives local councils financial support from the Scottish government to deal with emergency incidents, had been activated.THE BIG MATCH There was a time back there when Manchester United and Arsenal were the two best teams in the Premier League, and their showdowns were the fixtures that decided the season. Now, not so much, with the quality regressing to levels similar to the era before Arsène Wenger arrived on these shores with suitcases full of his new inventions, water and broccoli, and Fergie had drastically reduced the United starting XI’s 330-pint-per-session intake. As a result, tonight’s meeting of these old foes at Old Trafford is extremely unlikely to have a bearing on the season overall. But it may have a bearing on their seasons, and for that reason alone we should probably feign interest. It’s fair to say both teams have had their trousers handed to them, neatly folded, whenever they’ve faced proper opposition this season. United have already welcomed their two arch-rivals to Old Trafford, losing the first halves against Liverpool and City to the aggregate score of 6-0, though together the second halves added up to just the 1-0 defeat against teams who had declared, which was progress of sorts. Arsenal meanwhile have already faced Chelsea, City and Liverpool, and came out of those fixtures with an 11-goal deficit, having failed to score at any point themselves. So it’s going to be interesting to see what happens tonight. Is it possible for both teams to implode at once? Head says no, but slapstick-loving heart refuses to listen. To be scrupulously fair, both sides have reason for optimism, too. United are coming off the back of a staunch 1-1 draw at leaders Chelsea, and will be eager to impress new interim boss Ralf Rangnick, who will be observing from a blame-free position in the stands, behind Michael Carrick. Arsenal have won seven of their last 10. And neither are as bad as Everton. It’s too close to call, so Arsenal’s hopes may depend on Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang rediscovering the art of scoring from two yards out, with United’s dreams resting on whether Carrick shows enough resolve to keep Harry Maguire, available again after suspension, out of harm’s way on the bench. Penny for the thoughts of Roy Keane and Patrick Vieira, that it’s come to this. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Paul Doyle for hot MBM updates of Tottenham 2-0 Brentford from 7.30pm before Rob Smyth is on hand for Manchester United 2-1 Arsenal from 8.15pm. QUOTE OF THE DAY “This was the last resort after I was denied the chance to a fair trial. I was denied the chance to be heard, I was denied the chance to speak up and after all I was detained whilst my trial has not finished yet. I was detained just to make sure that I don’t speak up, that I do not talk, that I do not defend myself, that I do not reveal the true story behind what happened to me” – Former Qatar World Cup official Abdullah Ibhais explains why he is entering the 17th day of a hunger strike in prison. FIVER LETTERS “My beloved New England Revolution were eliminated from the MLS Cup playoffs in a single match conference semi-final 2-2 AET (3-5 penalties) on Tuesday night. While any rational person would consider our season a rousing success – we did, after all, amass 73 points in 34 regular season matches; this may not sound earth shattering, but it does represent an MLS record for points in a season – that’s not how things work in USA!! USA!!! USA!!!! Here only the playoffs matter. So my Sporting Kansas City friend, whose team was also eliminated in gruesome fashion, and I were commiserating. I texted: ‘A wise person once said it’s not the loss (or rejection) that kills you, it’s the hope.’ Then I realised I’d picked that line up from The Fiver. So I’m devastated, and I’m using The Fiver as a source of wisdom. Does it get any worse than that?” – Michael Monroe. “Seeing new Norwich City manager Dean Smith standing on the touchline resplendent in a monogrammed club anorak, I idly wondered if he gets to wear his boss’s jacket on other days too?” – Allastair McGillivray. “The 10 players on the ‘who the Premier League should watch list’ surely give lie to the letters writers accusing the Fiver of English bias and chips on shoulders” – Trevor Wastell. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Michael Monroe. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Our Football Weekly Special on how to tackle misogyny in the game is right here. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Ralf Rangnick will take charge of his first match as Manchester United’s interim manager when Crystal Palace visit on Sunday after the paperwork regarding the German’s employment was completed on Thursday. Christian Eriksen has started training with former club Odense in his native Denmark. “It’s natural for him since he played here in his youth and lives around the corner. We are very happy to be able to provide training facilities for him,” cheered the Danish club. Auckland will stage the opening game of the 2023 Women’s World Cup, with Sydney confirmed as host for the final of football’s showpiece tournament. Naughty Crystal Palace and Aston Villa have been charged by the Football Association for failing to ensure that players conducted themselves in an orderly fashion, which is important in the modern game. Everton owner Farhad Moshiri says he will not sack Rafael Benítez anytime soon, so he can expect his P45 in the post. “Rafa needs time to have his mark on the squad,” Moshiri bleated on TalkSport. “He will be supported to add depth to the squad.” STILL WANT MORE? Max Rushden declares pundits should be engaging and entertaining, whether that comes in the form of Ally McCoist’s infectious laughter and self-deprecation or Roy Keane’s fury. Italy could have a shiny new No 9 if they reach next year’s World Cup because Gianluca Scamacca is pulling up trees for Sassuolo. Nicky Bandini has the story. Ligue 1 is more competitive and unpredictable than you think, Adam White explains. Rafael Benítez and Salamon Rondón are symptoms, not the cause, of Everton’s deep malaise, argues floating-football-brain-in-a-jar Jonathan Wilson. England’s 20-0 hammering of Latvia was the final straw for Suzanne Wrack, who says it is time for action to combat the mismatches. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! MAME BIRAM DIOUF TAKE A BOWIn the mid-1960s Mick Rock, a rather unlikely Cambridge scholarship boy, was by far the most exotic undergraduate beast in Gonville and Caius College, already with a wild and reckless reputation. He lived just above me on “O” staircase in Tree Court, relying on the reliably draughty corridors to disperse those ever-present fumes of marijuana, and somehow satisfying his tutors term after term that essays were getting written, work was being done. Invariably ahead of the game, he always argued that weed – or at least the relatively innocuous variety then available – was far less dangerous in the long run than the alcohol and tobacco which most of us enjoyed in the pubs as a matter of course. For me, as a head-in-the-books medical student, it was an altogether dizzying experience just being with Mick. I certainly learned to keep my few precious girlfriends well away. Despite his hectic life-in-the-fast-lane approach to the college routine, he somehow even managed to stay one step ahead of the proctors and bulldogs who were meant to “keep discipline” among the students. It all seems rather quaint now, but I still cherish the superb b/w photos he took of us all with that famous battered old 40-quid Pentax.Pope Francis has arrived in Cyprus armed with a message of compassion for the thousands of people who have sought sanctuary on the east Mediterranean island, and a promise that by the end of the year 50 refugees will have been relocated to Italy. The pontiff embarked on the politically sensitive tour on Thursday as the EU country closest to the Middle East struggles with an unprecedented influx of asylum seekers. “They are our brothers and sisters,” he said in a video message before the visit. Francis has made the defence of refugees a cornerstone of his papacy. In 2016 the Roman Catholic leader stunned Europe’s political elite when he elected to share his plane back to Rome with 12 refugees at the end of a historic trip to Lesbos, the island then at the centre of the migration crisis. Five years later, the pope made clear that during his pilgrimage to war-partitioned Cyprus, his mind would again be focused on those who had reached Europe often in the face of great adversity. “I am also thinking of those who, in recent years and still today, have been fleeing from war and poverty, landing on the shores of the continent and elsewhere and encountering not hospitality but hostility and even exploitation,” he said at the weekend. “How many have lost their lives at sea! Today our sea, the Mediterranean, is a great cemetery.” The five-day tour, which also takes in Greece and a second lightning visit to Lesbos, comes amid a hardening of migration policy globally. Both Nicosia and Athens have been accused of resorting to violent methods, including pushbacks of boats carrying asylum seekers, to keep migrants and refugees at bay. In a letter released on Thursday highlighting the alleged violations, 36 NGOs appealed to meet the religious leader when he flies into Greece on Saturday. In Cyprus, aid workers and Greek Cypriot officials said they have been overwhelmed by the numbers of people arriving, which by early November were up 38% compared with all of 2020. In May the government called a state of emergency, claiming asylum seekers exceeded 4% of the local population. Most of the newcomers cross from the Turkish-occupied north through the buffer zone that bisects the island, a legacy of the frozen conflict that has haunted the country since 1974 when a coup aimed at unity with Greece prompted Ankara to invade. The Vatican has signalled that the pope, who will be hosted in a Franciscan monastery in no man’s land, will mention the need to “strengthen bilateral talks” so as to resolve the island’s division. Speaking to Catholic leaders in Nicosia Francis underlined the need for a “fraternal” church. “We should not experience diversity as a threat to identity; we should not be jealous or defensive,” he said. “We need to work together to build a future worthy of humanity, to overcome divisions, to break down walls.” In a trip expected to be heavy on symbolism, a ecumenical mass with migrants is planned at the church of the Holy Cross in Nicosia after a service at the capital’s outdoor stadium on Friday. Francis has described Cyprus as the outpost of the Holy Land on the continent of Europe. “He comes with a message of acceptance and tolerance,” Father Jerzy Kraj, patriarchal vicar of the island’s Latin community, told the Guardian. “We see his visit to the peripheries of Europe as a sign that he wants to encourage us all to help them and accept them.” The cleric confirmed that 50 vulnerable refugees would be transferred to Rome at the pope’s request. The tour, the last the octogenarian pope will make in 2021, has surprised Catholic clergy given the size of congregations in both countries. There are barely 25,000 Catholics in Cyprus and just twice that number in Greece. But Fr Kraj said while only seven years had elapsed since the previous pope visited Cyprus, the trip was in keeping with a man who had chosen to be named after one of the most venerated figures in Christianity. “Pope Francis has a Franciscan heart,” he said. “We never dreamed that he would come to Cyprus so soon but it is at the peripheries where people are in need. He comes as a brother and to show them his love.”Anger at the sponsoring of Lewis Hamilton’s Formula One car by a firm that made combustible insulation used on Grenfell Tower has intensified after a cabinet minister demanded a U-turn by Mercedes. Michael Gove, the secretary of state for levelling up, housing and communities, spoke out after Grenfell survivors branded the deal “truly shocking”. He said he was “deeply disappointed Mercedes are accepting sponsorship from cladding firm Kingspan … while the Grenfell inquiry is ongoing”. Hamilton, a seven-time Formula One champion, is facing protests from Grenfell survivors over the deal that will see his car emblazoned with Kingspan’s logo starting at this weekend’s Saudi Arabia Grand Prix. Kingspan made some of the insulation used on the refurbishment of Grenfell Tower, which caught fire on 14 June 2017, killing 72 people. Survivors of the disaster and bereaved relatives demanded the Mercedes-AMG Petronas Formula One team drop the sponsorship deal, with one branding it “disgusting”. After the Guardian revealed their anger, Gove tweeted on Thursday night: “The Grenfell community deserves better.” The survivors’ group Grenfell United said in a letter on Thursday to the team boss, Toto Wolff: “Kingspan played a central role in inflicting the pain and suffering that we feel today, and there must be a degree of public censure for Kingspan’s recklessness and carelessness for human life.” It called on him to “immediately sever your relationship” with Kingspan. The public inquiry into the disaster has heard that prior to Grenfell, Kingspan changed the composition of its plastic foam boards, and tests showed that they burned “like a raging inferno”. But the company continued to use a previous test pass and sold them for use on buildings across the UK, including Grenfell, where a small amount were used. The public inquiry has heard that Kingspan executives also dismissed customers’ concerns about the boards’ fire safety, with a manager in one case saying: “[They] are getting me confused with someone who gives a dam [sic].” The British driver, who is currently second in the world championship standings, has previously supported the Grenfell community. On the third anniversary of the fire, he posted on Instagram: “Today marks three years since the horrific Grenfell Tower fire in London. Remembering the 72 souls we lost and their loved ones, and everyone affected by this tragedy. #justiceforgrenfell.” Mercedes’ decision to take the sponsorship, with the logo on the cars’ nose cone, was branded “disgusting” by Nabil Choucair, who lost six members of his family in the fire. “I am very disappointed that someone who says he supports us, wants to advertise Kingspan, who contributed to the loss of innocent lives,” he said. “He should not accept it. You can’t support the community and say you respect the deceased and families and still take sponsorship like this.” The Mercedes team stressed that drivers were not involved in sponsorship decisions, and said in a statement: “Our partner Kingspan has supported, and continues to support, the vitally important work of the inquiry to determine what went wrong and why in the Grenfell Tower tragedy. Our new partnership announced this week is centred on sustainability, and will support us in achieving our targets in this area.” In 2020, the public inquiry into the disaster disclosed emails from a Kingspan technical manager after he was questioned by potential customers about the fire safety of the boards in which he said the customer “can go f#ck themselves, and if they are not careful we’ll sue the a#se [off ] them”. Other emails revealed how technical team members joked in 2016 that claims about how safe the product was were “all lies” and it should be scrapped. Plastic-filled aluminium cladding panels made by a different company, Arconic, were the main cause of the rapid spread of the Grenfell Tower fire, the inquiry has already found. The foam panels made mostly by Celotex and a small quantity of boards from Kingspan used as insulation “contributed to the rate and extent of vertical flame spread”, according to Sir Martin Moore-Bick, the chair of the inquiry. Kingspan’s chief executive, Gene Murtagh, this year admitted “unacceptable conduct and historical process shortcomings, involving a small number of employees”, but said this did “not reflect the high standards of integrity and safety that are core Kingspan values”. He said: “We have already implemented several important changes that demonstrate our commitment to product compliance and good governance. Our aims are clear: to reassure that safety takes precedence over all other considerations and to ensure this can never happen again.” In a statement announcing the sponsorship deal, the Mercedes team said: “Kingspan’s products, systems and technologies address critical challenges in the built environment, including improving energy efficiency, reducing embodied carbon, driving circularity and conserving water. They have been used to help create high-performance buildings around the world for the team’s parent company, Mercedes-Benz.” Wolff said he was “delighted to welcome Kingspan to our team”. In a statement, Kingspan told the Guardian: “Kingspan played no role in the design of the cladding system on Grenfell Tower, where its K15 product constituted approximately 5% of the insulation and was used as a substitute product without Kingspan’s knowledge in a system that was not compliant with the building regulations. The new partnership with the Mercedes-AMG Petronas Formula One team reflects the ambitious sustainability targets of both organisations.”Stephen Colbert Though he has taken pains to avoid mentioning him by name, Stephen Colbert couldn’t ignore the latest revelation about Donald Trump on Wednesday evening, thanks to yet another book by a former staff member, first reported in the Guardian. The latest, The Chief’s Chief by former chief of staff Mark Meadows, recounts how the former president tested positive for Covid three days before his first debate with Joe Biden in September 2020. Meadows, a self-described devout Christian who doesn’t swear, writes in his book that Trump’s response to the positive test “rhymed with, ‘Oh spit, you’ve gotta be trucking lidding me.’” “Meadows, of course, happy to undermine democracy, but he won’t swear,” Colbert remarked, “which explains the title of his book: I’m a Ducking Piece of Zit With My Nose Up Rump’s Grasshole.” Meadows claims that Trump subsequently tested negative and continued on as usual, while the chief of staff instructed everyone in the president’s immediate circle to treat him as if he were positive. “So no touching him, no getting close to him, avoid him unless absolutely necessary – a strategy the CDC calls ‘The Melania’,” Colbert quipped. Trump was not tested before the debate because he arrived late, and according to Meadows, organizers relied on the honor system. “How could you rely on the honor system when you know he doesn’t have any?!” Colbert wondered. “That’s like meeting Vladimir Putin and relying on the shirt system.” So why did Meadows let the debate go forward? According to him, Trump simply looked better by debate day – “his face, for the most part at least, had regained its usual light bronze hue.” “Light bronze hue – maybe he’s healthier, maybe it’s Maybelline,” said Colbert. “It’s Maybelline.” Jimmy Kimmel Jimmy Kimmel also mocked Fox News’s reliance on the honor system for Covid during the September 2020 debate. “You might as well rely on the Dewey decimal system,” he said. “Have you met Donald Trump? ‘You promise you’re negative, guy who ran a fake university?’ Of course Typhoid Harry wanted to debate anyway.” Trump released a statement on Wednesday disputing Meadows’s story and calling it “fake news.” The denial was “especially hilarious”, Kimmel continued, because Trump celebrated the book’s announcement in October with a different sentiment: “Mark Meadows, our great Chief of Staff during some very exciting White House years, has written a new book entitled the Chief’s Chief,” he wrote in an official statement along with several lines of promotion for the book as an “incredible Christmas gift”. “Two months later, Mark Meadows is a jerk and it’s fake news,” Kimmel noted. “Do the math on the Covid: it means Trump had it at that little soiree that he threw for Judge Amy Coney Barrett, after which at least eight people who were there tested positive. I wonder who they got it from? I wonder whose tiny hand they all shook at that party? “The only shocking thing about any of this is that anyone would be shocked by this,” he added. “Of course he didn’t tell the Gold Star families and the supreme court justice and Joe Biden that he was positive.” Trevor Noah And on the Daily Show, Trevor Noah reacted to the news of Trump’s positive test before participating in the 2020 debate anyway, “which, on the one hand, is incredibly irresponsible and dangerous,” he said. “But on the other hand, was very relatable. “I mean, that’s why you get second opinions, right?” he continued. “One doctor tells you that you’re very ill and you don’t have much longer, but another doctor says, ‘looking good, my man, you should go to Miami!’ I mean, you’re going to go with that doctor.” As for Trump attending a debate with Joe Biden, whose age made him particularly vulnerable to Covid: “I’m not saying that Trump was trying to assassinate Joe Biden, but he definitely wasn’t going out of his way to avoid it,” Noah said.The addition of almost 5 gigawatts of renewable energy capacity will improve the resilience of Australia’s main electricity grid this summer, with outages from fossil fuel plants the main threat to supplies, the Australian Energy Market Operator says. In its 2021-22 Summer Readiness Plan, released on Friday, AEMO said the advent of a La Niña in the Pacific reduced the risk of high temperatures. Still, “extreme hot days during summer, particularly if coupled with high humidity, create the highest stress on the electricity grid”, it said. Australia has entered summer after its coolest spring since 2016, the Bureau of Meteorology said on Wednesday. The bureau’s outlook for the next three months is for relatively wet conditions in the eastern half of the country, with below-average daytime temperatures predicted for much of NSW. Risks remain of insufficient supply during summer peak load periods, although these have been eased by an increase in renewable power supplies. Households have added 2.6GW of new solar panel capacity in the past year even with the Covid disruptions, while wind and solar farms have added another 2.2GW in the past year. “Continued rapid development of new large-scale and distributed renewable resources has helped improve the reliability outlook for summer 2021-22, however, very high demand concurrent with low variable renewable energy generation may present a risk of insufficient supply meeting demand,” Aemo said. Existing fossil fuel plants, though, are not without their own challenges. The explosion that knocked out Callide C power station’s unit 4 in Queensland and the unavailability of Mintaro power station in South Australia contributed to about 700MW less coal- and gas-fired capacity going into this summer versus a year ago. The 1.48GW Yallourn power station in Victoria also remains vulnerable if high rainfall causes the Morwell River to flood, although the probability of such an event is rated as low, Aemo said. “Should such an event occur, Aemo forecasts a risk of between 150,000 and 500,000 customers in Victoria being without power for up to eight hours during an extreme heat event – equal to a one-in-10-year peak demand event – at least once this summer,” it said. Also shoring up supply will be an emergency capacity – dubbed the reliability and emergency reserve trader – of more than 2GW that Aemo is arranging. Last summer, that capacity was called on only once in New South Wales to mitigate the risk of load shedding or blackouts. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Separately, Aemo may be facing some supply constraints of its own, with employees voting on Thursday to strike for the first time over what they said was management’s failure to address employment issues including extending the enterprise agreement to cover more graduate and early-career staff. Staff plan to engage in work stoppages, refuse to work overtime or oncall, and take all allocated meal breaks during what is typically the “highest-pressure period” for the energy operator. “This isn’t simply an issue about wages or pay rises,” said the Professionals Australia chief executive, Jill McCabe. “It’s fundamentally about ensuring Aemo employees are not worse off under the new enterprise agreement.” Guardian Australia sought comment from Aemo about the potential strike. Operators of large-scale grid storage, including batteries, have their own complaints following Thursday’s release of the Australian Energy Market Commission’s new rule for network access. As reported earlier this week, most industry participants were worried the new regulation could hamper the take-up of new batteries and other forms of storage. “For large batteries the rule will cut red tape, reduce costs and logistical hurdles to participate in the market,” said the AEMC chair, Anna Collyer. “Batteries will no longer need to register twice, to both draw energy from the grid and send it out, as they currently do.” However, industry lobby group, the Clean Energy Council, said the new rule would result in consumers paying twice for network charges – first through higher electricity prices and again through standard network charges. “While the AEMC has made several positive changes for storage, the renewable energy industry is disappointed that it has rejected the Australian Energy Market Operator’s proposal to exempt pumped hydro and batteries from paying network charges,” said the council’s director of energy transformation, Christiaan Zuur. “Batteries and pumped hydro will now be placed at a commercial disadvantage to coal and gas generators, who do not face network charges,” Zuur said. “This undermines the efforts of state and territory governments to decarbonise the power system.” The electricity sector accounts for about one-third of Australia’s greenhouse gas emissions. Government data released on Tuesday showed those emissions have lately been on the rise, including in the power industry.Labor is poised to unveil a new medium term emissions reduction target and a suite of policy measures – including significant investments in new energy economy jobs – provided the package is given the green light by the shadow cabinet on Friday morning. Guardian Australia understands the shadow climate change minister, Chris Bowen, has prepared options in a range between 35% and 45% for a new 2030 emissions reduction target, depending on the underpinning mechanisms and policy measures the shadow cabinet is prepared to adopt. Labor leadership group met on Thursday afternoon, and the shadow cabinet will consider the tightly held climate policy proposals on Friday morning. Federal parliament adjourned for the summer break on Thursday, but the Labor caucus has remained in Canberra for an early meeting to endorse Anthony Albanese’s most significant, and electorally risky, policy gambit to date. Guardian Australia understands any new commitments – expected to include economy-wide abatement measures, including policies driving the electrification of transport, and investments in the low billions in new jobs in the renewables sector and in emerging industries like hydrogen – will be underpinned by economic analysis from a respected firm. Labor was slammed by the Coalition during the 2019 campaign for not having bespoke modelling identifying the cost of its climate policies. The underpinning analysis of Labor’s election offering for 2022 is an effort to blunt the electoral scare campaign that will inevitably accompany the opposition proposing a higher 2030 target than the Coalition. While Scott Morrison has already committed the Coalition to a net zero emissions reduction by 2050 in an effort to shore up Liberal moderates under political pressure from climate focused independents – the government is already muscling up for another federal election cycle of weaponising climate ambition in regional Queensland electorates and in Labor-held seats in the Hunter Valley. Given the electoral stakes, and the internal spectrum of risk appetites, the Labor leadership waited until parliament adjourned to bring the climate policy options into shadow cabinet, and has planned a public announcement directly after caucus to minimise the window for potential leaks. The shadow cabinet submission had not been circulated widely on Thursday evening, but options for the new target are understood to include a 35% cut, which would line Labor’s election commitment up with a forecast overachievement on the Abbott-era Coalition target. The Coalition’s current 2030 target is a cut of 26 to 28% on 2005 levels by 2030 – but the latest government projections suggest the government’s technology-driven approach to the transition could deliver a 35% reduction. Under sustained diplomatic pressure from key allies, including the United Kingdom and the United States, Morrison sought a formal increase in the 2030 target ahead of the recent Cop26 summit in Glasgow. But that sortie was vetoed by the Nationals. As well as a potential 35% cut, shadow cabinet is expected to consider more ambitious options – a reduction more like 40%, and an option up to 45%. The higher targets would involve Labor engaging the Coalition’s safeguards mechanism to drive lower abatement during the transition to the new energy economy. While Labor is likely to deploy existing government mechanisms to drive emissions reduction, the Morrison government is already limbering up to brand its own safeguards mechanism a carbon tax in the event Labor lands on a higher target. The safeguards mechanism isn’t a carbon tax, and the business community has urged the Coalition to expand its own mechanism to push companies to reduce their emissions consistent with net zero. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The politics of climate change have shifted since the 2019 election. There is bipartisan agreement on the 2050 target, and the business groups that once campaigned against Labor’s carbon price now propose 2030 targets up to 50%. But Labor went backwards in Queensland at the last federal election in substantial part because of its more ambitious climate policies. Last weekend, the shadow treasurer, Jim Chalmers, said the Queensland government had given Labor a template for pursuing higher cuts to emissions while giving workers a pathway to the jobs created during the transition. Chalmers told Guardian Australia medium-term targets need to be accompanied by government investment in “additional jobs, additional industries”. “If you look at the Palaszczuk government, they’ve made some really quite remarkable investments in Gladstone in hydrogen, in Townsville, in other minerals,” Chalmers said last weekend. Imposing ambition and aligning that with investments in new economic opportunity allows people to see “tangible opportunities in regional communities”. “I think that’s the way through this issue.”Late last year, at the age of 68, Suzanah-Jo Day found herself in need of somewhere to live. A series of abusive relationships had left her broke and without superannuation, and Sydney’s property market meant it was nearly impossible to find a private rental that she could afford on her age pension. After a lifetime working in both the aged care and disability sectors, she was not used to navigating the state’s complex welfare system, but knew the notoriously long wait times for social housing meant she was unlikely to find somewhere to live. In what she describes as “pure luck”, she stumbled across a northern beaches rental run by a local women’s shelter. Known as “transitional housing”, what was supposed to be a short stay has turned into 12 months. “I didn’t know how long it would be, or if I’d ever be able to afford anything,” she said. “I’d still be in the same tangle if it wasn’t for the women’s shelter.” Though she considers herself one of the “lucky ones”, Day’s experience is not unique. On Friday the advocacy group Housing for the Aged released a new report looking at the state of homelessness for older women. It cites the New South Wales government’s own 2018 NSW Homelessness Strategy to show that the state saw an 88% growth in the number of women over the age of 55 accessing homelessness services between 2013 and 2017. In 2021, there were still almost 5,000 women over the age of 55 on the waiting list for social housing in the state. The Housing for the Aged report calls for changes to social housing policy to make it easier for women like Day to access social housing. In NSW, access to the priority list for social housing on the basis of age is limited to people over the age of 80. With more than 50,000 people on the waiting list for social housing and delays of between five and 10 years in some parts of the state, it means accessing affordable housing through the public system is a pipe dream for many. Coupled with the state’s housing affordability crisis, older women are increasingly left with few options. “In many cases the reality is that it means sleeping in your car, hoping to house-sit or pet-sit, or hoping friends and family can put a roof over your head,” Fiona York, the chief executive of Housing for the Aged, said. “It also means women end up in unsafe situations, either rooming or just in unsafe situations. You’re really stuck.” Along with expanding the age for priority access, the report joins a growing chorus of advocacy groups in calling for the state government to massively increase the number of social houses built each year, including those specifically for older people. In June Equity Economics released a report stating that NSW currently had a shortfall of 70,000 social housing units, and that it would need to build 5,000 each year for the next 30 years to meet the OECD average. “What we don’t want to see is a battle between priority cohorts,” York said. “Everyone has the right to safe and affordable housing and what we have now is woefully inadequate. We can’t have the most vulnerable people fighting over scraps.” The government says it has already significantly boosted housing supply in the state. In last year’s budget it committed $812m for new housing supply and maintenance, which it said would deliver more than 800 new social homes and upgrades to about 16,500 existing properties. More recently, it has committed $18m to create 78 new dwellings specifically for older women in south-west and southern Sydney to be delivered through community housing. On Saturday, the minister for families, communities and disability services, Alister Henskens, visited a new 220-unit development at Minto, in the city’s south-west, where half will be dedicated to older women. Henskens said the government prioritised access to housing based on need, and pointed to other programs including a $484m investment to support women and children escaping domestic and family violence into housing and specialist services. “The NSW government provides social housing to eligible applicants as quickly as possible, prioritising those most in need, including people who are homeless, escaping domestic violence or with severe and ongoing medical conditions,” he said. “We also have a range of rent assistance programs, including Rent Choice Start Safely for women escaping domestic violence, to help people secure or maintain tenancies in the private rental market. Available support includes helping people pay rent, cover rental bonds and to sustain tenancies.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning NSW Labor’s shadow minister for housing, Rose Jackson, said it was “appalling” that so many older women in the state were at risk of homelessness. She said the government should invest in a specialist homelessness service for older people, and consider changes to the way access to priority housing was decided. “It’s important any changes in priority access are accompanied by more actual social housing though because we don’t just want to change the waiting lists, we want to get people off them and into stable and secure housing.”The concept of the double-header has been a controversial topic for about as long as they have been around. To the advocates, they attract normally otherwise-engaged eyeballs for free. To the detractors, they perpetuate a problematic less-popular-little-sister vibe – whether intentional or not. The objective is thus: schedule a women’s domestic match directly before a men’s and the former can piggy-back off the crowds already attending the latter. The women’s game consequently gets more exposure and broadcasters are financially content. It sounds like a simple equation. The caveat, of course, is the slightly insulting notion that women’s sport does not hold the same worth as that played by their male counterparts. That to be properly valued it must stand on its own, as a singular entity, and entice the same number of fans by virtue of the seismic growth of women’s sport globally. In theory, this is a sound argument and a goal towards which sporting bodies should strive. It is also – right now, at least – utopian. And in the context of Australian women’s football, 18 months out from a home World Cup, the priority must be to lure as many eyes as possible towards A-League Women. In terms of the national team, women’s football has no problem drawing a big crowd. The Matildas’ two-match friendly series with the USA drew a record record 36,109 to Stadium Australia on Saturday and 20,495 to McDonald Jones Stadium on Tuesday. Based on sheer numbers alone, many of those spectators are not regulars at ALW fixtures. The average attendance across the Covid-affected 2020-21 regular season was about 1,000. In 2019-20, just before the pandemic, it was about 1,500 and in 2018-19 – just before the mass exodus of Matildas and other higher-profile players to Europe – about 1,800. This is not a reflection on the quality of football. Last season was fascinating viewing, not least because of Melbourne Victory’s title and Sydney FC’s dominance, Melbourne City’s struggles, and the movement of others in between. The departure of big-name stars also thrust young players on centre stage. Kyra Cooney-Cross’s superb campaign with Victory has made the 19-year-old a regular starter for Australia, and the form of 17-year-old Jessika Nash for Canberra United earned her an international call-up and a contract with Sydney FC. Lisa De Vanna demonstrated her longevity with Victory, while former national teammate Emily Gielnik won the golden boot with Brisbane Roar. More abounds this coming campaign and the A-Leagues has made a point of attempting to maximise this by scheduling almost half the ALW’s regular-season fixtures as double-headers alongside A-League Men games. Victory will play all seven home games at AAMI Park as part of double-headers which, overall, account for 32 of the 70 regular-season matches. A-Leagues commissioner Greg O’Rourke said the draw was configured in this way to ensure “highest levels of broadcast quality”. “The double-headers we have scheduled allow our clubs to stage both their men’s and women’s teams in top-quality stadiums for their fans, and mean that the football will not stop flowing on Paramount+,” O’Rourke said last month. On the airwaves, it certainly works for broadcast partner ViacomCBS, who can pool production resources across two matches instead of one. The relatively short gap of less than hour between the two games means little dead time during which spectators must entertain themselves. On the ground, though, it also has to work for the players. In the past, A-League Women players involved in double-headers have often found themselves bumped out of venues’ main change rooms, which were being saved for use by the men in the subsequent match. At the old Allianz Stadium that meant actually leaving the ground at half-time and walking through a throng of fans to the AFL changerooms in the neighbouring SCG. On one occasion, while playing a double-header at Leichhardt Oval, a women’s team had to use the change rooms at an aquatic centre across the road. But attitudes are changing, and logistics with them, and if done correctly and respectfully, this format can make a difference. In recent months we witnessed such a difference in the Hundred which which ran almost every match of the cricket franchise’s inaugural men’s and women’s competitions as double-headers and attracted so many spectators even the England and Wales Cricket Board was surprised. “If we’re honest, we didn’t quite know how the double headers were going to go,” Beth Barrett-Wild, head of the women’s Hundred, said in August. “But when I walk into the stadium now, I’m expecting 7,500 people to come and watch – it’s mad.” Of course, roaring success in one setting does not guarantee it in another, and infrastructure and cooperation from the many Australian sporting codes utilising shared stadia are parameters not always in administrators’ control. But if it works, and the two games are marketed as one match day under the banner of one club, is that really such a terrible thing?Hey, how are you? You’re tired? How tired? Oh, you’ve never been this tired in all your life kind of tired? You dream of sleeping for 10 years tired? Every part of you is tired, even your hair? Yeah, same. After 2020’s first lockdown, people bounced back. There was a buzz to getting back out again and reconnecting with people, a release of pent up energy, and the commitment to beat the virus back and get to Covid zero. Now … now … people are hollow-eyed, wrecked, a shell. The fatigue is animal. Omicron, whatever – just run me over with a tractor. People are struggling to stay up past 8pm. They’re wanting to make a 5:30 booking for dinner. They day-dream longingly of profound rest, cool sheets, white walls, long holidays, solitude and silence. After a brief spurt of energy in October when we opened up, people are now limping to the end of the year. The other day at the doctor’s, my GP started falling asleep mid-consult. She was looking something up for me on the internet about concussion and then her head dropped sharply in a micro-sleep. She had just been telling me how exhausted she was from the pandemic. Some of Australia’s leading female business and community leaders signed an open letter last week asking for more recognition and support for the care economy. They say women are “suffering the great exhaustion” – resulting from the extra unpaid work of caring on top of their normal jobs. Healthcare workers are leaving in droves, and there is a mass exodus of 20,000 critical care nurses – many of them traumatised and exhausted. Pope Francis asked Catholics last month to pray for people with burnout. I see the exhaustion in my own colleagues. Journalists and editors were in the strange situation of reporting on a situation that they were living through – trapped in a news story for almost two years. “I am more than exhausted,” one editor told me. “We need a new word.” And for those of us consuming the news over this period of time – we were in the weird situation of being directly affected by the story. Usually if you are directly affected by a news event – say a bushfire or weather event – it’s relatively short lived. You don’t see your story on the news nightly for 20 months. The price of vigilance to the one story, over this long period of time, is exhaustion. Or more than exhaustion – the thing we don’t have a word for. But now, after 20 months of vigilance, people are starting to – if not quite relax, then stopping and taking a breath. People who were just hanging on by a thread can finally let go. But what does letting go mean – and will our society allow it? The answer, as a lot of us are finding out, is “no”. The world doesn’t stop just because you are exhausted. You still have to go to work, earn a paycheck, see friends, parents, be a carer, plan a holiday or Christmas, deal with life in the same relentless way that you did before the pandemic. And now with opening up you need to add a social life and the gym, and maybe travel and returning to the office, on top of what was already there. Rest is on the other side of exhaustion – promising to be an antidote. But do we even know how to rest? Properly rest, with no stimuli? Our dopamine-addicted brains have been jacked up for years on notifications, social media likes, watching Netflix while tweeting while texting, etc. Neurons drenched in stimuli, our fight or flight response activated for almost two years – how do we recover? We’ll have to learn a whole new way of being. There’s no one there to show us. There’s no profit to be made from rest. Corporate mindfulness training was all the rage a few years ago – 10 minutes of meditation daily to improve clarity and productivity. But this is not what we need right now. Rest is of a different order. It cannot be rushed. Our bodies will lead us there. Exhaustion is their message.A sharp rise in energy debt has prompted calls for government intervention as Australian households struggle to keep the lights on. Despite falling energy prices more households are struggling to pay their bills. Both the Australian Energy Regulator and social services group Acoss are calling for an overhaul in how the debt is handled after a report from AER revealed there are 248,520 households across Australia struggling to pay. According to the report released this week, the average household energy debt for gas and electricity has increased 12% from $897 in 2019–20 to $1,000 in 2020–21. The average electricity debt for a customer upon entry into their retailer’s “hardship” program grew 21% over the same period, from $1,304 to $1,584. The data reveals 182,665 households are currently paying off bills, an increase of 8,444 from the previous year, a trend that also reflects the impact of the Covid pandemic. Despite growing debt, the number of customers entering “hardship” programs fell – from 72,882 to 65,855 in 2020–21, with around half of those customers still unable to keep up with their ongoing usage costs. AER chair, Clare Savage, said retailers had an obligation to identify whether a customer was experiencing hardship and payment difficulties – so the drop in hardship program participation during the pandemic, and their effectiveness in reducing debt, was concerning. “It’s not surprising that energy debt rose due to the effects of the Covid pandemic, and not surprising to see an increase in people on payment plans to manage their bills,” Savage said. “But we are not out of the Covid woods yet, and with our data showing more than 262,000 people now paying off some form of energy debt, it does raise questions as to why there is a drop in the number of customers entering hardship programs. “Residential electricity customers on hardship programs have $500 more average debt, compared to other residential customers with debt,” she said. Angela Finch is a single mum with three kids aged 13, 9 and 4. She has $1200 worth of energy debt. The debt has been accruing since she fled a violent relationship. She is on a payment plan of $55 a week, of which four dollars goes to the debt and the rest pays off the power the young family is still using. “It’s going to be years, it’ll be a long time. I actually haven’t done the maths because I know it’ll be there forever,” Finch said. “I do a tight budget. I had my girls’ birthdays, it’s six weeks to Christmas, and then in six weeks they go back to school. Do the math on that. It’s too depressing.” Finch can tell you how much a kilo of minced meat costs or when the price of toilet paper went up – she rations food and plans three months in advance for Christmas and school restarting. But she knows by the time she graduates from her social work degree and starts her new career, the family’s energy debt will hardly have a dent in it. “It’s always in the back of your head, you don’t stop thinking about it. It’s niggling right there,” she said. The program director of climate and energy at Acoss, Kellie Caught, said it was clear from the data that payment plans, which companies legally have to offer, weren’t helping Australians struggling. “If you’re on jobseeker and living on $45 a day, your ability to pay down debt while you’re trying to pay the next energy bill is impossible,” Caught said. “The data is clear, there’s been an increase of people who have been in debt for more than a year, and that level is increasing. They just can’t pay it off.” Caught called on the federal government to offer those in serious debt $1,000 to help pay it off, which should be matched by the energy providers. Savage said the regulator’s main priority in the next year was monitoring retailers to ensure they are identifying households in financial difficulty and offering them payment plans. The federal energy minister, Angus Taylor, said the Morrison government was committed to ensuring retailers provided the necessary support. “Energy costs are continuing to fall. This is good news for Australian families and small businesses,” Minister Taylor said. “However, as providers of an essential service, it is critical that energy companies step up to deliver necessary support to any customers doing it tough.”The member for Wentworth, Dave Sharma, is facing questions about claims he made in his local newspaper that he had been successful in getting the Coalition to “upgrade” its 2030 emissions reduction target. In an interview in the Wentworth Courier two weeks ago, Sharma rebuffed criticism from independent candidate Allegra Spender’s campaign that he had been ineffective in changing the Coalition’s climate policy. “I’ve delivered a binding commitment to net zero emissions by 2050, an upgraded 2030 emissions reduction target and obtained a guarantee that the offshore oil and gas project pep-11 will not proceed,” Sharma was quoted as saying. While the Coalition has now committed to net zero emissions by 2050, it resisted calls from other nations during the recent Cop26 climate summit for a more ambitious 2030 target. Instead, it has stuck with a 26-28% reduction while projecting it will beat that target. The 2030 target is set to be a key issue in the Wentworth campaign. Sharma is facing a well-funded challenge from Spender, who is running on a platform of more urgent action on climate change including a 50% reduction in emissions by 2030. “The reason why I am standing is that the community doesn’t trust the Coalition’s commitment to climate action,” she told Guardian Australia. “If the Coalition was committed, they would have legislated net zero by 2050, they would have lifted their 2030 targets, and they would have passed legislation to stop pep-11. But they haven’t done any of those things.” From a 35% reduction ‘target’ to ‘projections’ On his return from Glasgow, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, explicitly rejected changing the target, saying modelling shows Australia would “meet and beat” that target so there was no need to formally alter it. However, the Coalition has been criticised for not producing detailed modelling to support the claim and to show the pathway to achieve net zero by 2050. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Before the Cop26 talks last month, Sharma publicly urged his colleagues to adopt a new midterm target of a 40-45% cut in greenhouse gas emissions by 2035. But so far he’s been rebuffed by his own party. Meanwhile, Sharma’s latest flyers use more nuanced language on 2030. It is no longer an update to the “target” but an update to “projections”. “We have updated our 2030 emissions reduction projection to 35%,” a smiling Sharma says in a brochure letterboxed this week. “When I was elected to parliament in 2019 I promised to fight for a more ambitious climate policy. I have delivered.” On the reverse side, Sharma has reproduced extracts of news stories that record his efforts to nudge his colleagues toward a more ambitious target. Pep-11 – a large offshore gas exploration licence stretching from Newcastle to Wollongong – is also festering as an election issue. Although the prime minister opposes it, and the licence has expired, the power to grant an extension rests with Nationals MP and the federal resources minister, Keith Pitt. Since February he has refused to act. Comment was sought from Sharma.Natalie Baini, the former Liberal who will run as an independent in the Sydney seat of Reid, has blasted the culture of her former party, claiming her political career was thwarted after she raised concerns about the alleged conduct of a married Coalition minister she had been in a relationship with. In the wake of this week’s release of the Jenkins review, Baini said she decided to speak out about her experience and call out the “Liberal party playbook”, where complaints were allegedly ignored by senior party leaders, and female complainants often discredited. Baini, the former cultural diversity manager for the AFL, announced on Tuesday that she would be quitting the party to run as an independent partly in protest at its handling of her complaints about allegedly “inappropriate” conduct of some senior men in the party. Baini claims that she was in a consensual relationship with the former minister and Reid MP Craig Laundy, whose family she had known since childhood. She claims that she consented to the relationship because Laundy had told her that he was effectively separated from his wife, but was staying in the family home on a temporary basis for the sake of his children. She later found out this was not true and ended the relationship. She says that once the relationship ended she was overlooked for preselection for the seat. When she complained about his conduct to senior party leaders and Scott Morrison’s office she says she was ignored. At the time of the relationship, Laundy was the minister for small and family business, and Baini was the vice-president of the Reid branch and says she was seen as a likely successor. Baini raised concerns about Laundy’s alleged dishonest conduct toward her with the party’s New South Wales state director, Chris Stone, after the relationship ended, saying she was concerned that the extramarital affair could affect the party’s campaign if he chose to run again in the seat. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning She believes this complaint led to the party disregarding her as a potential political candidate because she was seen as problematic for Laundy, who had wanted to endorse his successor. “It was to my detriment to have been honest in the declarations of my personal relationships as required by the Liberal party,” Baini told Guardian Australia. “And the takeaway for me was that the person of integrity is the one who is punished. “I know I am not the first, but I’m prepared to be a political human sacrifice if it means I am the last.” Baini’s comments come after the federal education minister, Alan Tudge, was stood aside on Thursday pending an investigation into his relationship with his former staffer Rachelle Miller, who claimed her career suffered as a result of her consensual affair with the minister, while Tudge was promoted. ‘It is shameful’ Laundy, a key supporter of former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull, announced in March 2019 that he would not be recontesting Reid ahead of the last election after months of speculation about his future and potential successor. Baini said she believed the party’s desire for Laundy to endorse his successor resulted in Fiona Martin being chosen as Morrison’s “captain’s pick”, with no formal process opened for other candidates to put their name forward. Martin was announced as the candidate just six weeks before the 18 May election. When preselections were opened while Laundy was still the sitting member, no other candidates put their name forward to challenge the incumbent. After Laundy announced he would be leaving, there was no formal preselection process. The party managed the process for appointing a candidate through discussions with the prime minister’s office and Laundy. At the time, it was reported that the prime minister’s office had been in discussions with the high-profile ABC presenter Stan Grant and the former NSW deputy police commissioner Nick Kaldas. It was also reported that Laundy would be campaigning closely with the new candidate, with the marginal seat of Reid seen as crucial to Morrison’s ability to win the 2019 election. Two letters of complaint that Baini wrote to the party in late 2020 and early 2021, seen by Guardian Australia, received no response. A formal response from Stone on behalf of the NSW division of the party was sent only after Baini forwarded the correspondence to all members of the state executive in October this year. But the party found that none of Baini’s concerns were covered by the party’s code of conduct. “Whilst the division is concerned to ensure that members act appropriately in their dealings with each other, allegations unrelated to the organised activities of the Division or against persons who are not members fall outside of the scope of the Code of Conduct,” the letter in response says. “The nature of your complaint against Mr Laundy for which you seek action by the Division is not clear. You assert that he misled you in what was otherwise a consensual relationship. With respect that is not a matter calling for the involvement of the division, and falls outside the scope of the code of conduct.” After the 2019 election, Baini also raised her concerns about the Reid preselection process with the prime minister’s private secretary, Yaron Finkelstein, who was a longtime friend. She met Finkelstein at her home to discuss the Laundy matter. Following the meeting she complained about the party’s response to her concerns. Baini said the response showed the party had no regard for how Laundy’s alleged behaviour may have affected her. “I wanted an acknowledgement that I had been unfairly excluded from the preselection process or from consideration at the prior election at which I believe I was the strongest and most obvious candidate, and a number of people would support that contention,” Baini said. “And I wanted to see some level of disciplinary action against the people who are identified … some level of discipline to know that a party was sincere in its protection of women who had been subjected to poor conduct.” Baini said she believed the party’s response to her complaints highlights the political culture exposed by Kate Jenkins’ review into Parliament House, and said she doubted the government’s ability to adequately address the problem. “The default understanding of problem management in the party is just ignore it,” she said. “It’s a playbook. And the playbook is to first, ignore, second, avoid due process, and third, question the capacity and mental health of the complainant. “I am proof that people who are otherwise seen as qualified, of good character, capable and genuine, have their careers terminated because they are willing to say something negative about the party even if it is in private correspondence. “The brand management is certainly more important than the wellbeing of any member.” The lawyer and sports administrator said her experience in politics was a world away from the private sphere, “where this type of culture would not be allowed to fester in any respectable organisation”. “There, any incident is addressed thoroughly and immediately. So to me it is shameful that our government does not know how to lead in this space,” she said. “I used to believe that the Liberal party would be able to fix this culture, however the prime minister’s remarks in parliament yesterday suggested that MPs are above the rules because they are elected by the public,” she said. “MPs need to recognise that they are part of the problem, which I believe they are unwilling to do, and that makes me less convinced that this government is able to address these problems in any meaningful way.” In response to questions from Guardian Australia, a spokesman for Laundy did not address Baini’s claims about their relationship or her allegation that he lied to her about his marital status. “When Mr Laundy announced his decision to retire from politics in March 2019, he had no knowledge of who his replacement would be for the electorate of Reid. Mr Laundy made it clear at the time that his decision to retire was fuelled by his desire to focus on his family,” a spokesman for the former MP said. “Given his intentions to retire from politics were clear, Mr Laundy was not involved in, nor did he have any control over the preselection process which was managed by the party in 2019. “When Mr Laundy was made aware by the Liberal Party that Dr Fiona Martin would be his successor, he supported her campaign efforts to ensure the seat he held for six years was returned to the Coalition in the 2019 election.” The NSW Liberal party acknowledged that a meeting between Stone and Baini took place in May 2018, but claimed both the follow-up letters of complaint had been overlooked, even though they had been received. “A meeting took place in May 2018 at which some matters were raised that the State Director was asked to keep confidential, and they have been treated as such. The person raising these matters was satisfied at the time with the undertaking that the information would be used in the context of the Party’s confidential nomination review process,” a party spokesperson said. “Nominations for preselection in Reid were opened twice in 2018 – no nominations were received on the first occasion and only one nomination was received on the second occasion. “The process for selecting and endorsing a candidate for Reid was conducted in accordance with the Party’s Constitution.” In the party’s formal response to Baini, Stone said: “Had you nominated, the normal constitutional processes would have been followed.” Baini, however, contends that multiple attempts to contact senior figures in the party to express an interest in running for the seat once Laundy had announced his resignation were ignored.Minnie Macgregor’s deadpan portrait, taken circa 1899, hangs on the sitting room wall of Meroogal, a timber house with gothic trimming her relatives owned at Nowra on the New South Wales south coast. Her “insanely massive” hair in the photograph drew queer artist Gerwyn Davies to her story. The photograph was taken before Macgregor fell ill. “The diagnosis was it was her hair, it was too big, and it was draining all of her power,” Davies says, relaying mythology gleaned from a historic house curator. “They forced her to chop all her hair off, which was pretty cruel.” Meerogal by Gerwyn Davies, inspired by Minnie Macgregor Macgregor, who had been living with her elder sister at Wollongong, succumbed to pneumonia in 1918, aged 44. For his exhibition Iridescent, Davies photographed himself clad in sequinned red from head to foot, holding a book aloft outside Meroogal, which is today a museum. Davies’ big red wig in the Meroogal image might be read as an ode to Macgregor’s lost locks, but he cautions that none of the 12 campy figures he creates in his new show, shot at 12 Sydney Living Museums and NSW State Archives locations, should be read as directly representing the real people who passed through these sites. The artist’s greater interest is playing with the gender, sexuality and class strictures that bound such people. Clockwise from left: Copa (2020), Cactus (2020), Saturn (2021) and Adonis (2019) all by Gerwyn Davies. These works are not part of Iridescent. Queensland-born, Sydney-based Davies, 36, sews his own costumes. He wants to transform into sculptures, not create self-portraits, so he never shows his face in any of his photographs. Often, he cannot see out of the costume when he is photographing himself. “There are times when I can vaguely see through a haze of fabric, but there are other times when the material is really restrictive and I can panic. It gets hot. It’s this PVC stretch, but it doesn’t breathe, so putting it on your face can be quite confronting.” Top: Osaka I (2018) Bottom: Kyoto III (2018). These photographs are not part of Iridescent. Davies does often display his arms and legs, hence his tattoos are on show. Over a decade ago, he had an image of bushranger Captain Moonlite tattooed on his bicep. Davies was captivated by Moonlite’s “sexually transgressive” element, subverting the usual “hypermasculine aura” of the bushranger figure, “the stuff of stubby coolers and bumper stickers”. Moonlite reportedly went to his execution wearing a ring on his wedding finger made of a lock of hair from James Nesbitt, the man widely interpreted as his lover. When Davies started making a costume inspired by Moonlite, which he shot at the Justice &amp; Police museum at Sydney’s Circular Quay, he wanted to represent the wedding band, but as Davies began assembling the tubular gold outfit, it morphed into the shackles Moonlite also wore to the gallows. Top: Vaucluse House by Gerwyn Davies, inspired by Sarah Wentworth. Bottom: Justice &amp; Police Museum by Gerwyn Davies, inspired by Captain Moonlite. Davies spent his primary school years in Darwin, a time he recalls with fondness, rollerblading and meeting hippies from a commune across the road, and another neighbour who kept a big crocodile in his swimming pool. Less happy were his subsequent three years at a Catholic boarding school in Toowoomba, Queensland. “I was quite heavily bullied,” he recalls. “It was a very country, rugby school, and I was very effeminate and performative and clearly gay.” Citing the Melbourne-born performance artist Leigh Bowery as an influence, Davies has just completed a four-year PhD in photo media at the University of NSW, studying the aesthetics of camp. His partner, advertising creative director Andrew Henderson, will critique his work: “It always comes with, ‘Do you want my honest opinion?’” says Davies. “I trust his very sharp, keen eye and incredible knowledge of pop culture.” When it came to research for making an Iridescent work at inner-Sydney’s Elizabeth Bay House, Davies at first stumbled, because he found the original owner of the trophy house, colonial secretary Alexander Macleay, an “unappetising” figure. The key was Macleay’s rooms containing entomological specimens and an “overly masculine” library with marble busts of Greek philosophers. Davies created a big yellow costume with ears and a tail, “a specimen that looked like it had devoured him and taken over the house”. At Vaucluse House, former resident Sarah Wentworth provided the inspiration for a monochrome costume inspired by the black and white tiles in the courtyard. Despite marrying colonial statesman William Charles Wentworth, the daughter of two ex-convicts was never accepted by colonial Sydney society because their first two children had been born out of wedlock. “The way I’ve painted it, it was this very campy tragedy,” says Davies. “But from all reports she was quite happy to be the social outsider out there.” Iridescent by Gerwyn Davies is on at the Museum of Sydney from 4 December to 24 April 2022, as part of Sydney festivalA surge in mosquitoes, spiders, termites, rodents – and mould – has hit eastern Australia, in what appears to be a fitting end to 2021. The wet weather caused by the latest La Niña event has helped flush out creatures that may typically burrow or live underground into the open and inside people’s homes. “La Niña is hot and wet? Or hot and mouldy? Or hot and spider-webby? Or hot and weedy?” Sophie Lewis, from Canberra, tweeted. Cartoonist Cathy Wilcox also voiced some questions: “Is this a particularly spidery summer? It seems like it here on the coast. Big engineered webs full of cicadas. More spidery than mosquito-y. Also very tick-y. Plus one leech.” Sam Yehia, owner of Sydney Best Pest Control, said the start of La Niña had definitely brought out more pests. “One of the things we’ve picked up on, coming into the season, is there are a lot more spiders and a lot more rodent activity around,” he said. “Previously you had set seasons for pests but we’ve noticed a pattern over the last couple of years due to weather changes, that pests that are an issue in winter, such as rats and mice, are continuing into the summer months. “We are seeing a lot more activity around this year. There are always spiders, rats and mice but when you have these changes in weather patterns, periods of rain and heat, it does affect the life cycle of insects, and their movements.” The warm wet weather was likely to encourage mosquitoes to breed more, he said, and the number of termites would probably increase. “We’ve also seen an increase in termites’ flights, we’ve noticed after warmer days, after thunderstorms you tend to get a lot more flights than what we’ve seen in other years,” he said. But some are on the move and coming inside because they are looking for safety. “In regards to flooding, anything that burrows into the ground – rats, mice, spiders – they all move to higher ground so a lot of people can see a lot more activity,” Yehia said. Sales manager Sally White from Wet and Forget, a national company that sells products to kill mould, said it was experiencing a 20% increase in calls this season already. “It’s a huge increase and definitely more than last year. We operate Australia-wide and right now it’s the whole east coast,” she said. She said they were getting more calls to fix mould inside wardrobes, and outside on pavers and around pools. She expected it to be a busy summer. “Especially inland, where there have been floods – they’ll be a lot of mould problems following that, when the water recedes,” she said. Agriculture Victoria plant pest manager Chris Pittock said La Niña created a more “productive ecosystem”. “There’s more plant growth, better conditions for insects that rely on plants for food or shelter,” Pittock said. “You end up with insects that might be seen as pests but also predatory insects like wasps and ladybirds.” He said they were already seeing an increase in snails, European wasps, aphids, leaf miners, caterpillars and moths across parts of Victoria. “It doesn’t take long for predatory insects to catch up, and birds get into the play. “It’s an uptick in the whole ecosystem, but if you’re a farmer it can be frustrating to wait for nature to catch up.” With the wet weather, one thing is certain – an increase in mosquitoes. More than a nuisance, the little flies can carry serious diseases such as Ross River fever. But Dr Cameron Webb from the University of Sydney said while the weather will bring more mosquitoes, that doesn’t mean more diseases. “While we can predict an increase in mosquitoes, it’s tricky to predict outbreaks of mosquito-borne diseases. It depends on the local wildlife because they pick up the virus from birds and native marsupials.” So what to do about it? Whether it’s eight-legged friends or growing mould spores, here’s what the experts advise. Spiders Associate Prof Tanya Latty, from the University of Sydney, said: “Usually, if you’re seeing an increase it’s because something has changed outside and they are coming in temporarily. Animals come into our homes because [we] are offering something [they] want. “I would never recommend anyone use insecticide. Reduce clutter, seal the house – make sure doors go all the way down, don’t leave windows open without screens. “A lot of spiders are helpful … The vast majority are not going to cause a problem. “For funnel webs and redback spiders, you can always call a professional.” Mould “Everyone has a different idea on how you get rid of [mould], but the most important thing really is airflow and keeping the surfaces as dry as possible, especially inside,” White said. “Moving stuff away from the walls, to get that airflow, and to try to dry everything out.” Mosquitoes Webb said: “In your own backyard, tip out water retainers, whether it’s pot plant saucers or neglected kids’ toys. Make sure your roof gutters and drains are clean. Wash your bird bath out weekly, so any mosquitoes which have laid eggs can’t complete the cycle. “Put on flyscreens, and a tropical insect repellent, any one you can get from the pharmacy or supermarket.”In his latest novel, award-winning crime writer Garry Disher interrogates the cultural landscapes of power and misogyny within the coastal town of Swanage, a fictional locale nestled among the back beaches of Dromana in Victoria. Contemporary attitudes towards male violence are pitted against the stereotypes of a small-town old boys’ club in this complex and thought-provoking story. World-weary Charlie Deravin has grown up around cops – he was practically raised by local sergeant Mark Valente and the other alphas of the “Menlo Beach mafia”. As an adult (and now a cop himself), Charlie returns to Swanage with his brother Liam to help their mother evict a troublesome lodger and prepare her house for sale. When, eight days later, Charlie’s mum goes missing on the same day as schoolboy Billy Saul, people assume their disappearances are unrelated – Billy’s a tragic accident, their mother a victim of domestic violence. Charlie’s father, Rhys Deravin, is accused of murdering his ex-wife, and although there’s no proof to convict him, the accusation is enough for Liam to turn his back on his dad and for the local cops to stop investigating other leads. But Charlie fixates on tracking down the lodger – the man he’s convinced is responsible for his mother’s death. Twenty years after the events of the novel’s extended prologue, Charlie is staying in Swanage while on leave for punching a superior officer. Now a divorcee with an adult daughter, Charlie has worked his way up through the police ranks, all while investigating his mother’s disappearance on the side. A particularly gritty rape case, in which privilege and entitlement seem to take precedence over truth, has left Charlie disillusioned with his job, and with a heightened awareness of the lack of justice for women. When two skeletons are unearthed at a local building site and revealed to be the bodies of Charlie’s mother and Billy Saul, his old obsession takes an even firmer grip, leaving him determined to get to the truth of what happened. The “dead girl” trope in crime fiction is the subject of much criticism and debate. US author Alice Bolin writes in her book of essays Dead Girls: “The victim’s body is a neutral arena on which to work out male problems.” In some ways this rings true in The Way it is Now: Charlie’s mum is somewhat downtrodden; as a mother, ex-wife and landlady to key male characters, her position is relational to the men in the novel. Although Charlie’s mother is more complex than the standard female cadaver, her death is in many ways the catalyst for her son’s narrative. Disher leans further into this trope than most writers, turning the narrative towards the dynamics that allow toxic masculinity to fester as Charlie reflects on his relationship with masculinity and power, and his fear of becoming like his father. The sun-bleached, asbestos-lined beach shacks of Swanage are like a metaphor for the tired attitudes of the old cops who still roam the streets. The town feels out of time, ripe with nostalgia and sweltering summers. The threatening presence of detective Valente seems to seep into all corners of the investigation. There is a power struggle happening here, not just between Charlie and Valente, but between progressive and outdated attitudes. Charlie’s brother Liam is less willing to reflect on the past, dismissing the old cops as “vicious old homophobes”. Underpinning the investigation are simmering domestic tensions: Liam’s strained relationship with his father, Rhys’s deteriorating health, and his new wife Fay’s growing anxiety about the unnamed illness. Tensions in the Deravin family come to a head and Disher captures well the mix of loyalty, obligation, resentment and love that all families navigate. Both brothers have a good relationship with Fay, who is a likable character, far from any wicked stepmother. Love is an unexpected theme in the novel, particularly for Charlie, whose burgeoning relationship with feisty jury member Anna makes him reflect on ways he might have loved better in the past. Disher charts Charlie’s journey towards self-reflection, and while he is far from perfect in his new relationship, there is a sense of his capacity to grow. There is a sadness at the heart of The Way it is Now – a suggestion that our stubborn inability to change is doing untold damage. Disher is, as always, a deft and compelling crime novelist, and he has crafted a provocative whodunnit that is grounded firmly in the current moment. The Way it is Now by Garry Disher is out now through Text Publishing (RRP$32.99)Canadian lawmakers have passed a motion banning the discredited practice of “conversion therapy”, in a rare show of unanimity in the country’s parliament. A surprise motion on Wednesday by the opposition Conservatives to fast-track the legislation prompted applause in the House of Commons. A handful of Liberal cabinet ministers hugged their Conservative colleagues after the vote. “I dream of the day when LGBTQ2 issues are no longer political footballs. And we are one day closer to that future,” said Liberal MP Randy Boissonnault, who is gay. Canada’s justice minister, David Lametti, praised the Conservatives for bringing the motion forward. “There are clearly people in the Conservative caucus who exercised a great deal of leadership on the issue, and I thank them,” he said. “This is what we can do when parliament works together.” The governing Liberals had made repeated attempts to pass legislation banning the practice, which aims to change individuals’ sexual orientation or gender identity, and has been deemed harmful by health experts globally. The Liberals first introduced the bill in March 2020, but it died after the government prorogued parliament. Trudeau’s party reintroduced the bill again but it died when parliament dissolved ahead of the September federal election. The Conservative leader, Erin O’Toole, has become an outspoken proponent of LGBTQ rights since taking control of the party. By voting to fast-track the bill, lawmakers avoid having to record their vote. Previously, 62 Conservatives voted against the motion in June. The bill will now go to the senate for a separate vote before it becomes law. A recent UN report found that conversion practices are performed in at least 68 countries, although experts say some version of conversion practice is still found in all nations. Aversion therapy, where a person is subjected to a “negative, painful or otherwise distressing sensation”– including electric shocks – to create a negative association, has been used in many countries. The vote puts Canada one step closer to joining a small number of nations – Brazil, Ecuador, Germany and Malta – that have outright banned the practice. A recent bill in the UK has proposed restricting, but not banning, the practice.An Arizona police officer has been fired amid outrage over the killing of a suspected shoplifter who was in a motorized wheelchair and moving slowly away from officers when he was shot in the back multiple times. Surveillance videos released by the police department showed Officer Ryan Remington of the Tucson police department slowly walking behind 61-year old Richard Lee Richards through a parking lot outside a Walmart on Monday evening. Richards had been accused of stealing a toolbox from Walmart and an employee contacted Remington, who was working a special duty assignment at the store. Richards brandished a knife at the employee at one point, police said. “Do not go into the store, sir,” Remington can be heard yelling at Richards in police body-cam footage as Richards approached the entrance of a Lowe’s Home Improvement. As Richards continued to approach the entrance, Remington fired nine shots and hit Richard on the back and side. Richards slumped forward and fell to the ground in front of a flower stand and was then quickly handcuffed by Remington. He was pronounced dead shortly afterwards. Tucson’s police chief, Chris Magnus, said the Walmart employee approached Richards and asked him to show him a receipt. Richards responded by pulling out a knife and said: “Here’s your receipt.” According to Magnus, Remington ordered Richards to stop and hand over the knife, to which the Walmart employee heard Richards say: “If you want me to put down the knife, you’re going to have to shoot me.” Magnus condemned the shooting on Tuesday, saying: “His use of deadly force in this incident is a clear violation of department policy and directly contradicts multiple aspects of our use of force and training.” He added that he was “deeply disturbed and troubled” by Remington’s actions and “as a result, the department moved earlier today to terminate Officer Remington”, who had been part of the Tucson police force for four years. Tucson’s mayor, Regina Romero, declared Remington’s actions “unconscionable and indefensible”, adding: “It is moments like this that test our resolve to ensure justice and accountability. We owe this to all Tusconans.” Mike Storie, an attorney representing Remington, condemned Remington’s termination and described the comments made by Magnus and Romero as politically motivated. “These are unbelievable circumstances that I’ve never seen,” he said, adding that Remington “attempted to de-escalate the situation” until he had no other choice. The Pima county attorney’s office is reviewing the shooting for possible criminal charges against Remington.Scientists have raised concerns about a proposed overhaul of newborn screening that could lead to the UK becoming the first country to offer whole-genome sequencing for every baby. Speaking before the publication of plans for an NHS pilot study in which up to 200,000 babies’ genomes will be sequenced and analysed, scientists suggested the initiative appeared designed to create a valuable health dataset rather than an effective method of improving the diagnosis of rare diseases. Anneke Lucassen, director of the Centre for Personalised Medicine at the University of Oxford, said that if the primary objective were improving newborn screening, there were alternative, more targeted tests that would be cheaper and potentially more reliable. “If it was really all about [diagnosing more conditions], you could do that through other means,” she said. “It’s about helping to build the genomics industry in the UK and it’s about creating a research resource so we can study people as they grow older.” Lucassen said she was not opposed to the pilot, or even necessarily to these objectives, but wanted more transparency, “because otherwise it’s sold as something that is not the full picture”. “The public needs to know that,” she added. Sequencing the genomes of all newborns would represent a hugely ambitious upgrade to the routine “heel prick” test that all babies receive at about five days to detect nine serious health conditions including cystic fibrosis, sickle cell disease and various metabolic diseases. The plan has gathered political momentum and was cited in the chancellor’s October budget speech as part of a £5bn commitment to health research, with a suggestion that more than 200 conditions could be screened for. In the pilot, babies’ genomes and anonymised health data would be added to Genomic England’s research database, which academics and industry scientists can use for pre-competitive research. Some welcomed the UK’s far-sighted approach to genomics, saying genetic information would inevitably play an increasingly important role in healthcare in the future. “I think [genomics data] will be an incredibly powerful tool when used in the right way,” said Prof Sir Peter Donnelly, chief executive of Genomics plc and a professor of statistical science at the University of Oxford. “I see the newborn screening programme as one step in that path.” A public consultation early this year found that the public would be supportive of the plans. However, geneticists are concerned that there has not been sufficient clarity about the potential for more targeted tests of specific genes to work just as well or better. “If your motivation is simply to improve newborn screening to improve newborn health, this isn’t how you’d do it,” said Prof Caroline Wright, a geneticist at the University of Exeter. Prof Francesco Muntoni, a paediatric neurologist, said other proposals to expand the number of conditions screened for were being sidelined because the sequencing proposal had become a national flagship project. He said this risked delaying the introduction of tests for conditions such as spinal muscular atrophy, for which new treatments exist that can protect babies before symptoms appear. There are also questions about the risk of false positives. Until now, whole-genome sequencing has been used to diagnose rare conditions in people with unexplained symptoms. The reverse – predicting disease based on the genome of healthy babies – is a more difficult task, and experts said the more conditions that were screened for, the higher the risk of placing healthy babies on a medical pathway. One recent trial in California found that genetic sequencing would result in a sixfold increase in false positives for metabolic disorders, compared with the conventional biochemical test. Donnelly said the greatest healthcare value of such data would be in predicting the risk of common health conditions such as heart disease and diabetes in adulthood. He said there were particular ethical complexities around the consent process for obtaining genomic data in newborn babies. “[These issues] are all much easier when you can ask the individuals directly,” he said. Simon Wilde, the engagement director for Genomics England, said: “We recognise the uncertainty of knowing what the exact benefits might be, which is why we are doing the research pilot, to gather the evidence. We’ve set out in the vision document the different questions we want to explore in the research pilot, and our planning and research will be led by the public, patients and potential participants in the programme to get this right. We are not rushing into this because we want to do this at the right pace.”Abrdn has struck a £1.5bn deal to buy the online investment platform Interactive Investor, as the fund manager pushes into the increasingly popular realm of web-based trading. Abrdn, which was known as Standard Life Aberdeen until a vowel-averse name change earlier this year, said it was acquiring a fast-growing business that added 46,000 customers last year, excluding acquisitions, taking the total above 400,000. The business was purchased from the majority shareholder, JC Flowers, a US private equity firm, which controlled Interactive Investor via a holding company, Antler Holdco, registered in Guernsey. The move heralds a significant expansion by Abrdn into direct investment. Firms such as Interactive Investor and its rival Hargreaves Lansdown allow individual “retail” investors the opportunity to exercise control, rather than handing over responsibility to a fund manager. They have become increasingly popular thanks in part to the development of apps and web-based platforms that make trading easier, fuelling increased interest in dealing in financial instruments. While apps such as Robinhood and eToro have targeted small-time “day traders”, often seeking a quick profit on sometimes controversial assets such as cryptocurrency, Interactive Investor has pitched itself at a different clientele. Day trading platforms typically charge no subscription fee, taking a cut of trades and charging withdrawal fees instead. Interactive Investor’s entry-level product requires a subscription of £9.99 per month, with customers able to set up automatic investment plans for free but charged if they make more than one trade per month. Its client base skews older and wealthier, with customers more likely to be prepared to invest for longer-term returns. The average customer is a 57-year-old with £137,454 deposited with the company, significantly more than both day traders and the £82,000 average at Hargreaves Lansdown and AJ Bell. Richard Wilson, the chief executive of Interactive Investor, will continue to lead the business, whose £55bn of assets under administration will increase Abrdn’s direct investment business fivefold, to £69bn. Wilson is expected to report directly to the Abrdn chief executive, Stephen Bird, who has made expansion into retail investing a priority for the Edinburgh-based firm, better known for traditional asset management on behalf of clients. Bird said the deal was a “unique opportunity and a transformative step in delivering our growth strategy”. Interactive Investor was founded in 1994 by the entrepreneur Sherry Coutu, who ran the business until it floated on the London Stock Exchange in 2000. She left after it was bought the following year by Australia’s AMP, which briefly rebranded the business, folding it into its own Ample brand. The chief executive, Tomas Carruthers, led a buyout in 2003, leading to majority ownership by the US private equity firm JC Flowers.Living near green space could reduce the physical and psychological symptoms of premenstrual syndrome (PMS), researchers have found. A first-of-its-kind study of more than 1,000 women aged 18 to 49 living in cities in Norway and Sweden found that women who across their lifetime live in neighbourhoods with more green space are less likely to experience PMS symptoms than those living in less green neighbourhoods. Scientists from the Barcelona Institute for Global Health and the University of Bergen found that women living in neighbourhoods with more green space had fewer PMS symptoms and were less likely to experience anxiety, depression, difficulty sleeping, breast tenderness or abdominal bloating. Although PMS causes clinically relevant symptoms in up to 20% of women of reproductive age, there have not previously been any studies into its relationship with green space. The study, published in Environment International, adds to a growing body of evidence of the health benefits associated with natural environments. Participating women – from Bergen in Norway and Gothenburg, Umeå and Uppsala in Sweden – were required to complete a questionnaire, including whether they experienced any of the following common PMS symptoms: irritability, anxiety, tearfulness or increased sensitivity, difficulty sleeping, depression, breast tenderness or abdominal bloating and headaches. The study adopted the normalised difference vegetation index (NDVI) to calculate green space and scientists also estimated exposure to air pollution. The research aimed to establish whether living near an urban green space could improve PMS symptoms and whether it was affected by body mass index, air pollution or physical activity. Lead author Kai Triebner, a researcher at the University of Bergen, said: “Three of the four symptoms that improved with exposure to green space were psychological, which is consistent with what we already knew: contact with nature helps to reduce stress and improve mental health.” Triebner said green space lowered levels of cortisol. He said: “Stress can worsen PMS symptoms and increase levels of the hormone cortisol, which, in turn, could be associated with an increased release of progesterone, which has been linked to the occurrence of PMS symptoms.” The research is “another building block” in understanding of what the best conditions are to live healthily, he said. But the research found that women needed to be exposed to green space for a long time to get the most benefits. “When we looked at exposure to green space at a specific point in time, the analysis did not yield any significant results,” said Payam Dadvand, a researcher at ISGlobal, the Barcelona Institute for Global Health, and a coordinator of the study. “Our research therefore underscores the importance of long-term exposure to green space, which is where benefits against PMS symptoms were found.” Previous research has suggested that the benefits of natural space are linked to a rise in physical activity and a reduction in air pollution exposure. But the latest study did not find that these factors played a role. Dadvand said that despite growing evidence of the beneficial impact of green space on health, many cities still did not have enough of it. He said: “City officials should therefore prioritise natural environments as essential for our health.”The Beatles didn’t know what they were in for The concept for Let It Be was: no concept. The Beatles arrived in an empty studio and wondered where the equipment was. (And revealed that they knew very little about setting up PA systems.) What were they rehearsing for? A show on the QE2? A concert on Primrose Hill? A TV special in Libya? A film? What would the set look like? Would it be made of plastic? Why, George Harrison wondered, were they being recorded? Get Back makes clear that the Beatles didn’t have a clue what to expect from Let It Be. And they certainly didn’t know how devious director Michael Lindsay-Hogg was. Not only was he recording their conversations, but he was also hiding microphones in canteen flowerpots. I had no idea the surreptitiously recorded conversation between John Lennon and Paul McCartney existed, in which the greatest songwriting partnership of all time discuss their deteriorating relationship and the way they’ve failed Harrison. “George said he didn’t get enough satisfaction any more because of the compromise he had to make to be together,” says Lennon. “It’s a festering wound that we’ve allowed. Yesterday – it’s a wound that festered even deeper, and we didn’t give him any bandages.” While it was thrilling to hear that secret, candid chat, I can’t have been alone in feeling slightly cheapened by the experience. Michael Lindsay-Hogg made a terrible film and had a lot of bad ideas Sometimes you need to know when to shut up and listen. But not Lindsay-Hogg. Throughout Let It Be, no matter what’s happening, he’s there, puffing on a cigar, chiming in with unhelpful comments and directions, or stories about working with Orson Welles when he was a child actor. He just will not quit with his idea for a trip to Libya, and at one point suggests filming in an orphanage, or a children’s hospital. “Not one where they’re really sick,” he adds, as if that makes his awful idea any better. Paul McCartney is really good at writing songs Macca’s songwriting skill was hardly in question prior to the release of this documentary, but watching him muster Get Back out of thin air is like nothing I’ve ever seen before. One second, the song doesn’t exist; the next, he’s playing it and improvising the lyrics, bringing it into being by sheer force of will. The fact that Ringo Starr is sitting opposite yawning and Harrison looks equally bored suggests McCartney did that kind of thing a lot. For those of us seeing this for the first time, it looks like some kind of witchcraft. Ringo is an amazing drummer Another long-running non-debate that really needs putting to bed. Starr is not some journeyman who got lucky – he’s one of the best drummers ever and the Beatles wouldn’t have been as good without him. Let’s blame Jasper Carrott for adding fuel to this particular fire. But once again, his input is here for all to see. He wasn’t as creatively involved as the other three, but when needed, he was there – drunk or hungover if Get Back is anything to go by – whether bashing a piano lid, slapping his thighs or caressing his drum kit – and better than anyone. The world owes Yoko Ono an apology Yoko didn’t break up the Beatles. Blaming it on her constant presence was always an absurd, lazy accusation grounded in misogyny and racism (seeing Paul, Ringo and George’s partners and various guests wander in and out of the studio really hammers home those double standards), but hopefully we can once and for all put to bed any nonsense about how she brought about the band’s decline. Yes, there were tensions – complicated, deep-seated and long-running – but, as McCartney says in part two, Yoko’s presence was only an obstacle if the rest of the band allowed it to be. “It really isn’t that bad. They just want to stay together,” he says of her and Lennon. “She’s great, she really is all right.” Billy Preston could solve any crisis “It’s interesting to see how nicely people behave when you bring a guest in, because they don’t want everybody to know they’re so bitchy,” remarked Harrison in the 1995 TV documentary Anthology when asked about bringing in keyboardist and Little Richard band member Billy Preston for the Let It Be sessions. They are on fire when playing with Preston – perhaps inspired by his skill, perhaps liberated by the shift from Twickenham Studios to Savile Row, and finally jettisoning the idea of performing a concert in Libya to close the film. Above all, maybe it’s that Preston was totemic, a friend from the Hamburg days they talk of so fondly throughout Get Back, and a reminder of friendlier, happier times. Glyn Johns dressed incredibly Despite the best efforts of Harrison in a purple shirt, pink striped trousers and furry boots seemingly made of carpet, he can’t hold a sartorial candle to engineer Glyn Johns in his various coats. Whether mustard, thigh-length and double-breasted, big, white and hairy, black vinyl proto-puffer, maroon crushed velvet or navy blue with a deckchair stripe, the man dressed like more of a rock star than anyone in the room. Mal Evans is a joy to watch The Beatles’ road manager would have done anything for them, no matter what they asked. McCartney casually mentions, as he’s walking off for lunch, that maybe it would be good to have an anvil. An hour or so later, Evans is sitting there smacking an anvil during an early take of Maxwell’s Silver Hammer. He chips in with song ideas for The Long and Winding Road, and almost immediately after Harrison announces he’s leaving, Evans checks he’ll be OK for money and says he’ll speak to Apple about his residual payments. What a guy to have around. Reality TV primed us for Get Back Ghastly as some of his ideas were, Lindsay-Hogg was probably right about trying to construct some kind of narrative. Unlike now, he didn’t have 20 years of reality TV to fall back on, which has conditioned viewers to the idea of nothing much happening. Let’s also remember that up until this point, most artists were only seen in stage-managed formats, never in an unfiltered, direct way. Now, we’re comfortable with – we demand – that kind of access. McCartney comes out better than anyone expected The received wisdom was that McCartney behaved like some kind of controlling ego-monster during the Let It Be sessions, and that this was the main reason it had never been rereleased. In Get Back, however, Peter Jackson takes a sad song and makes it better. We see McCartney support his bandmates in their writing, massage their egos, write prolifically, inject enthusiasm and keep the whole thing moving forward, all the while displaying previously unseen levels of self-awareness and an ability to predict the future. The moment after Harrison has left and Lennon is a no-show where he sits back in his chair and says “and then there were two” as his eyes fill up with tears is too much. This didn’t have to be the end Hindsight is a wonderful thing, of course, but there was a way through all this. The history books tell us that by January 1969, the four were pretty much at each other’s throats, uninterested in their tedious day jobs and McCartney’s schoolmasterly ways – but that just wasn’t the case. It’s impossible after watching Get Back not to imagine a different future where the Beatles recorded All Things Must Pass for Let It Be, heeded Glyn Johns’ warnings about bringing in the inevitably disastrous Allen Klein as manager, got back to their roots with a string of concerts around the UK, took a couple of years off to make a solo record each and reconvened. If that’s too much, let’s at least imagine a future where Jackson is given all the footage from Anthology to work his magic on.Have you experienced problems with the supply of large household items such as beds or sofas or perhaps another large purchase that you were hoping to receive before Christmas? Has it taken several months for your order to be delivered? Were you aware of a delay when you bought the item or have you been taken by surprise? Were you promised by the supplier that it would arrive before Christmas? We would like to hear from people who are experiencing delays or other issues with their purchases of large items below. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.A prosecutor in Michigan has explained why the teenage suspect in a deadly high school shooting this week was unusually charged with the crime of terrorism, along four first-degree murder counts and numerous other offenses. Charges are also being considered against the shooter’s parents, prosecutor Karen McDonald said, which would be a rare move in cases of school shootings and would probably be linked to access to firearms. McDonald, the Oakland county prosecutor, said 15-year-old Ethan Crumbley, who is charged as an adult, had clearly set out to kill or injure as many people as he could during the rampage at Oxford high school in suburban Detroit that left four students dead and seven others, including a teacher, wounded. “If that’s not terrorism, I don’t know what is,” McDonald told CNN, conceding “there is no playbook about how to prosecute a school shooting.” Multiple videos from inside the school and other digital evidence, she said, gave investigators a clear picture of Crumbley emerging from a bathroom with a semi-automatic handgun and allegedly beginning to shoot multiple people. “But you probably don’t even need to see that to know how terrifying it is to be in close proximity of another student shooting and killing fellow students. I mean, it’s terror,” she said. “Like every other child that was in that building, and I address that about the terrorism charge, we must have an appropriate consequence that speaks for the victims that were not killed or injured but also, they were affected, how do they go back to school?” McDonald said that as well as families grieving children, and others praying for those still in hospital, “over 1,000 were also victimized as well”. Charges are also being considered against the shooter’s parents, James and Jennifer Crumbley, the prosecutor has said. According to authorities, Crumbley’s father bought the 9mm Sig Sauer handgun only four days before the shooting, although it is not known how it came to the suspect’s possession. Such a move would also be rare: according to a Washington Post analysis in March of school shootings, parents or guardians are rarely charged when their child takes and uses an improperly secured weapon. A study by the Giffords Law Center found that 21 states had no child-access prevention laws for guns. Of the 105 school shootings since the 1999 Columbine high school massacre that the Post looked at, the weapon used was sourced to relatives or friends in 80% of the cases, yet only four adults faced charges for not locking them up securely. “Those who do not do that should and will be held accountable,” McDonald said, indicating that charges could be imminent against the parents, who attended their son’s court arraignment on Wednesday via video link. “We have to do better,” McDonald added. Authorities in Oxford, a township of about 22,000 residents north of downtown Detroit, revealed on Wednesday that the suspect’s parents were called to the school on the day of the shooting to discuss his “concerning behaviors” in the classroom. Detectives are poring over evidence taken from the scene and the suspect’s home. According to Oakland sheriff’s lieutenant Tim Wills, speaking at the arraignment, that included “two separate videos recovered from Ethan’s cellphone made by him the night before the incident, wherein he talked about shooting and killing students the next day at Oxford high school.” The investigators also retrieved a journal in which Crumbley is said to have expressed an intention to massacre his classmates. The victims of the shooting have been named as students Hana St Juliana, 14; Tate Myre, 16; and Justin Shilling and Madisyn Baldwin, both 17.The graceful actor Arlene Dahl, who has died aged 96, was hardly ever seen with a hair out of place, nor less than elegantly and fashionably dressed. Though her refusal to look anything but her best, on or off screen, limited the range of her acting roles, she was able to profit from this immaculate image when she retired from films to establish a highly successful business selling cosmetics and lingerie. Dahl began her career with Warner Bros in the late 1940s before moving to MGM for whom, in 1950, she was in a couple of good westerns, opposite Robert Taylor in Ambush, and Joel McCrea in The Outriders, looking gorgeous and staying clear of any horses. She continued in colourful action adventures for various studios throughout the 50s, allowing her male co-stars, such as Ray Milland in Jamaica Run (1953), Alan Ladd in Desert Legion (1953) and Rock Hudson in Bengal Brigade (1954), to sweat on her behalf. In 1953, Dahl, newly divorced from the screen Tarzan Lex Barker, co-starred with the Argentinian actor Fernando Lamas in a couple of kitschy melodramas, Sangaree, set in the deep south, and The Diamond Queen, in which Dahl lounged languorously as Maya, the queen of Nepal. Lamas, whom she married the following year, once remarked, “In the six years I was married to Arlene, I never saw her without makeup. Being married to her was very nice at night. But in the daytime, it was like being married to Elizabeth Arden.” One of her few interesting roles of the period was in Alan Dwan’s Slightly Scarlet (1956), in which Dahl, a redhead, played the evil ex-con sister of the equally flame-haired Rhonda Fleming. Continuing to inject a little wickedness into her persona, she came to England to make Fortune is a Woman (AKA She Played With Fire, 1956) as a wife using her charms to trap an insurance investigator (Jack Hawkins) into blackmail and murder. After appearing in one of the best Hollywood Jules Verne adaptations, Journey to the Center of the Earth (1959), she established her beauty business, Arlene Dahl Enterprises. She had already begun writing an internationally syndicated newspaper column, Let’s Be Beautiful, that ran for 20 years, and she also went on to design fashion collections for Vogue Patterns in the 1970s and 80s, to create a jewellery line and to launch a perfume called Dahlia. Her books, mostly on beauty and astrology, included Always Ask a Man: The Key to Femininity (1963) and Beyond Beauty: A Three-Part Journey to Help You Reach Your Full Potential as a Woman (1980). The daughter of Rudolph Dahl, a car dealer, and Idelle (nee Swan), Dahl was born in Minneapolis, of Norwegian extraction. Her first jobs were as a buyer and model for department stores in Chicago, and then she won some early acting roles, including a small part in a Broadway musical, Mr Strauss Goes to Boston (1945), which got her noticed by Warner Bros. That studio did not do much for her, giving her a walk-on in Life With Father (1947) and casting her as the sweet wife of the composer Dennis Morgan in the soppy biopic My Wild Irish Rose (1947), so she soon moved over to MGM. There she was given roles as straight woman to another redhead, the slapstick comic Red Skelton, in two comedies, A Southern Yankee (1948) and Watch the Birdie (1950), that were both reworkings of better Buster Keaton material. In the likable musical biopic, Three Little Words (1950), Dahl had little to do as Skelton’s silent screen star wife, though she did get to sing the number (Nevertheless) I Love You So Much. In fact, she had a pleasant singing voice, which she had little chance to use in films. “I consider my years in Hollywood nothing but an interim. What I always wanted was to be a musical comedy star,” she said when she starred as Margo Channing in Applause, the musical version of All About Eve (following Lauren Bacall and Anne Baxter) on Broadway in 1972. After the peak of her career in the 50s, Dahl made very few films, though she played the feisty Lucinda Schenk for three years (1982-85) on the popular TV soap One Life to Live. One of her last screen appearances was as a guest in Night of the Warrior (1991), which starred her son Lorenzo Lamas. Dahl is survived by her sixth husband, Marc Rosen, a designer of cosmetics packaging, whom she married in 1984, and by Lorenzo, the son of her second marriage; by a daughter, Carole, from her third marriage, to Christian Holmes; and a son, Stephen, from her fifth marriage, to Rounsevelle Schaum; and by nine grandchildren and two great-grandchildren. • Arlene Carol Dahl, actor and businesswoman, born 11 August 1925; died 29 November 2021 • Ronald Bergan died in 2020Erin Cuthbert’s dad, Steve, won’t let her win. Not kicking balls against a wall as a kid, nor playing golf now. “He always wants absolutely to beat me,” the Chelsea forward says with a laugh. “He said: ‘There’s going to be a day where you beat me and it’s going to be on merit.’ It’s the same with golf now. I’m working on my golf game. I’m going to try and beat him. Maybe next year.” The 23-year-old pauses when asked whether that, and battling in boys’ teams, is where the terrier-like work rate and drive that have helped make her a fan favourite come from, or whether it has always been part of her. “A little bit of both,” she says, before Chelsea face Arsenal in the 2020-21 FA Cup final on Sunday. “We talk about nature and nurture. It’s in my nature to never give up. Growing up in Scotland there weren’t a lot of professional players at the time. A couple – Kim Little had done it, hopefully I’ve followed along her path a little bit – but a lot of people don’t get out of my area [Irvine]. My area isn’t the poshest area, there’s a lot of poverty, it’s a rough area of Scotland, but I was lucky enough to have a family who always supported me and always took me everywhere that I needed to be.” Her dad coached her too, at local boys’ clubs, and “was pretty brutal with me at times”, she adds with a grin. She played on girls’ teams as well: “I played Saturday and Sunday, no problem.” Playing with boys toughened her up and would create a fierce loyalty. “When I went to Crosshouse Boys Club and played 11-a-sides, when one of the boys in the other team kicked me, one of the boys on my team would want to go right through them, which I absolutely loved,” she says. At Crosshouse she delivered revenge after a coach at a former team had told her she wasn’t physical or strong enough to play 11-a-side with boys. “That was a little bit of rejection. I said I wanted to go somewhere where I was valued. I went to Crosshouse and won the league, won all the titles and it was so sweet to beat them.” From Crosshouse she joined the team she supported, Rangers, playing with boys and girls in the elite centre before the club launched a girls’ academy and she began working her way through the youth teams before making her senior debut at 15. “I was part of the national performance group with the national team too,” she says. “I would go to the gym at seven in the morning, and it was an hour away so I had to get up at five and be out of the house at six, do my gym session with the national team players, then I would have a shower, be at uni for nine, be at uni all day and then train with Glasgow City in the evening. It was quite a drain on me because I worked on Saturdays to try and get myself some money to pay for my bloomin’ petrol.” The move to Scotland’s premier side, Glasgow City, came in 2015 and a year later Chelsea signed her, reward for all the hard work. At 23, she has made 145 appearances for the club. “I came down for a trial and by the time I got back to the airport – Emma [Hayes, the manager] dropped me off – I got into the Wagamama at Heathrow and there was a contract waiting for me in my emails,” she says. Last season Cuthbert spent more time on the bench, with Hayes citing her among a group of four who struggled after the pandemic-stunted season. “When you keep training and training and you’re not playing it’s really difficult,” Cuthbert says. “There was no escape … I had no way of separating my work and my life because there was no life at that time for anyone. So I did struggle.” Not being able to see family or socialise was difficult. “Also, there were a few things medically wrong with me at that time that meant I wasn’t able to perform at the highest level. I never will feel sorry for myself. I just needed to suck it up and get on with it. I made sure that this summer I enjoyed it to my fullest. I was following Scotland around at the Euros. I saw my beautiful country; I’d never had the opportunity to do that before.” A full pre-season, after ankle injuries in previous breaks, helped. This year she got to go back to Rangers for a friendly too. “The amount of people that had Cuthbert 22 on the back of Chelsea shirts was honestly unbelievable.” Now she has a new level of confidence. “Whenever I get the ball, I feel like I can do something,” she says. “Maybe last season, that’s where I went wrong. Because that’s not how I felt. I felt like every time I got the ball I had to pass to somebody else.” In Chelsea’s 4-0 defeat of Manchester City the forward drew Hayes’s praise for “taking one for the team” and sticking to City’s Lauren Hemp. “It’s it’s not ideal being shifted about different positions. I’ll be honest with that; Emma knows how I feel about that,” says Cuthbert. “But Emma also understands that I’m a versatile player and I can play different positions. Being a young player, being able to play all these different positions can only help you. But at some point you’re going to have to nail one down. I don’t want to just be doing all these positions, I want to be a specialist in one. But I’ll do whatever job I need to do for the team.” Get to know the players in England’s top-flight better with our WSL player in focus series. Read all our interviews here.Christmas parties are being cancelled. Restaurants are reporting an increase in the number of diners’ no-shows. The first tentative signs of the impact of the Omicron variant on the economy are starting to emerge. True, the relatively modest drop in the number of diners in the week up to 29 November might have had as much to do with the storm Arwen as with consumers taking fright at the possibility of a new wave of the pandemic. But the anecdotal evidence is that a chunk of the population is risk-averse and does not wait for an official lockdown before adopting more cautious behaviour. That was the pattern in the past, and there is no reason to imagine it will change this time, despite the prime minister’s insistence that there is no need to cancel Christmas shindigs. The government is keen to avoid harming the economy, but there will clearly be some short-term damage to the sectors least able to bear it, even if the Omicron variant proves to be less of a threat than feared. The hospitality, and bricks and mortar, retail sectors are in need of a bumper festive period after what has been a desperately hard couple of years. For some businesses, cancelled Christmas bookings will be the final straw. Each new wave of the virus embeds structural changes in the way the economy functions. It is reasonable to assume that Omicron will be followed by other variants, so there will be more working from home, more online shopping, and a shift in spending from face-to-face services to buying goods. This is a classic case of what the economist Joseph Schumpeter called creative destruction, and for the losers it will be a painful process. It may be years before the full effects of the pandemic become clear. In the meantime, the likely shift in spending from services to goods will exacerbate supply-chain issues, adding to inflationary pressures. When news of Omicron broke, the knee-jerk reaction of financial markets was to assume central banks would delay tightening policy. That may prove not to be the case. Pumped up petrol Only last month, the price of oil was closing in on $90 a barrel and there was talk of the $100 mark being breached before too long. The speculation proved unfounded. A combination of factors – fears that rocketing prices would derail the global economy, tougher Covid-19 curbs in Europe, the release of oil from strategic reserves, and the arrival of the Omicron variant – led to a sharp fall. There has now been a fresh fall in the price of crude following the decision by the Opec cartel and its allies to go ahead with January’s plans to increase production by 400,000 barrels a day. At one point after the news was announced, Brent crude was trading at $67 a barrel – almost $20 a barrel below its $86 October peak. At which point, those filling up their vehicles with petrol or diesel have every reason to ask why they are not feeling the benefit. Retailers were quick to raise prices to around 150p a litre when the global oil price went up, but have been slow to bring them down again now the cost of crude has fallen. According to the RAC, retailers are making 19p a litre profit compared with 6p a litre before the pandemic. That looks remarkably like price gouging. London lag It is fair to say the listing rules for companies wanting to trade on the London stock market rarely get pulses racing. There is, though, some significance in the shakeup announced by the Financial Conduct Authority. Put simply, the watchdog is trying to make it easier for those who have started innovative companies to bring their businesses to the market sooner while also retaining sufficient protection against hostile takeovers. The penny seems to have dropped that the London stock market is not the first port of call for fast-growing tech companies, which, if they list in Europe at all, increasingly favour Amsterdam. New York is where the real action is, with daily trading in Tesla on Wall Street worth more than three times the trades of the entire London Stock Exchange. Writing in the FT, Paul Marshall, cofounder of hedge fund Marshall Wace, says UK fund managers would rather have a steady stream of dividends than high growth, and that the LSE is in danger of becoming a Jurassic Park. If Marshall is right, and trading volumes suggest he is, it will take more than changes to listing rules to restore London’s mojo.A great weariness tends to come over me when the subject of Banksy rears its urban-stencilled head. Whether this is my fault, the fault of the media for constantly bringing up Banksy, the fault of Banksy himself, or the fault of people who will not stop referring to Banksy in polite conversation, I don’t know. Even so, Aurélia Rouvier and Laurent Richard’s 90-minute documentary Banksy Most Wanted (BritBox) did a fine job of keeping ennui and irritation at bay. Its swift jog-trot through the history of one of Bristol’s most famous sons, with extensive footage of his work – in situ, on merch, in the hands of collectors who had tempted freeholders to part with parts of their non-party walls – still allowed plenty of time for consideration of the wider, more philosophical issues raised by his art. The film was bookended by footage from and accounts of the night of Banksy’s most famous stunt/astute piece of marketing/excoriating commentary on the vacuousness of the art world: the automated shredding three years ago of Girl With Balloon (one from an edition of 25) by a device the artist had hidden in the frame, just as Sotheby’s gavel had come down on a million-quid-and-change bid for it. Or rather, as Handelsblatt journalist Stephanie Dieckvoss pointed out, the semi-shredding. “It wasn’t destructive,” she noted. “It was a change.” The altered artwork was given a new name and date – and, although it came too late for inclusion in the film, a new price. Love Is in the Bin sold (again at Sotheby’s) for £16m in October this year. Is that a triumph for a guerrilla artist, or a betrayal of everything a man who was first taken to people’s hearts because of his anti-establishment messages supposedly stands for? “You can’t criticise the market but give it what it wants at the same time,” reckons Dieckvoss. “That’s a bit lame.” But are we saying only the pure of heart and empty of bank account are to be trusted and admired? How good a living are you allowed? Such questions floated around, and I would have liked to have spent more time with them, or with the question of what people should do with the Banksys they or their neighbourhood or their city have been gifted. Should they be left in place as intended for the enjoyment of all, or are they – as the art dealer Robin Barton asserts – saleable items like any other, as long as you can find the freeholder and a big enough circular saw to cut through brick? (Also, are art dealers any different from estate agents? This was an implied rather than an overt query, but I’d still like it answered.) As real-life discussions about the artist tend to, the film preferred to concentrate on the question of who Banksy – who has remained unidentified throughout his two-decade career – really is. Its consideration of this also took in the much more interesting question of what kind of person wants to know. The short answer seemed to be: “journalists eager to emerge from the sea of confusion in which they have been swimming”. Some are endearingly candid about it. As a journalism student, Craig Williams put together a viable case for it being Massive Attack’s Robert Del Naja (“Me being stupid, me being young and a bit of an idiot thought I’d go after the biggest story: who is Banksy?”). The musician denied it during a concert, in a way that only fuelled more speculation (“We are all Banksy!”) and several other candidates have been put forward since – most convincingly and prosaically by a forensic expert, who followed the paper and digital trail left by the various documents that companies associated with the Banksy business are required to file. Why let daylight in upon magic? Why not, says Williams. We know who Picasso was – what difference does it make to the art? For others, the unknowability – the Everyman-ness that anonymity provides – is much of the point when dealing with art specifically designed and placed to be accessible to all. Rouvier and Richard’s film covered a lot of ground enthusiastically, intelligently and as unpretentiously as I’ve ever seen it done. At the very least it will give me something to recommend to those people who constantly want to talk about Banksy, and get them off my back. Even if, shockingly, it has moved me fractionally closer to being willing to listen to them one day.Vaccination could become mandatory in Germany from February, Angela Merkel has said, as she announced what her successor as chancellor, Olaf Scholz, described as “a lockdown of the unvaccinated”. As more EU countries confirmed cases of the Omicron variant, which the bloc’s health agency said could make up more than half of all infections on the continent within months, Merkel described the situation as “very serious”. Meeting with Scholz and Germany’s 16 state leaders for emergency talks on Thursday on tougher measures to stem rocketing Covid cases, the outgoing chancellor said an “act of national solidarity” was required. “We have understood that the situation is very serious and that we want to take further measures in addition to those already taken,” she said. “To do this, the fourth wave must be broken, and this has not yet been achieved.” Daily new infections in Germany have broken records in recent weeks, with many hospitals operating at or over capacity. Authorities said 73,209 new cases were recorded in the past 24 hours. Deaths have surged from a rolling seven-day average of just over 10 a day in August to nearly 300 this week. Merkel said Germany’s ethics council would issue formal guidance on a vaccine mandate, and the Bundestag would vote on the legislation by the end of the year. If passed, the rule would come into force from February. “Given the situation, I think it is appropriate to adopt compulsory vaccination,” said Merkel, who is due hand over to Scholz next week. The move would follow the example of neighbouring Austria, which is planning mandatory vaccinations from February. Greece also announced mandatory jabs for the over-60s, with unvaccinated people facing fines if they fail to comply. Merkel also announced a blanket ban on people who have not been vaccinated or recovered from Covid entering bars, restaurants, theatres, cinemas and other leisure venues, as well as non-essential shops and Christmas markets. In areas where the incidence rate exceeds 350 per 100,000 people, discos and nightclubs will close. Private gatherings will be limited to 50 people indoors and 200 outdoors, providing everyone involved has been vaccinated or recovered. But if there are unvaccinated people in the mix, households may invite a maximum of two outside guests, not including children, Merkel said. Masks are to become compulsory in schools. The lockdown measures are expected to be approved by MPs in the coming days and will take effect immediately afterwards. Experts have blamed the fourth wave on Germany’s relatively low vaccination rate of about 68%. For comparison, Spain has fully vaccinated 79% of its population and Portugal 86%. “From the point of view of intensive and emergency medicine, the pandemic situation has never been as threatening and serious as it is today,” Germany’s intensive care association said. Merkel’s outgoing government had previously ruled out mandatory vaccination, but the measure has since won broad political backing. “We don’t have enough vaccinated people,” Scholz said after the meeting. “We now know that this has consequences.” Authorities in Norway said the new variant had been detected in one person out of more than 50 who tested positive for Covid after an office Christmas dinner party in an Oslo restaurant on Friday, and they expected more cases to follow. The Norwegian government reintroduced some restrictions to cope with the emergence of the Omicron variant, including testing all travellers arriving in Norway within 24 hours of arrival, whether vaccinated or not. France announced its first Omicron case on the mainland, in an unvaccinated man from the greater Paris region recently returned from a trip to Nigeria, and said it was awaiting the results of sequencing tests on his wife, who had also tested positive, to see if she was also infected with the variant. Regional authorities in Madrid said they had detected Spain’s first domestic Omicron case, in a vaccinated person who had not travelled to any countries considered at risk or met anyone who had, and were investigating two other similar suspected cases. Dutch health authorities called for pre-flight tests for all travel from outside the EU after it emerged that almost all of the 62 passengers who tested positive after arriving on two flights from South Africa on 26 November, including those with the variant, were fully vaccinated.Alec Baldwin says he did not pull the trigger on the gun that accidentally killed cinematographer Halyna Hutchins on the set of the movie Rust in October. Hutchins, 42, was killed, and director Joel Souza, 48, injured when the gun Baldwin was holding went off during rehearsals for the western on a ranch outside of Santa Fe, New Mexico – a rare filming fatality that sent shockwaves through Hollywood and has forced a reckoning on the use of weapons on set and cutting corners on production safety. In a promo for the ABC interview, Baldwin’s first since the tragedy, George Stephanopoulos is shown asking the actor to confirm that it wasn’t in the script for the trigger to be pulled. “Well, the trigger wasn’t pulled. I didn’t pull the trigger,” Baldwin says. Stephanopoulos confirms, “So you never pulled the trigger?” to which Baldwin answers, “No, no, no, no. I would never point a gun at anyone and pull a trigger at them. Never.” Stephanopoulos, in an appearance on Wednesday morning on Good Morning America, described the 80-minute sit-down as “raw” and “intense”. The journalist described Baldwin, 63, as “devastated” yet “very candid” and “forthcoming”. The actor “answered every question” and discussed Hutchins, meeting with her family, and his account of what happened on set that day. “I have to tell you, I was surprised in many places over the course of that hour and 20 minutes we sat down yesterday,” Stephanopoulos said. “I’ve done thousands of interviews in the last 20 years at ABC,” he said. “This was the most intense I’ve ever experienced.” The Sante Fe county sheriff’s office is investigating the shooting, largely focused on how live rounds, which are banned on set, came to be in the gun held by Baldwin. According to reports, Baldwin believed the gun was empty. He had been handed the weapon by assistant director Dave Halls, who allegedly called “cold gun” as he passed it over. Weapons on set, including the gun given to Hall, were handled by 24-year-old Hannah Gutierrez Reed, a head armorer juggling her second ever feature gig handling weapons with the job of key props assistant. Asked how he thinks a live bullet got in the gun, which was supposed to be loaded with blanks or dummy rounds, Baldwin said he had “no idea”. Baldwin also answered Stephanopoulos unequivocally that the accidental shooting was the worst thing that’s ever happened to him: “Yep … yeah, because I think back and I think of ‘what could I have done?’” An attorney for Halls told ABC News on Thursday morning that her client has maintained that Baldwin did not pull the trigger, and thinks the accident was a “misfire”. “The entire time Baldwin had his finger outside the trigger guard, parallel to the barrel,” Halls’s attorney, Lisa Torraco, told Good Morning America’s Kaylee Hartung. “[Halls] told me since day one he thought it was a misfire.” According to an affidavit for a search warrant filed by the sheriff’s office on 22 October, Halls told investigators he did not know there were live rounds in the Colt .45 revolver before he gave it to Baldwin. An attorney for Gutierrez Reed said the week after the shooting that the armorer had “no idea” how live rounds became present on the set, and blamed producers for an “unsafe” workplace. The special, Alec Baldwin Unscripted, will air in the US on ABC on Thursday at 8pm ET, and will be available later on Hulu.Lewis Hamilton has said he is not comfortable competing in Saudi Arabia given its repressive laws regarding the LGBTQ+ community. Speaking before this weekend’s grand prix in Jeddah, Hamilton described the laws as “terrifying” and once more called on Formula One to do more to address human rights issues in the countries it visits. On Wednesday a range of human rights groups wrote to F1, accusing the sport of being complicit in Saudi Arabia’s sportswashing by competing in the country. They highlighted women’s rights activists who risk imprisonment for their actions, with Human Rights Watch citing “Saudi Arabia’s brutal crackdown on peaceful dissidents”. Amnesty International called on drivers to speak out, drawing attention to the plight of Saudi LGBTQ+ people who live in a country where same-sex relations are illegal and punishable by flogging or imprisonment. F1 has attracted considerable criticism for racing in Saudi Arabia and Hamilton, who has been a strident supporter of equality and diversity, admitted he did not feel at ease with the regime. “Do I feel comfortable here? I wouldn’t say I do,” he said. “But it’s not my choice to be here, the sport has taken the choice to be here.” Hamilton goes into the meeting, the first to be held in Saudi Arabia, in a tightly fought battle with Red Bull’s Max Verstappen who leads the championship by eight points with two rounds remaining. Yet much as the world champion is focused on this nail-biting finish, Hamilton, as he has been in the past, was also insistent that he would play a part in trying to make a difference. “Whilst we are here it’s important we do try to raise awareness,” he said. “In the last race you saw the [rainbow] helmet that I wore. I will wear that again here and in the next race [in Abu Dhabi] because it is an issue. If anyone wants to take time to read what the law is for the LGBT+ community, it is pretty terrifying. There are changes that need to be made.” Hamilton’s words will be hammer blows to the Saudi authorities who have invested heavily in attracting sporting events to the country and whose sovereign wealth fund recently succeeded in a takeover bid for Newcastle United. He is the sport’s biggest, most recognised global star and this is the first time he has spoken so bluntly about being uncomfortable to be competing in a specific country because of its repressive regime. At the last round in Qatar, where same-sex relationships are also illegal, Hamilton wore a helmet with the rainbow and coloured chevrons in support of the LGBTQ+ community and will do so again here. “The sport and we are duty bound to make sure we try to raise awareness for certain issues we have seen, particularly human rights in these countries that we are going to,” he said. The four-times world champion Sebastian Vettel will also be demonstrating his support this weekend, wearing rainbow-adorned trainers. He organised a karting session at the track on Thursday for women and girl drivers to show solidarity with them, given they were given the right to drive only in 2018. The Williams team principal, Jost Capito, will not be in attendance at the race after testing positive for Covid-19 before flying to Saudi Arabia and will remain in the UK. Sacha Deshmukh, Amnesty International UK’s CEO, welcomed Hamilton’s stance. “It’s extremely encouraging to see Lewis Hamilton speaking out on women’s and LGBTI rights in Saudi Arabia like this,” he said. “It’s high-profile interventions like Lewis’s that help undo some of the sportwashing effects of Saudi-hosted events such as the Jeddah Grand Prix. “Coming after the purchase of Newcastle United, the hosting of big-money boxing bouts and numerous top-tier golf and tennis tournaments, the Jeddah race is clearly Saudi Arabia’s latest bid to once again sportswash its dismal human rights record.”Omicron is causing consternation around the world, with the variant found to be behind an exponential rise in Covid cases in South Africa. Yet with just 42 cases confirmed in the UK so far, and most European countries seeing numbers in the double rather than triple figures, could this be a tentative sign the variant may fail to take hold outside southern Africa? The bottom line is, it is too soon to say. One issue is that there are important differences that make it difficult to compare the situations in South Africa and beyond. Prof Rowland Kao, an epidemiologist at the University of Edinburgh and member of the modelling group Spi-M, noted that different Covid variants are circulating in South Africa and the country uses different vaccines from those used in Britain. As well as the Pfizer/BioNTech jab, it has used the Janssen vaccine – not yet in use in the UK – and suspended the use of the Oxford/AstraZeneca jab. Kao said some differences may aid Britain, for example the longer interval between vaccine doses. “The fact that we had an early vaccine deployment then lots of people infected [with Covid] also can be helpful in broadening the spectrum of immune response, and this may again mean we have greater protection than [South Africa],” he said. With Covid already “running hot” in the UK and some European countries, picking up early signs of Omicron’s impact is challenging. Before the new variant was detected, Covid cases in South Africa were very low, meaning its impact became clear at an early juncture. Dr Michelle Groome, of South Africa’s National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD), said that new Covid cases had risen from a weekly average of about 300 a day to 1,000 last week, and most recently 3,500. By contrast, the UK has been experiencing a huge number of cases a day – 53,945 on Thursday alone – with figures fluctuating by several thousand from day to day. Should Omicron lead to a rise in cases, they could take longer to become apparent from such data alone. Case numbers are not the only source scientists have to hand, however. One approach experts are using to investigate Omicron’s presence in the UK is to look at results of tests for the coronavirus S-gene in Covid-positive samples. Omicron has a mutation that means it comes up negative on such tests, as was the case for the Alpha variant, but not Delta, meaning the test can give a quick – although not conclusive – indication of whether Omicron is present. In a thread on Twitter, Prof Nick Davies of the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine noted that in the five days to 28 November, there had been an increase in S-gene target failure in community testing data in England from about 0.1% to about 0.3%. Davies said around half of PCR tests in the community are processed by labs that use such a test, although the Guardian understands there may be some prioritisation of cases in areas where Omicron has already been found. While Davies found the results only equate to about 60 more samples testing negative for the S-gene than would otherwise have been expected, he said the excess is most likely down to Omicron cases and suggested the numbers will probably climb. Whether or not those cases are down to imported infections or linked to transmission within the community, however, remains unclear. “So scientists in England will be watching this data stream carefully over the next several days and weeks to work out what is happening,” Davies wrote. Others have also stressed that the situation in the UK is in its early days, but there are reasons for concern. “There was at least a single large-scale event in Scotland – which indicates the potential for rapid spread,” said Kao, adding that the S-gene test results are among the evidence suggesting the UK is also starting to see signs of an exponential rise. Kao said: “There is good reason to think it’s spreading already at a good rate. But what we don’t know yet is whether or not that will be sustained, and also whether it will result in more sustained increased hospitalisations and deaths.”That’s all for today - here’s the main stories: Alcoholic drinks companies have issued fresh warnings that the Christmas supply of wine, spirits and beer could be disrupted, after the government refused to provide an update on efforts to resolve the shortage of HGV drivers. In an exchange in the Commons, the trade minister Ranil Jayawardena said he was “not going to provide a running commentary on numbers”, after being asked how many of 5,000 temporary visas earmarked for non-UK drivers had been issued. The shadow trade minister Bill Esterson described Jayawardena’s refusal to provide an update as “extraordinary”. He said: “The reality is that the Wine and Spirit Trade Association warns of delivery chaos, of major delays on wine and spirit delivery times - up to five times longer than last year - and increases in freight costs; no doubt it won’t affect parties in Downing Street. “I have to ask the minister: does he want to be responsible for cancelling Christmas celebrations elsewhere, because if he doesn’t, he needs to give a much better answer than the one he’s just given.” The Labour MP cited a letter sent last week to the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, by 48 firms including Pernod Ricard, Moët Hennessy and the Wine Society, which said rising costs and supply chain “chaos” had increased the risk that supermarkets run dry and festive deliveries arrive late. Drinks companies told the Guardian the situation was leading to extra costs and causing delays.... The Opec cartel and its allies have agreed to pump more barrels oil from January, but left the door open to putting the brakes on should the Omicron variant lead to further restrictions on travel and trade. The global price of crude fell briefly to $66 per barrel, its lowest level since mid-August, after ministers from some the world’s biggest oil producing countries agreed to go ahead with a plan to increase production by 400,000 barrels a day in the new year. However, prices swung back up after the Opec+ agreed the meeting would not formally close. The unusual move was so the cartel could “continue to monitor the market closely”, pending any new developments, and make “immediate adjustments” rather than wait for the next meeting on 4 January. Thedecision to leave its oil production policy unchanged for now may suggest that Opec+ is banking on new travel restrictions being short-lived if existing vaccines prove effective against the Omicron variant, or if its symptoms are milder than earlier variants of the virus. More here: After another day buffered by omicron worries, European stock markets have closed in the red. The UK’s FTSE 100 lost 39 points, or 0.55%, to 7,129 points, with oil companies cushioning the selloff. Shell gained 1.6% while BP finished 1.1% higher. Catering group Compass (+0.9%) and bank NatWest (+0.8%) were also in the risers. But cyber-security firm Darktrace was the top faller, tumbling 9%, a day after its relegation from the FTSE 100 in the next reshuffle was confirmed. European markets saw steeper losses, with France’s CAC down 1.2% and Germany’s DAX losing 1.3%. It’s been a choppy week, since the discovery of the Omicron variant led to travel restrictions being imposed. Danni Hewson, AJ Bell financial analyst, predicts more volatility as officials work out exactly what to do about the new variant. “There had been much speculation that fears Omicron would stall economies and cut demand for oil might prompt OPEC+ to think twice about its plans to up output in the new year. A volte-face would have pushed up the oil price at a time when consumers are already being sorely taxed by rising prices. The decision not to change tack at the moment will be something of a salve to markets which have endured days of volatility as investors try to get their heads around how big an impact this variant might actually have. Of course, the emergence of a new Covid strain has taken the pressure off the group to do more than they had planned, to up output beyond the agreed levels in a bid to curb rising inflation. Governments know squeezed living standards make for unhappy voters and President Biden in particular has waded into the argument, though the moves made by the US were rather limited in scale and therefore in impact. “In response the oil price slipped, but only slightly and after a momentary pause which saw big oil shudder in response, both BP and Royal Dutch Shell shot quickly back into green territory and big oil stocks on Wall Street seemed to follow a similar path. The White House has welcomed OPEC and its allies’ decision to increase oil output, but added that the U.S. has no plans to reconsider last month’s decision to release crude reserves. One of the biggest unions representing BT workers has urged the business secretary to ensure any potential takeover bid protects the telecoms company’s 100,000 staff, its hundreds of millions in research spending and the national interest. Prospect wrote to Kwasi Kwarteng days before BT’s largest shareholder is allowed to make a potential offer under UK takeover rules. Patrick Drahi, the French-Israeli telecoms billionaire known for cost-cutting at businesses he controls, is free to make his next move from 11 December with the expiry of a no-bid clause that was triggered when he took his £2.2bn stake in June. Mike Clancy, the general secretary of Prospect, said: “The business secretary must take personal charge of making sure that any proposed takeover supports growing that investment, not a flight of money or skills overseas. We need a clear focus on protecting both our national interests and jobs while boosting private sector research and development (R&amp;D), all of which could be at risk with a controversial takeover.” Grab, the Southeast Asian unicorn with a superapp offering food delivery, ride-hailing and financial services has made a volatile entry onto New York’s Nasdaq today. Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, explains: In a wildly volatile Nasdaq debut, shares in Grab have swung between gains and losses, now trading down nearly 10%, having initially opened up as much as 18%. The Southeast Asian unicorn, which listed after a SPAC merger with Altimeter Growth Corp, is the most valuable tech business in the region with a market cap of almost $40bn. The Singapore ride-hailing firm raised $4.5bn from a number of investors including BlackRock and T. Rowe Price. Although the company is yet to turn a profit, Grab is well-positioned to benefit from growth in South-East Asia and the accompanying demand for technology with its diversified business model covering deliveries, mobility and financial services. So far its food delivery business has had the most success, benefiting from the stay at home trend during the pandemic. Investors are hoping that Grab can build momentum as we emerge from covid, having reported a slowdown in revenue and a widening EBITDA loss in its latest quarterly results. ‘Tiz the season for festive forecasts, as analysts take a stab at what might happen to stock markets and the economy next year. And in that spirit, Saxo Bank has today released its 10 Outrageous Predictions for 2022. Not things that it believes will happen, but potential risks which investors aren’t pricing in. One is that US inflation soars above 15% in a wage-price spiral, a prospect that would keep Jerome Powell awake at night In this scenario, Saxo says: By the fourth quarter of 2022, the wages for the lower half of US incomes are rising at an annualised 15% clip as companies scramble to find willing and qualified workers who are increasingly selective due to a rising sense of entitlement as jobs are plentiful relative to the meagre availability of workers at all skill levels. This creates a wage-price spiral, with inflation over 15% by 2023, forcing the Federal Reserve into a “too-little, too-late move” to tighten monetary policy faster in a desperate effort to tame inflation. But the central bank has lost credibility; it will take time to regain it, says Saxo. The market impact would be severe : extreme volatility in US equity and credit markets. The JNK high-yield ETF falls as much as 20% and the VIXM mid-curve volatility ETF soars as much as 70%. Other ‘outrageous predictions’ are that the US mid-term election brings constitutional crisis; a stand-off over the certification of close Senate and/or House election results preventing the 118th Congress sitting on schedule in early 2023. Or, Facebook could be abandoned by younger users in protest at the mining of personal information for profit; the attempt by Facebook parent Meta to reel them back in with the Metaverse stumbles. Another possibility: a group of women traders launch a coordinated assault on companies with weak records on gender equality. This would lead to huge swings in equity prices for targeted companies, in a more sophisticated version of the meme stock Reddit Army. The other predictions are: The plan to end fossil fuels gets a rain check EU Superfund for climate, energy and defence announced, to be funded by private pensions India joins the Gulf Cooperation Council as a non-voting member Spotify disrupted due to NFT-based digital rights platform New hypersonic tech drives space race and new cold war Medical breakthrough extends average life expectancy 25 years Chief Investment Officer at Saxo Bank, Steen Jakobsen says this year’s theme is ‘revolution’ There is so much energy building up in our inequality-plagued society and economy. Add to that the inability of the current system to address the issue and we need to look into the future with a fundamental view that it’s not a question of whether we get a revolution but a more a question of when and how. With every revolution, some win and some lose, but that’s not the point—if the current system can’t change but must, a revolution is the only path forward. A culture war is raging across the globe and the divide is no longer simply between the rich and the poor. It’s also the young versus the old, the educated class versus the less educated working class, real markets with price discovery versus government intervention, stock market buy-backs versus R&amp;D spending, inflation versus deflation, women versus men, the progressive left versus the centrist left, virtual signalling on social media versus real changes to society, the rentier class versus labour, fossil fuels versus green energy, ESG initiatives versus the need to supply the world with reliable energy—the list go on. We collaborated globally on Covid vaccines in 2020 and 2021. Now we need a new Manhattan Project–-type endeavour to set the marginal cost of energy, adjusted for productivity, on the path to much lower levels while eliminating the impact of our energy generation on the environment. Such a move would unleash the most significant productivity cycle in history: we could desalinate water, make vertical farms feasible almost anywhere, increase computer powers to quantum states, and continue to explore new boundaries in biology and physics.” Oil is now recovering some of its earlier losses, as traders digest Opec’s output increase, and its decision to keep today’s meeting ongoing in case immediate adjustments are needed. Brent crude has risen back to $68.70 per barrel, only down 0.3% today. Opec+ have confirmed that they have agreed to lift output in January as planned, sticking to their agreed policy of production increases. In a statement, the group say today’s meeting reconfirmed the production adjustment plan, and the decision to lift overall production by 400,000 barrels per day in January. But unusually, today’s meeting will remain in session pending further developments of the pandemic. This will let the group “continue to monitor the market closely and make immediate adjustments if required”, it says. That, I think, means Opec could change policy straight away if demand or prices weakened sharply, rather than waiting for the next meeting on 4th January 2022. But for now, more oil entering the market should feed through to lower fuel costs for motorists. That will cheer the Biden administration, which has been under pressure over soaring gasoline prices. Here’s Fawad Razaqzada, market analyst at ThinkMarkets, on Opec+’s decision: Demand concerns were already on the rise and the last thing crude oil bulls were expecting to hear was another rollover of the current policy from the OPEC+ group. Yet contrary to some expectations for only a moderate hike or no hike at all for January, that’s exactly what happened. So, the OPEC+ will raise output by another 400K barrels per day, adding more oil to the global supply and thus completely removing the threat of supply shortages at a time when demand is expected to fall. Indeed, crude oil prices were coming under renewed pressure ever since yesterday afternoon when the first case of the new variant was detected in the US. But in light of the OPEC+ decision, they have just hit fresh weekly lows, with WTI slipping to $63 and Brent $66 – both at their weakest levels since August. Still, the OPEC+ has now stated that it may adjust future production plans if the market changes. So, I suppose it all now depends on Covid and lockdowns. If the situation deteriorates then the OPEC+ will stop further production hikes, possibly as early as their next meet on January 4th. Otherwise, the current policy may rollover as planned. Here’s some snap reaction to OPEC and its allies agreeing to stick to their existing policy of monthly oil output increases, despite fears that a U.S. release from crude reserves and the Omicron variant would hit prices. The oil markets have reacted sharply to reports that Opec will stick to its existing plan of lifting output again next month: The oil price is falling sharply, on reports that the Opec+ group has agreed to raise output again next month as planned. Reports from today’s meeting of Opec and its allies say the group has decided not to divert from its strategy of adding an extra 400,000 barrels of oil per day to the market each month. Reuters says: OPEC+ has agreed to go ahead with its planned January oil output rise of 400,000 barrels per day, two OPEC+ sources said on Thursday. Amena Bakr, chief Opec correspondent at Energy Intelligence, has tweeted that the group seems to be in agreement about sticking to their current policy: This has knocked the oil price, with some traders having anticipated that Opec+ would freeze production in January, given uncertainty over Omicron’s impact on the global economy. Brent crude has tumbled to $66.31 per barrel, down 3.7% today, its lowest since mid-August. It had hit three-year highs over $86/barrel in October, as Opec+ gradually reversed the steep production cuts implemented after Covid-19 lockdowns hurt demand for energy. But it has fallen since, as rising Covid-19 cases have dampened demand. The number of Americans filing new jobless claims has risen, but is still relatively low as US companies try to hold onto staff. There were 222,000 fresh ‘initial claims’ for unemployment support last week, up from the 53-year low seen in the previous week. That’s still below pre-pandemic levels, which Robert Frick, corporate economist at Navy Federal Credit Union, says is a very positive sign. Today’s release of initial unemployment claims puts us almost back to pre-pandemic levels. That’s great news, but it comes with the caveat that the new wave of Delta cases, and the specter of Omicron cases, could push layoffs higher in coming weeks.” The number of people dining out across the UK has fallen to the lowest level since the reopening of indoor hospitality, according to restaurant industry figures covering the first few days since news broke of the Omicron variant. The seven-day average estimate for UK seated diners fell six percentage points in the week to 29 November, reaching the lowest point since 17 May when indoor dining reopened in England, Scotland and Wales. While the number of people eating out remained above levels recorded during the equivalent week in 2019 before the onset of the pandemic, at 111%, the figure was down from a level of 117% in the previous week, according to the figures from the booking platform OpenTable. In a potential sign of growing consumer caution, the number of seated diners on Monday and Tuesday this week fell sharply compared with the same days earlier this month, dropping to 4% and 7% below pre-Covid levels for the same days in 2019. Although the number of people dining out is usually lower at the start of the week, this was the weakest daily figure since July. More here: UK household wealth soared last year thanks to rising house prices, pension values and savings. Households’ net worth grew to £11.2 trillion in 2020, an increase of 8.4% during a year in which the pandemic hammered the economy. It’s the second highest growth since the 2008 global economic downturn, the Office for National Statistics says. Over 40% of this increase in households’ net worth was due to land becoming more valuable, due to a 7.3% increase in average house prices. This rise was likely to have been affected by the reduction in stamp duty rates, the ONS says. Pensions added another 40%, mainly due to an increase in the value of defined benefit pension schemes, due to historically low gilt yields. “Currency and deposits” contributed 21.5% of the growth in households’ net worth, as due to the jump in savings during lockdowns and the furlough scheme which protected incomes. The increase in land values also lifted the UK’s net worth, which rose by £500bn to £10.7 trillion. But general government net worth fell by £445bn in 2020 to minus £1,494 billion, the largest annual fall recorded, due to the surge in borrowing to cover the cost of the pandemic. The UK’s financial net worth increased by £63bn, but remained negative at around minus £500bn in 2020, meaning the value of the UK’s financial liabilities continued to exceed the value of financial assets. The ONS explains: This was the first time UK financial assets increased more than financial liabilities since 2016 and have therefore made a positive contribution to growth in the UK’s net worth. This was mainly attributed to greater overseas bank deposits and loan contracts with UK banks. The factors that would have contributed to this include: the availability of financial support for businesses, cheaper forms of funding, changes in demand and reluctance to spend because of the uncertainty during the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic. The Brazilian economy has fallen back into recession, as high interest rates, rising inflation and a drought all hit growth. Brazil’s GDP fell by 0.1% in the third quarter of 2021, following a 0.4% contraction in April-June, statistics agency IBGE reports. That puts Latin America’s largest economy into a technical recession (two consecutive quarters of economic contraction). Brazil’s economic rebound from the worst of the COVID-19 pandemic has been hit by a rise in inflation, which led its central bank to raise interest rates several times this year . Brazil has also been hit by the worst drought in almost a century, leading to water shortages and the threat of power blackouts, as the country has tried to recover from the pandemic. After another choppy morning, the UK stock market is still in the red. The FTSE 100 index is down 64 points, or 0.9%, at 7104 points, back towards the seven-week lows earlier this week. Despite omicron worries, airline stocks are actually higher today, with IAG up 1.8% and budget rivals easyJet gaining 3.8% and Wizz Air rising 3.3%. Oil producers BP and Royal Dutch Shell are also a little higher, ahead of the Opec decision. But cruise operator Carnival is down 6%, suggesting some concerns that passenger numbers could be hit by Omicron worries, after the US reported its first case yesterday. Overall, the market remains acutely sensitive to anything about omicron and will respond on positive or negative headlines with abandon, says Neil Wilson of Markets.com: Sector wise, healthcare and consumer defensives won out yesterday, quality tech provided some resistance with Apple and Microsoft barely declining. Momentum was a problem with ARKK [the popular innovation-focused fund] down almost 7%, almost 40% below the all-time high struck earlier this year. This is mirrored today on the FTSE with the likes of Unilever and United Utilities among the few risers. Shell and BP also higher as crude rallied 1% though oil remains under a heap of pressure with OPEC+ set to meet today to decide on whether to increase output by 400k bpd in January. A pause in the loosening of output controls would help sentiment in the market and is increasingly expected. Advertising boss Sir Martin Sorrell has said clients are cancelling Christmas events in response to Omicron, and criticised the UK government for failing to give sufficient guidance on masks. Sorrell, the executive chairman of S4 Capital and the founder and former chief executive of WPP, said event cancellations had gathered pace since the new Covid variant was identified. Sorrell told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “What we are seeing our clients doing and other people [doing], the answer is they are … cancelling,” “There has been quite a sharp series of cancellations since this happened just three, four, five days ago.” Boris Johnson, who is embroiled in a controversy over Christmas parties at Downing Street during lockdown last year, has urged people not to cancel festive parties or nativity plays. But, business minister George Freeman says his department won’t have a big party this year. His parliamentary team will have a Zoom gathering, due to the omicron variant, he told Times Radio. The decision on whether Opec and its allies will lift oil production next month as planned, or freeze output at December’s levels, hangs in the balance. Under its existing pact, Opec+ agreed to raise output by 400,000 barrels per day (bpd) each month, as it reverses the large cuts introduced early in the pandemic. But market uncertainties mean its next move is uncertain, according to the latest words from delegates, as Reuters explains: Two OPEC+ sources said the group would discuss pausing the January increase as an option, while two sources said they expected the 400,000 bpd rise to go ahead. One source even said he expected a cut in production, without giving any figures. More here: OPEC+ oil output decision in the balance as Omicron hammers prices UK asset manager abrdn has secured a deal to buy online investment platform Interactive Investor for £1.49bn. II says the deal will let it build on its position as the UK’s second largest DIY investment platform, with almost £55bn of assets under administration and over 400,000 customers. II’s CEO Richard Wilson will join abrdn and continue to lead the platform, the asset manager said in a statement. The move will boost abrdn’s position in the personal investing sector, where ii competes with rivals like Hargreaves Lansdown and AJ Bell. Abrdn (formerly called Standard Life Aberdeen) has been looking to expand its presence in UK adviser and consumer markets. Stephen Bird, chief executive officer of abrdn, says: “This is a unique opportunity and a transformative step in delivering our growth strategy. interactive investor is the UK’s number one subscription-based investing platform with a powerful reputation as a consumer champion. abrdn’s scale, resources and shared vision will enable interactive investor to grow confidently and expand its leadership position in the UK’s attractive savings and wealth market. Lord Rothermere has upped his bid to take the publisher of the Daily Mail, i, Metro and New Scientist private to try to win over investors who believe he is significantly undervaluing the business. The family, which founded the Daily Mail in 1896 and listed the parent company, Daily Mail and General Trust (DMGT), on the stock market in 1932, has upped its offer to 270p a share, valuing the newspaper business at £885m including debt. The previous offer of 255p a share, valuing the business at £850m, prompted two top 10 shareholders – Majedie Asset Management and JO Hambro Capital Management, which control or advise on shares accounting for a combined 10.2% of DMGT – to publicly criticise the offer as woefully undervaluing the assets. Rothermere, who has struggled to win acceptance of the deal from shareholders, has also changed the terms, so the family now needs only 50% approval from investors to delist. Those unwilling to sell will be offered shares in the private company. More here: Salih Yilmaz, senior oil analyst for Bloomberg Intelligence, suggests Opec could pause its planned output hike, while it assesses the impact of omicron. In the eurozone, unemployment has dipped to its lowest level since the first wave of Covid-19 hit the region last year. The euro area jobless rate dropped to 7.3% in October, down from 7.4% in September, and the lowest since spring 2020. Eurostat estimates that eurozone unemployment has fallen by over 1.5m since October 2020, when the jobless rate was 8.4% The youth unemployment rate also dipped in October, to 15.9% from 16% a month earlier. But firms are also hiking their prices sharply, as they pass on higher commodity costs, energy bills, and labour costs. Industrial producer prices in the euro area jumped by 5.4% in October alone, and were 21.9% higher than a year ago. The increase is driven by higher energy costs -- up 62.5% year-on-year in the energy sector. But there was also a 16.8% increase in intermediate goods prices (items used to make final products), and a 4.2% jump in durable consumer goods. Neil Birrell, Premier Miton chief investment officer and manager of Premier Miton Diversified fund range, says: “The unemployment rate in Eurozone remains stubbornly high, but it was in line with expectations. Meanwhile, producer prices came in a lot higher than expected, up 5.4% month on month, reflecting the global concerns around inflation. The whole outlook is obviously muddled by the Omicron issue, but the data is quite clear. For now, inflation is rising fast and the ECB will have to consider this in their policy discussions, as will all other central banks.” The UK’s gas crunch continued last week. The ONS reports that wholesale gas prices rose by 8% last week, the third rise in a row. That squeeze has forced 25 UK energy suppliers to collapse since the start of September, and means the UK’s energy cap is likely to be lifted sharply higher next spring, driving up bills for consumers. Crisps remain in short supply at a quarter of UK shops, a month after a software problem at Walkers hit production. Multipack crisps were in low supply at 20% of shops surveyed last week by market researchers Kantar Public, while 4% had run out, showing no improvement on a week ago. Painkillers paracetamol and ibuprofen were also in short supply at 16% of shops, while 8% had run out of frozen turkeys after worried consumers shopped early for Christmas to avoid missing out. Sarah Riding, retail &amp; supply chain partner at the law firm, Gowling WLG, says: “From a supply chain perspective, overcoming these challenges in the coming weeks will be a litmus test of the ability to utilise key supply chain survival tactics for when normality returns in the New Year - something which is borne out by recent comments from the WTO. “As the global variables at play subside, it is vital that businesses use this experience to strengthen their supply chain strategies and efficiencies around vendor dependencies, the regularity of supplier reviews and of course ethics.” More UK companies are stockpiling materials and parts, as inflationary pressures and supply chain shortages continue to hit the economy. Across all industries, 6% of businesses reported they were stockpiling goods or materials in late November 2021, according to the Office for National Statistics’ latest survey of the UK economy. That’s the highest percentage reported since the question was introduced in early February 2021. Some 38% of businesses reported that the prices of materials, goods or services increased compared with normal expectations for this time of year, up from 37% in October 2021. Two-thirds of manufacturers reported that prices were unusually high. And these costs are being passed on; 16% of businesses reported increases in the price of materials, goods or services sold last month, compared with 15% in October. The oil price has risen this morning, after hitting three-month lows last night ahead of today’s Opec+ meeting. Brent crude is up 1.7% at around $70 per barrel, having tumbled sharply since the Omicron variant first worried markets late last week. Traders are watching to see if Opec and its allies decide to release more oil into the market in January. Their current deal is to add an extra 400,000 barrels per day each month; but they could could decide to restrain supply due to concerns over demand, and a US-coordinated release of oil last week. It’s a tricky call, as AJ Bell investment director Russ Mould explains: “Later today OPEC will make a call on oil production quotas as the producers’ cartel weighs up the threat to demand posed by Omicron. “The dramatic fall in oil prices in recent weeks means they may be tempted to make cuts but if they do so and it turns out the variant is more benign than feared, oil could then gush significantly higher, leading to demand destruction in itself. “Just like central bankers, investors and everybody else, OPEC is performing a high wire act at present and Christmas may be upon us before we return to solid ground.” Tesco’s festive TV campaign featuring Santa Claus bearing a Covid vaccine passport has been cleared by the UK ad watchdog despite anti-vaccination campaigners making it the second most complained about advert of all time. The advert, titled “This Christmas, Nothing’s Stopping Us”, prompted more than 5,000 complaints to the Advertising Standards Authority (ASA), which determines whether marketing campaigns have broken the UK advertising code. The ad shows the public determined to enjoy a proper Christmas with family and friends after lockdown restrictions prevented gatherings last year. However, in one scene a reporter appears on TV with “breaking news” telling viewers that “Santa could be quarantined”. Father Christmas is then shown presenting his Covid pass at border control, proving he has been vaccinated to a customs official so he can enter the country without restriction. A spokesman for the ASA said: “Having carefully assessed the 5,000 complaints we received about the Tesco Christmas ad campaign, we have concluded it doesn’t break our rules and there are no grounds for further action,” “We consider that the depiction of Santa displaying a proof of vaccine status in an airport is likely to be seen as a humorous reference to international travel rules people have experienced this year. It is unlikely to be interpreted as a message about these rules or the Covid-19 vaccine more widely. More here: A Teesside factory that makes Covid-19 vaccines has received a £400m injection from its Japanese owners, the largest single investment in UK pharmaceutical manufacturing in decades. The biotechnology arm of the Japanese conglomerate Fujifilm, which is better known for its photography heritage, said the package would more than double its Billingham site’s development and manufacturing capability, creating the largest biopharmaceutical factory with several different technologies in the UK. The factory in Stockton-on-Tees produces ingredients from biological sources for pharmaceutical treatments, such as microbes, cell cultures and viral vectors, used to deliver genetic material into cells. More here: Technology stocks are also pulling Europe’s stock markets down, following a report that demand for Apple’s flagship iPhone 13 has slowed. Bloomberg reported that Apple has told its component suppliers that demand for the iPhone 13 lineup has weakened, according to people familiar with the matter. Apple had already been juggling supply shortages, and some consumers appear to have have decided against trying to get the hard-to-find item. Bloomberg explains: Already, Apple had cut its iPhone 13 production goal for this year by as many as 10 million units, down from a target of 90 million, because of a lack of parts, Bloomberg News reported. But the hope was to make up much of that shortfall next year -- when supply is expected to improve. The company is now informing its vendors that those orders may not materialize, according to the people, who asked not to be identified because the discussions are private. The company is still on track for a record holiday season, with analysts projecting a sales increase of 6% to $117.9 billion in the final three months of the calendar year. But it won’t be the blockbuster quarter that Apple -- and Wall Street -- had originally envisioned. Shortages and delivery delays have frustrated many consumers. And with inflation and the omicron variant bringing fresh concerns to pandemic-weary shoppers, they may forego some purchases. Shares in Dutch semiconductor maker ASML have fallen by 4%. It provide chip makers with essential hardware, software and services to mass produce patterns on silicon. Chipmaker Infineon Technologies are down 2.7%, In the City, the FTSE 100 index has dropped by around 0.7%, a day after its best session in four months. The blue-chip index is down 58 points at 7110 points, while Europe’s Stoxx 600 has fallen over 1%. Royal Mail is the top FTSE 100 faller, down 5% after its shares went ex-dividend today. Betting group Entain (-3%) and retailer JD Sports (-2.6%) are also in the fallers. Tech-focused investor Scottish Mortgage Investment Trust (-2.6%) is lower after US technology companies fell last night. But GSK’s shares are a little higher (+0.3%) after it reported that lab tests have shown its antibody drug sotrovimab retains its activity against Omicron. A drug treatment which, the makers say, works against the new Omicron variant of Covid-19, has been approved by UK regulators. UK pharmaceuticals group GlaxoSmithKline reported this morning that a lab analysis of the antibody-based COVID-19 therapy it is developing with US partner Vir has shown the drug retains activity against all tested variants of concern, including key mutations of Omicron. Sotrovimab, a single monoclonal antibody, binds to the spike protein on the outside of the COVID-19 virus, preventing it from attaching to and entering human cells, so that it cannot replicate in the body. Tests are ongoing to confirm the results against all of the Omicron mutations, with an update expected by year-end, GSK added. George Scangos, chief executive officer of Vir, explained: “Sotrovimab was deliberately designed with a mutating virus in mind. By targeting a highly conserved region of the spike protein that is less likely to mutate, we hoped to address both the current SARS-CoV-2 virus and future variants that we expected would be inevitable. This hypothesis has borne out again and again - with its ongoing ability to maintain activity against all tested variants of concern and interest to date, including key mutations found in Omicron, as demonstrated by preclinical data. We have every expectation that this positive trend will continue and are working rapidly to confirm its activity against the full combination sequence of Omicron.” The news comes as Britain’s drug regulator, the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, approved sotrovimab, also known under the brand name Xevudy. MHRA says it took the decision “after it was found to be safe and effective at reducing the risk of hospitalisation and death in people with mild to moderate COVID-19 infection who are at an increased risk of developing severe disease”. Wall Street’s ‘fear index’, the VIX measure of volatility, has hit its highest level since January. Volatility rose yesterday after the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said the Omicron variant had been found in the US, knocking the earlier optimistic mood. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Uncertainty over the latest variant of Covid-19 continues to grip the markets, as oil producers gather (remotely) to decide whether to keep boosting their output despite the economic threat from Omicron. Wall Street took another dive yesterday, in the most volatile session since March after the first case of the Omicron variant was reported in the United States, in California. Wall Street’s benchmark S&amp;P 500 index ended down 1.2% on Wednesday after being up 1.9% earlier in the day, while the Dow Jones industrial average lost 1.3% in another rollercoaster session. This knocked some Asia-Pacific markets, with Japan’s Nikkei dropping another 182 points, or 0.65%, to 27,753. European markets are set to slide at the open, having rallied strongly on Wednesday, with concerns that the US Federal Reserve could wrap up its stimulus package faster than expected also worrying investors. Given the uncertainty over the latest variant’s virulence, transmissibility, and vaccine’s efficacy against it, the markets are being buffeted by the latest headlines. As Jim Reid of Deutsche Bank says, In terms of developments about Omicron, we’re still in a waiting game for some concrete stats, but there was positive news early on from the World Health Organization’s chief scientist, who said that they think vaccines “will still protect against severe disease as they have against the other variants”. On the other hand, there was further negative news out of South Africa, as the country reported 8,561 infections over the previous day, with a positivity rate of 16.5%. That’s up from 4,373 cases the day before, and 2,273 the day before that, so all eyes will be on whether this trend continues, and also on what that means for hospitalisation and death rates over the days ahead. The Opec+ group of major oil producers will assess the impact of Omicron on energy demand, when they meet later today to agree how much oil to pump in January. Opec, led by Saudi Arabia will be joined by non-OPEC allies such as Russia. They must decide whether to stick with their plan to gradually increase oil production by 400,000 barrels per day each month, or pull back. Peter McNally, global lead for industrials, metals &amp; energy at research firm, Third Bridge, says today’s meeting will be one of Opec’s most important since the recovery began. Authorities have looked to control the spread of COVID with swift lockdowns and the oil demand recovery in those regions has stalled as a result. International air travel is still far away from a full recovery, so the impact of limiting travel from African countries may be relatively minor. Were OPEC+ to add another 400,000 barrels per day of supply for January 2022, it would be a signal that these countries expect the recovery to continue as previously planned. But this year began with Saudi Arabia unilaterally slashing production by 1 million barrels per day as the winter wave of COVID dashed the pace of recovery. This week’s meeting of OPEC+ ministers is shaping up to be one of the most significant since the pandemic recovery demand recovery began, and the key signal will be how much more oil will be added to supply to start the new year.” The agenda 9.30am GMT: Weekly real-time-indicators of economic activity and social change in the UK 10am GMT: Eurozone unemployment report for October 10am GMT: Eurozone producer prices report for October Noon BST: Brazil’s third-quarter GDP report 1pm GMT: Opec+ meeting begins 1.30pm GMT: US weekly jobless dataEcuador’s highest court has ruled that plans to mine for copper and gold in a protected cloud forest are unconstitutional and violate the rights of nature. In a landmark ruling, the constitutional court of Ecuador decided that mining permits issued in Los Cedros, a protected area in the north-west of the country, would harm the biodiversity of the forest, which is home to spectacled bears, endangered frogs, dozens of rare orchid species and the brown-headed spider monkey, one of the world’s rarest primates. Enami EP, Ecuador’s national mining company, held rights for mining concessions that had been granted in two-thirds of the reserve. The decision means that mining concessions, environmental and water permits in the forest must be cancelled after the court upheld a lawsuit brought by communities near Los Cedros that was successful in a lower court. The ruling by Ecuador’s highest court, published on Wednesday, upheld the rights of nature, which are enshrined in the country’s constitution, and said they applied across the whole country, not just to protected areas. Los Cedros is in the Chocó region of South America that includes parts of Colombia, Ecuador and Peru. It is one of the most biodiverse parts of the planet, home to flora and fauna found nowhere else on Earth. “This is a historic victory in favour of nature,” said Natalia Greene of the Global Alliance for the Rights of Nature, an NGO that argued for the court to keep mining away from Los Cedros. “The constitutional court states that no activity that threatens the rights of nature can be developed within the ecosystem of Los Cedros protected forest, including mining and any other extractive activity. Mining is now banned from this amazing and unique protected forest. This sets a great juridical precedent to continue with other threatened protected forests. Today, the endangered frogs, the spectacled bears, the spider monkey, the birds and nature as a whole have won an unprecedented battle.” Campaigners said the ruling set an important marker across Ecuador and the region, where several other mining and extraction projects are planned in ecologically important areas. Between 2007 and 2008, Ecuador enshrined the rights of nature in its rewritten constitution. Dr Mika Peck, a senior lecturer in biology at the University of Sussex first investigated the biological importance of Los Cedros in the mid-90s, compares the significance of the ruling to Thomas Paine’s Rights of Man, a key text in the American revolution. “It is important for the world to reflect on the limits of nature and to seriously question the effectiveness of current conservation policies and actions,” he said. “Policy frameworks that place humans in context as a part of nature, integrated into a system that balances intrinsic rights between legitimate subjects of the law, rather than placing humans as above, or apart from, nature, will be a necessary part of addressing the serious environmental issues that our planet is facing. This ruling is as important to nature as Thomas Paine’s Rights of Man were to our own species.” The Guardian has contacted Enami EP for comment. • This article was amended on 3 December 2021. Dr Mika Peck is not from Ecuador as an earlier version said.What is the current newborn screening? All babies in the UK are offered the “heel prick” or blood spot test at around five days old to screen for nine serious health conditions, including cystic fibrosis, sickle cell disease and various metabolic diseases. These conditions, if identified, can be treated or managed. Genetic testing is only offered in certain cases, such as if there is a concern that the baby might be at risk of an inherited disorder. What is whole-genome sequencing? Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) reads out the entire DNA code. It is already being used in the NHS to diagnose rare diseases and could be used to screen for mutations that are linked to a wider range of treatable serious diseases that affect babies. Genomics England says that using WGS could allow the current nine conditions screened for to be expanded to more than 200. Genetic data can also be used to predict a person’s risk of adulthood diseases, such as Alzheimer’s and heart disease. Do other countries offer whole-genome sequencing? No. There have been pilot studies for whole-genome sequencing for newborn screening, including a trial at Boston Children’s hospital, in which about 7% of families took up the offer. There are also countries that screen for a larger number of childhood diseases using an expanded panel of biochemical and targeted gene tests. Is this the only approach? Geneticists are in agreement that the UK’s newborn screening should be upgraded. Whole-genome sequencing is one way of achieving this. Another option would be to enhance the existing screening using a panel of genetic tests designed to detect mutations on specific genes. Some argue that these tests would be cheaper, and potentially more accurate for certain conditions. Are there advantages to WGS? A key advantage is flexibility: new conditions could be added to the screening list relatively easily since data for the entire genome is already being collected. Such a large dataset of genomic and linked health records would also allow scientists to learn more about genetic predictors of health and disease and potentially help develop new treatments. Some say that genomics will inevitably play an increasingly important role in healthcare and argue that it will be an advantage for participants, and the UK, to be at the forefront of this development. What are the downsides? Whole-genome sequencing can be less efficient at predicting some conditions than biochemical tests. This means that WGS would need to be combined with the existing screening process, rather than replacing it. There are also some conditions that are not currently screened for, such as spinal muscular atrophy, which may be detected more readily using a targeted gene test, optimised to pick up certain mutations. WGS allows scientists to screen for mutations in an almost unlimited number of genes, but screening genes that are less well understood can create a risk of false positives. When genetic mutations of unknown significance are discovered, it can create a diagnostic grey zone. Whole-genome sequencing is also expensive – roughly £1,000 per genome once analysis and data storage is accounted for. Based on this estimate, it would cost around £700m to sequence all newborns annually. There are also significant ethical questions about the consent process for collecting whole-genome data, which can be used to predict health outcomes in adulthood, and questions about who owns this data and how access to it is determined.A hard-right French MP who wants to hold a referendum “to stop mass immigration” and set up “a French Guantánamo bay” to deal with terrorism, has topped the first-round vote to choose a presidential candidate for the right’s Les Républicains party, in a shock result. Éric Ciotti, 56, a politician from Nice who is known for his hardline views on Islam and immigration, went from outsider to the surprise top position in Thursday’s first-round vote by members of Nicolas Sarkozy’s party. He now faces a second-round runoff against Valérie Pécresse, the former Sarkozy minister who wants to become France’s first female president. During the primary campaign, Ciotti had dominated TV debates by nodding to many of the ideas of the French far right and vowing to fight against the “taboos of political correctness”. He said his success was down to his straight-talking approach and “the popular momentum for France to remain French” – an echo of the anti-immigration rhetoric by the far-right leader Marine Le Pen and the far-right TV pundit Éric Zemmour who has launched his own outsider bid for president. Pécresse, 54, head of the Paris region, has defined herself as “two-thirds Angela Merkel and one-third Margaret Thatcher”, which she says means being tough and economy-focused while building consensus. Well-known for facing down long-running street protests and university barricades in order to push through Sarkozy’s higher eduction reforms, Pécresse has argued that she is the only one with the standing and experience to beat the centrist Emmanuel Macron. A former budget minister, Pécresse has traditionally been seen as a moderate, and pro-European, although she hardened her line on immigration and security along with all the other candidates during the primary race. She has said her first measure as president would be to increase salaries and end the 35-hour working week. Pécresse said on Thursday that she had the support of French people who wanted “respect, truth and action”. She said she would make a “clear break” with Emmanuel Macron’s presidency which had “damaged and divided France”. The vote brought disappointment for the EU’s former Brexit negotiator, Michel Barnier, who was knocked out after commentators criticised his performance in the TV debates as lacklustre. Xavier Bertrand, a former health minister and head of the northern Hauts de France region, was also eliminated. Both said they would now support Pécresse, whose team believe she has a strong chance of winning. The first-round results were close. Ciotti and Pécresse both received slightly over 28,000 votes each, with Ciotti gaining 25.59% and Pécresse 25% of the ballots cast by party members. Roughly 140,000 members of the Les Républicains party, which traces its roots back to French war hero Charles de Gaulle, were called to cast their ballots electronically. The final round vote will begin on Friday morning, with the result announced on Saturday afternoon. After the result, Ciotti argued he was the only figure who could unite the right and win back voters from the far right. He has set himself apart from the centre right of the party, which has seen key figures jump ship to Macron’s government. Ciotti has said he would never align with Macron or vote Macron, even to stop the far right. He was keen not to alienate supporters of Zemmour, who argues that France is being destroyed by immigration and who holds convictions for inciting racial hatred as well as being attacked by historians for claiming the Nazi collaborator Marshal Philippe Pétain saved French Jews rather than aiding their deportation to death camps. Ciotti has said that given a choice between Macron or Zemmour, he would vote Zemmour. He said on Thursday that Zemmour had a “lucid analysis” of the state of France. But Ciotti added that he himself would bring more “hope of renewal” for France. He said his model was Sarkozy’s successful 2007 campaign, when many voters deserted the far right to vote Sarkozy. Zemmour tweeted: “I’m happy, dear Éric, to see our ideas so widely shared by members of Les Républicains.”Six men in the queue for papers on Wednesday morning; four had no face coverings (Let’s not pretend the anti-mask babies would have lasted a minute in the blitz, 30 November). As I collected my Guardian, I faced the queue and in a loud, penetrating voice (I’m a retired head of a comprehensive) I said: “Where are your masks?” They all looked sheepish while I said: “You’re all in detention tonight.” How do they think medical staff cope with full PPE? Vicki Morley Penzance, Cornwall • What do the fox, the hare, the pheasant, the partridge and the wild duck have in common? They form the quintet of Marks &amp; Spencer’s “animal socks” designs, neatly stitched, in attractive colours. A quirky choice of British wild animals, I thought, until I realised that they are celebrating British hunting. There’s a handkerchief range too. R Cullen Edinburgh • I have just received an invoice from Parcelforce to pay £40.88 in customs charges for a box of wine that my father sends each year for Christmas. It’s a pity that these charges apply to us all and not just Brexit voters. Ellen Hollingworth Gislingham, Suffolk • What Jonathan Van-Tam failed to mention in his football analogy (The politics sketch, 29 November) was that we started the match against Covid 10-nil down as a result of a decade of NHS underfunding. Deirdre Burrell Mortimer, Berkshire • If a Pi variant of Covid emerges, will it be 3.142 times as infectious? Chris Baker Willington, Derbyshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Emmanuel Macron’s description of Boris Johnson (Macron privately called Boris Johnson a ‘clown’, says French magazine, 2 December) is grossly insulting to clowns. They are engaged in a serious profession; Johnson isn’t. Prof Bob Brecher Brighton • I would like to point out that “circus” is not the appropriate translation for “cirque” in this context (despite the misleading reference to the “clown”); “shambles” or “madhouse” would be more to the point. Jean-Pierre Hingamp Montreuil-le-Gast, France • Boris Johnson can hardly deny that last year’s Christmas gathering at No 10 was a “party” (Johnson under growing pressure over No 10 parties during lockdown last year, 1 December). I mean, they had a clown and everything. Chris Webster Gümligen, Switzerland • Re the “boozy party” in No 10 on 18 December last year, as a Covid response team doctor making home visits, I attended several lonesome “gasping for breath” parties that day. Denis Jackson Glasgow • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Kwasi Kwarteng may claim that Storm Arwen was “an event the likes of which we haven’t seen for 60 years” (Prepare for more extreme weather, Britons warned in wake of Storm Arwen, 1 December), but year in, year out we are seeing more, and stronger, storms bringing snow or floods and power outages to most areas of the country. Hardly surprising, as the pattern is predicted in climate change models and is increasingly becoming people’s lived experience. At the same time, to combat global heating, we need to move to a future where we are ever more reliant on clean, green electricity for our heating, cooking and transport. Yet, as is being proven, the National Grid is not resilient enough to cope with these regular events that leave people without power for days. Can we be assured that the proposed £10bn investment in the grid between 2021 and 2026 will provide that resilience? The figure seems trivial compared with the suffering of people and disruption to business caused by Storm Arwen, with some still awaiting reconnection. Fred Pickering Chapel-en-le-Frith, Derbyshire • People in Cumbria are still without power, five days after Storm Arwen. We are told that it has caused unprecedented damage to the electricity network. As someone who has lived in and around this area for decades, I have watched trees encroaching on power lines due to inadequate maintenance. The question is how much of the damage is due to unprecedented neglect as opposed to unprecedented severity of the storm. And with global warming, are there enough repair staff to keep a vital service functioning? A whistleblower’s viewpoint would be interesting. Dr James Fisher Quernmore, LancashireIt probably is too soon and too risky for Labour to talk publicly about coalitions or electoral deals with other parties, but it’s vital that its leaders begin to plan seriously for those contingencies. As Rafael Behr points out (Labour’s best route to power is coalition, whether the party admits it or not, 30 November), the likelihood of Labour gaining a secure majority in its own right in 2023/24 would constitute a shift in electoral fortunes unprecedented in postwar UK politics. Yet the interests of Labour, the Liberal Democrats, the Greens and Plaid Cymru, and the progressive interests that they all claim to serve, will be best secured by recognising that, in working together, they can not only remove an increasingly corrupt, callous and hegemonic Tory party from office, but also prevent it ever again achieving unfettered power. If they fail to address that responsibility, they will have little moral authority in challenging the policies of the next Tory government, since they will have facilitated its continuation in power. Dr Gerald Dunning Tonteg, Rhondda Cynon Taff • There is a flaw in Rafael Behr’s otherwise excellent piece. Any agreement that Labour makes with the Liberal Democrats will involve enabling them to increase their representation in parliament. One plausible outcome is that, after the election, the Lib Dems hold the balance of power, with the Conservatives not far from a majority. In such circumstances, the likeliest outcome will be a Tory-Lib Dem government. Sir Ed Davey will go into the election ruling out such an outcome, and he will mean it, but after the election, the possibility of instability will weigh heavily on him. Given that any alternative combination will necessarily involve the SNP, a Tory-Lib Dem coalition in defence of the union may prove irresistible. Dr Christopher Stevens Canterbury • Rafael Behr dismisses the left and “continuity Corbynism” with its “socialist self-esteem”. He needs to be reminded that policies of renationalising energy and other utilities enjoy consistent majority public support, and that these policies enabled Jeremy Corbyn to deprive the Tories of a majority in 2017. Keir Starmer campaigned for the Labour leadership and gained my support by continuing with those policies, which he later resiled from. Gordon Brown and Ed Balls adopted the centrist, business- and finance-friendly policies that Starmer’s reshuffle now implies, and look where that got us. And as your editorial (30 November) suggests, the left-leaning membership of the party will not work with enthusiasm at the next election for a return to Blairism. Steve Smart Malvern, Worcestershire • Your editorial’s advice to Keir Starmer, that he “should be wary of causing gratuitous offence to the party’s left and its allies”, is somewhat tardy. Tens of thousands have already left the party or are sitting on their hands. Elected leader with a substantial majority drawn from across the membership, including large numbers of Jeremy Corbyn supporters like me, he simply spurned the opportunity to lead a united party. Instead, we have seen the steady drift away from the pledges he made, coupled with provocative public comments about how divided the party is and how he is going to turn it around. In truth, on policy matters the party is far from disunited, but Starmer displays little interest in engaging with the views of the membership. His silence on the massive support of members for proportional representation makes the point. It also shows that he has little sense of what is required to create the sort of broad alliance – both within and beyond the party – that will be needed to oust the Tories. David Parker Holmfirth, West Yorkshire • This article was amended on 6 December 2021 to correct the address given by David Parker. • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.After years of being accused of not playing the media game – cheating royal correspondents by not telling them when she went into labour, for example, and then having the temerity to avoid photographers when she came out – it was unsurprising, perhaps, that Meghan, the Duchess of Sussex, victorious in the latest battle of her fight with the Mail on Sunday, denounced it as a game played with “no rules”. Today, three court of appeal judges applied some when they ruled that letters written to family members counted as “personal, private and not matters of legitimate public interest”. What’s more, and in a point that few media lawyers have argued with, the copyright of such letters always belongs to the author. It’s a big win for the Duchess of Sussex, and it raises the question: why on earth did the Mail continue to appeal against the judgment made against it earlier this year? Mail executives argued in court that Meghan was playing her own game with the press, knowing that her letter would be leaked, daring to disintermediate the Mail and other papers by putting statements out on social media. They refused to settle and the response to the judgment suggests the appeal could go all the way up to the supreme court. Not only did the group pursue its appeal and continue to publish stories about Meghan and Prince Harry in the intervening months but, just a few weeks ago, the Mail on Sunday editor who published the letters, Ted Verity, was elevated to run all print titles. As one sign of just how newsworthy he considered Meghan and Harry, his last front page as Sunday editor splashed on the recent royal documentary, The Princes and the Press, while his first in charge of the Daily Mail mentioned it too. For Meghan herself it was all part of the “deception, intimidation and calculated attacks” by what she called a “daily fail” that “profits from the lies and pain that they create”. There is no getting away from the fact that Meghan excites strong opinion from supporters and detractors. This is a blessing and a curse. The fact that everyone seems to have a view encourages people to click on the stories about her – the more negative or scurrilous, the better. In his first interview since leaving GB News, published in the Daily Mail, Andrew Neil said the channel pushed “constant themes” to make a splash and win viewers: “We hate migrants, we hate the NHS, we hate lockdown and we hate Meghan Markle.” A history of tabloid headlines and their online iterations appears to have even taught newcomers that hate sells. Meghan refused to perform as the happy wife and new member of the royal “firm”, putting out her own statements and managing her own team. But she was quickly treated differently to her sister in law, the Duchess of Cambridge. Despite initial euphoria over Meghan as a “breath of fresh air” it was as long ago as 2016 that Harry first condemned “the racial undertones of comment pieces” about his then girlfriend. Last week, in Amol Rajan’s much watched, much debated BBC documentary on the royal princes and their relationship with the press, Rachel Johnson, the prime minister’s sister and a former Mail on Sunday columnist, gave an insight into Meghan’s treatment when she admitted that when she wrote “positively” about Meghan she “got no reaction”. Asked to explain what she meant by writing that this mixed-race woman was injecting some “exotic DNA” into the House of Windsor, she admitted that such a statement was “culturally acceptable” four years ago. But was it, even 10 or 20 years ago? Of course not. At the very least this suggests that Meghan has raised awareness about the sort of language that educated, successful people use without thinking. She apparently wants to do more. In her triumphant letter, which will no doubt annoy many journalists, Meghan wrote: “What matters most is that we are now collectively brave enough to reshape a tabloid industry that conditions people to be cruel, and profits from the lies and pain that they create.” The statement itself sends a signal: a sign of how Harry and Meghan want to change the relationship between the press and the monarchy. Consider that when Prince Charles successfully sued the Mail on Sunday for publishing his diaries in 2006, he said very little afterwards. There are broad themes here. It is no surprise that Prince Harry continues his legal complaint against those who hacked his phone, while more than 1,000 victims have already settled. This is no longer just about money for them, and it has a broader significance for all of us. It’s about what sort of society we want to see reflected in our media. We all have a stake in that. Jane Martinson is a Guardian columnistIt is the second time this year that Russia has amassed forces near its borders with Ukraine, so why has the estimated 90,000 troop buildup left western governments and independent analysts more concerned? The stark warning by the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, on Wednesday that Russia has made plans for a “large-scale” attack is backed up by open source analysis – and western intelligence assessments. “There is enough substance to this,” one insider added. President Joe Biden is said to have been concerned for weeks, but efforts to cool the temperature – including Thursday’s summit between Blinken and his counterpart, Sergey Lavrov – have failed, suggesting Russia wants the crisis to continue. Jane’s, the defence intelligence specialist, has tracked the deployment of Russian tanks, artillery and other units and to occupied Crimea in the south of Ukraine, Voronezh in the east and around Smolensk to the north, in what it coolly describes as “anomalous Russian military activity”. Neil Melvin, the director of international security studies at the Rusi thinktank, described the buildup as “much more serious” than was seen in April, because there is some evidence of meaningful combat preparations, notably in the field modifications sported by Russian armour. They look like cages bolted on to the roof – and reflect the fact Kremlin has been spooked by some of Ukraine’s recent arms purchases from the west. Of particular concern to Moscow are US Javelin anti-tank missiles and Turkish TB2 Bayraktar drones, both of which aim to knock out Russian armour by striking it where it is weakest, on the top. At the same time, Russia has raised the rhetoric. Earlier this week President Vladimir Putin warned that increased Nato military support for Ukraine would cross a “red line”. In particular, he warned against the stationing in Ukraine of western missile defence systems, similar to those in Romania or Poland. The focus on arms links to broader reasons on why Russia might want to force the issue. Orysia Lutsevych, a Ukrainian analyst from the Chatham House foreign policy thinktank, said that “time plays in Ukraine’s favour” as it seeks to develop along western lines. Putin does not want Kyiv to drift gradually and decisively into the western sphere, she adds. “Russia wants greater control over its near abroad and to prevent Nato enlargement – and that includes Georgia as well Ukraine,” she said. It is easy to argue that recent developments are designed by Russia to test the west and the US’s resolve, particularly as a new left-leaning German government is poised to take over. However, western diplomats emphasise that Ukraine is not a member of Nato and that therefore there is no obligation to defend the country if attacked. Instead Jens Stoltenberg, Nato’s secretary general, emphasised an economic response on Wednesday morning. “We all made it very clear that there will be a high price to pay and sanctions is one of the options,” although Melvin added that years of escalating sanctions have “raised the costs to Russia but not deterred it”. A full-scale attack remains hard to imagine, however, and Russia’s aim is most likely diplomatic. Melvin believes that Russia hopes to restart the stalled Minsk peace process, the 2014-2015 agreements struck after Russia seized Crimea and separatists took over the Donbass region, now divided from the rest of the country by sniping over military frontlines. “Russia wants to neutralise Ukraine and turn it into a buffer state. It would be optimal, from its point of view, to have Donbass recognised as autonomous with a leadership elected under Russia’s control, with a veto over Kyiv’s foreign policy,” he said. Such an interpretation of the Minsk agreements would, however, be politically unsellable to Ukraine, which is partly why their implementation has been stalled. With western leaders, such as the British foreign secretary, Liz Truss, again declaring on Thursday “support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity”, the trial of strength between west and east has some way to run.Joe Biden and Vladimir Putin are due to hold talks “in the near future” after their top diplomats made no apparent progress in Stockholm towards defusing a standoff over Ukraine, amid fears of a Russian invasion. The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, and the Russian foreign minister, Sergey Lavrov, opted not to make a joint appearance after trading threats during a 40-minute meeting whose short duration indicated there was little chance of a breakthrough. “We had a very direct, very candid, non-polemical exchange of views,” Blinken said afterwards. “It was serious; it was sober. I believe that the foreign minister will take the conversation back to President Putin. I’m going to do the same, of course, with President Biden. And I think it’s likely the presidents will speak directly in the near future.” The US has threatened to deploy “high-impact economic measures” if a Russian buildup of an estimated 100,000 troops leads to a larger conflict with Ukraine. Moscow has said that it feels threatened by Nato’s close relationship with Kyiv. In a bellicose statement following the talks, Russia’s foreign ministry threatened to take “retaliatory measures” if its interests were ignored. “Ignoring Russia’s legitimate concerns, Ukraine’s involvement in US geopolitical games amid the deployment of Nato forces near our borders, will have the most serious consequences, and will force Moscow to take retaliatory measures to level the military and strategic balance,” the ministry wrote. Blinken repeated the US warning about “serious consequences for Russian aggression toward Ukraine, including high-impact economic measures that we’ve refrained from taking in the past”. “We’ve been, will continue to be, very clear about those consequences. I think Moscow knows very well the universe of what’s possible,” he said. The talks came after Blinken told the Ukrainian foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, that Nato had an “unwavering commitment … to Ukraine’s territorial integrity, its sovereignty, its independence”. Liz Truss, the UK foreign secretary, also met Lavrov in Stockholm, where she expressed “concern about rising tensions across Europe”, as she “restated the UK’s support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, urging the Russian government to de-escalate the situation,” according to a Foreign Office readout. Lavrov appeared defiant before the talks, telling the press that “eastward enlargement” of Nato would “definitely affect our fundamental security interests”. The talks, which were held on the sidelines of an OSCE ministerial meeting in Stockholm, are the highest-profile negotiations between Russia and the US since Putin and Joe Biden met in Geneva in June. Biden has also dispatched his CIA director, William Burns, to Moscow several times to tell Russia not to launch a new offensive in Ukraine. Russia is seeking another presidential summit with the US in which Putin has said he will demand guarantees that Nato will limit its support of Ukraine, a non-member that is allied with the security bloc. Jens Stoltenberg, the head of Nato, has said that Russia has no veto on Ukraine joining the military alliance. On Thursday, a Russian foreign ministry official said he hoped Biden and Putin would speak directly within the next few days. US punitive measures in the event of Russian military action could target Russia’s new Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline, access to the Swift bank messaging system, or threaten other sectoral sanctions against the Russian economy. Russia annexed the Crimea peninsula from Ukraine in 2014 and has fuelled a war against Kyiv in south-east Ukraine that has left more than 13,000 people dead. In separate remarks before Thursday’s talks, Blinken called on Russia “to respect Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, to de-escalate, reverse the recent troop buildup, return forces to normal peaceful positions, and to implement the Minsk [peace deal] commitments”. Diplomacy was the only way to resolve the crisis, he said, urging both Moscow and Kyiv to follow the 2015 Minsk deal that has looked close to collapse in recent months. Blinken said: “It takes two to tango, and if our Russian friends are prepared to implement their commitments under Minsk and our Ukrainian friends are as well, we will fully support that, and that is the best way to avert a renewed crisis in Ukraine.” Russia said separately on Thursday that it had detained three Ukrainian spies, including one who had allegedly been planning an attack with explosives. The FSB domestic intelligence agency did not say where or when it had detained the Ukrainians. It said two of the alleged spies – a father and son – were agents of Ukraine’s SBU security service who had “travelled to Russia to collect information and take photographs and videos of strategically important enterprises and objects of transport infrastructure”. The SBU said the accusation was “fake” and part of a “hybrid war” effort.When Malcolm Molyneux, who has died aged 77, went to the Queen Elizabeth Central hospital in Blantyre as a consultant in 1974, he developed a keen sense of some of Malawi’s major health problems and the research needed to address them. None was more pressing than malaria, which at the time killed about 1 million people every year, mostly children in Africa. A decade later he moved on to the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine at the University of Liverpool. With an American colleague, Dr Terrie Taylor, he raised funds from the Wellcome Trust and US National Institutes of Health to open a research ward adjacent to the children’s department in Blantyre, and began studying malaria there in 1990. Some of his earliest work was on cerebral malaria, the mysterious and often fatal coma that affects children infected with the malaria parasite. Malcolm identified factors associated with severe disease and developed a new score to assess severity. The Blantyre Coma score, as it became known, is still in use today; the original publication has been widely cited in later research papers. With a better definition of what cerebral malaria was, it became possible to investigate its cause and develop treatments. As the Malawi research programme grew, other major health problems were addressed, including chest, gastrointestinal and brain infections, as well as HIV; on a typical ward round in the late 1990s it seemed that every child was accompanied by a grandparent because the virus had wiped out a whole generation of parents. In the local language, Chichewa, Malcolm would always comfort, even if he could not cure. He played a critical role in the formation of the College of Medicine at the University of Malawi in 1991, by ensuring that research was considered a key element within it. In 1994 a formal research partnership was established between Liverpool and the College of Medicine, and Malcolm soon returned to Malawi to lead what ultimately became the Malawi-Liverpool-Wellcome Trust (MLW) programme. In all he spent 30 years in Malawi. While his research focused on improving immediate patient care, he supported many others in their attempts to better understand the underlying mechanisms of disease in order to arrive at new therapies, and encouraged the development of talented young clinicians and scientists. In addition to helping Malawian scientists, he supported young investigators from the UK and other high-income countries. He insisted that those with medical backgrounds should help with the clinical workload, as well as pursuing their research interests. Twice a year he returned to Liverpool to teach. His combination of laconic humour and natural story telling made him a memorable, if unconventional, lecturer. He would often abandon his slides and perch on a desk, arms folded, to chat informally about the subject. By the time he retired as director of MLW in 2007 there were more than 400 people working there, including both local and foreign clinicians and scientists. He continued living in Malawi until 2015, supporting and mentoring informally, and displaying limitless enthusiasm. Malcolm had himself started life in Africa. Born in the Belgian Congo (now the Democratic Republic of the Congo), he was the son of missionary parents, Joyce (nee Gammon) and Colin Molyneux, and went to the Sakeji Mission school in Northern Rhodesia (now Zambia). After gaining a natural sciences and then a medical degree (1967) at Cambridge University, he completed his postgraduate clinical training in London. There he met Elizabeth Neech, and they married in 1969. As a medical student he had briefly visited Malawi, and after five years working in London returned there with Liz and their young family. Initially the couple worked as medical missionaries in a remote hospital. Although his faith remained important to him, Malcolm did not foist it on others. Liz went on to become professor of paediatrics at the College of Medicine, and in 2006 they were both appointed OBE. Malcolm edited several medical journals, and advised the Malawian government and World Health Organisation. In retirement he remained as active as ever, cycling from Land’s End to John O’Groats, with a climb of Ben Nevis along the way, a challenge taken up by others as The Length and Height of Britain; he then cycled to the island’s most northwest, western and eastern points. These ventures, which he managed despite having chronic leukaemia, raised thousands of pounds for the hospital in Malawi and other charities. He is survived by Liz, a daughter, three sons and 11 grandchildren. • Malcolm Edward Molyneux, medical researcher and director, born 20 November 1943; died 16 November 2021Boris Johnson has said that people should not be cancelling Christmas events in the light of concern about the Omicron variant. Some firms and individuals have been cancelling bookings, but Johnson said he did not want to see that because there was “no need for that at all”. (See 3.42pm.) He was asked to clarify the government’s position after George Freeman, the science minister, suggest big parties might be best avoided. (See 9.40am.) Keir Starmer said firms should adopt a “common sense approach”, but - like Freeman - he implied that events with hundreds of people from across the country might be unwise. (See 5.12pm.) The UK has recorded its biggest daily figure for new Covid cases for more than four months (see 4.23pm), although the week-on-week rise remains slight (2.8%). For the second day in a row the number of confirmed Omicron cases in the UK has risen by 10, and the total is now 42. (See 5.29pm.) The number of people dining out across the UK has fallen to the lowest level since the reopening of indoor hospitality, according to restaurant industry figures covering the first few days since news broke about the Omicron coronavirus variant. The advertising boss Sir Martin Sorrell has said clients are cancelling Christmas events in response to Omicron, and criticised the UK government for failing to give sufficient guidance on masks. Johnson has refused to explain what happened at the two Downing Street parties last winter that happened during lockdown. (See 4.12pm.) No 10 claims the lockdown rules were not broken, but it has not disputed factual accounts from witnesses suggesting the opposite. Scientists believe they may have found the trigger behind the extremely rare blood clot complications stemming from the Oxford/AstraZeneca’s Covid vaccine. A slew of the cheapest deals on PCR tests have been removed from the government website amid concerns travellers are being misled by companies advertising the coronavirus testing service for less than a £1. The UK Health Security Agency has said that a further seven cases of the Omicron variant have been confirmed in England. That takes the total for England to 29. And a further three cases have been identified in Scotland, taking the Scottish total to 13. The UK total is therefore 42. Here are the local authority areas in England where cases have been confirmed. Barnet – 2 Bexley – 1 Brentwood – 1 Buckinghamshire – 2 Camden – 2 Chiltern - 1 Haringey – 1 Lambeth - 1 Lancaster – 1 Lewisham – 2 Liverpool – 1 Newham - 1 North Norfolk – 1 Nottingham – 1 Oxford - 1 South Cambridgeshire – 1 South Northamptonshire – 2 Spellthorne - 1 Sutton – 1 Three Rivers – 1 Wandsworth – 1 Westminster – 3 George Freeman, the science minister, had a difficult time on the morning interview round this morning (see 9.40am and 10.16am), and then he received a minor slap-down from the No 10 press office. (See 12.22pm.) But someone has come to his defence. This is from Natalie Bennett, the former Green party leader. Her comment sounds sincere and well-intentioned, although praise from the Green party is probably the last thing you need if you want your career to flourish in the Boris Johnson’s populist, Brexity Conservative party. Starmer also said he was “quite surprised” to hear a minister saying people should not be snogging under the mistletoe this Christmas. (See 9.40am.) He told ITV: “I don’t think it’s the role of government to dictate who people can kiss or not kiss.” Keir Starmer has said Labour is advocating a “common sense approach” to parties. He said he was not saying all Christmas parties should be cancelled, but he did think firms should look at the case for holding a party on an event by event basis. He said there was a difference from a planned party for hundreds of people, with attendees coming from all over the country, and possibly from abroad, and a party for colleagues who work together daily. Labour has dug out a tweet that was posted by Boris Johnson on 18 December last year, the day of the second party at No 10 exposed by the Daily Mirror, saying people planning to form a Christmas bubble should minimise contact with others. Covid-19 case rates among the oldest age groups in England have fallen to their lowest level for nearly five months, PA Media reports. PA says: A total of 51.8 new cases per 100,000 people aged 80 and over were recorded in the week to November 28, while 66.8 per 100,000 were recorded for 70 to 79-year-olds. For both age groups they are the lowest rates of new cases since week to July 11. It is the fifth week in a row that rates for these groups have fallen. The figures, from the Health Security Agency (HSA), may reflect the impact of booster doses of Covid-19 vaccine, which began to be rolled out to double-jabbed people in the oldest groups from the end of September. Rates have also fallen among all other age groups, including schoolchildren. According to an Office for National Statistics report out today, an estimated 1.2 million people were suffering from long Covid – defined as experiencing symptoms for more than four weeks – at the end of October. That would amount to 1.9% of the population, or almost one person in 50. Of those, 71% (an estimated 862,000 people) had had long Covid for at least 12 weeks, and 36% (an estimated 439,000) had had it for at least a year, the ONS says. It also says 64% of long Covid sufferers (an estimated 775,000 people) said the condition had adversely affected their ability to carry out day-to-day activities, and 19% of sufferers (an estimated 232,000 people) said their ability to carry out these activities had been “limited a lot”. These figures are in line with previous ONS reports on the impact of long Covid. The UK has recorded 53,945 new Covid cases, according to this afternoon’s update to the coronavirus dashboard. The total number of new cases over the past week is only up 2.8% on the total for the previous week. But today’s total is the highest daily figure for recorded new cases for more than four months (since 17 July, when 54,674 cases were recorded). And there have been 141 further deaths. Week on week, deaths are down 3%. In his pooled interview for broadcasters Boris Johnson refused to discuss what happened at the Downing Street events last winter described by witnesses as parties. No 10 has not denied that these events did take place, but it has also claimed that the lockdown rules were not broken. If the witness accounts are true (and No 10 is not saying they are not), then it is hard to see how that latter Downing Street claim can be correct. In the interview Johnson said he would be hosting various Christmas events in Downing Street this year, in accordance with the rules. When ITV’s Anushka Asthana asked why Johnson did not settle the dispute about the 2020 No 10 Christmas parties by explaining what actually happened, Johnson replied: “Because I’ve told you.” He then went on to repeat his point about there being no need for people to cancel Christmas events this winter. Although Downing Street is firmly saying people should not be cancelling Christmas parties, there is quite a lot of evidence now that some organisations or individuals are deciding to play it safe this winter. Patrick Dardis, head of the the pub group Young’s, which runs more than 270 sites across the UK, told PA Media: I think the messaging has been terribly confusing and inconsistent. One moment you have Jenny Harries telling people to avoid socialising and an hour later you have Sajid Javid saying the opposite. I think the messaging started as a complete over-reaction and, unsurprisingly, it has concerned some people. From Friday we had seen some cancellations. We are hoping this all starts to calm down again and that government can properly get the message across that it is safe to go out and celebrate. We take safety incredibly seriously and I want people to be reassured that there won’t be anywhere better than a pub to socialise from a hygiene and ventilation point of view. Boris Johnson has given a pooled interview for broadcasters saying people should not be cancelling Christmas parties. When it was put to him that people were confused by the rules, and wanted to have them cleared up (see 9.40am), Johnson said: The most important thing is that people should follow the guidance we’ve set out. People shouldn’t be cancelling things. There’s no need for that at all. It’s not what we are saying. Johnson was being interviewed as he attended a vaccination centre to get his booster jab. At the news conference after the British-Irish Intergovernmental Conference, Brandon Lewis, the Northern Ireland secretary, said that the government had missed its deadline for introducing the bill to create an effective amnesty for crimes committed during the Troubles. Lewis announced the plan in July and later said that the government intended to legislate “this autumn”. Today Lewis said that he would need more time. He said: I’m already past the autumn. I think the latest I’ve heard autumn described once was the autumn statement of December 4 one year. So, I think we’ve already missed that. The reality is, I think, it’s important to put the time in to try and find a way forward that can help Northern Ireland move forward. If that takes a bit more time, then that’s something we’ve been prepared to do, hence why we didn’t deal with this earlier in the year and we were focused on trying to do something in the autumn, but we will do everything we can to try and find a way forward that works together. Simon Coveney, Ireland’s foreign minister, has said it would be a “tall order” to seal a new Brexit agreement on the Northern Ireland protocol before the end of the year. But, after a meeting today with Northern Ireland secretary Brandon Lewis, Coveney said progress was being made as officials from Brussels and London continue talks for a seventh week. Speaking at the Foreign Office in London following a British-Irish Intergovernmental Conference, Coveney said: There hasn’t been a breakthrough moment in the last number of weeks, but I think there has been a deeper understanding of each other’s positions. Do I think that all issues can be resolved linked to the protocol by the end of the year? I think that’s a very tall order and unlikely to happen. Lewis said at the same event that London would rather find a solution to the issues but repeated that the UK maintained the option of triggering Article 16 of the protocol. Emmanuel Macron, the French president, has described the Northern Ireland protocol, the post-Brexit governing trade in Northern Ireland, as a matter of war and peace. He told the EU’s committee of the regions: “It’s a question of war and peace for Ireland. So we should avoid any temptation to be less than serious.” At the Downing Street lobby briefing the PM’s spokesman suggested that this was not an appropriate way to discuss the protocol, the implementation of which is currently a matter of dispute between the UK and the EU. Asked about the comment, he said: When it comes to the protocol it is vital that we use measured and appropriate language given the sensitivities involved. It is obviously welcome that Mr Macron recognises that a serious situation needs to be resolved. We urgently need to make progress. This is probably one of the more minor verbal disputes between London and Paris at the moment. This week it was reported that in private Macron calls Johnson a “clown”. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, has written to Simon Case, the cabinet secretary, asking if he will call in the Metropolitan police to investigate reports that No 10 staff broke lockdown rules last year by hosting parties. As the Mirror reports, in her letter Rayner said: You will no doubt understand the seriousness of the allegations made. This government is undermining public health messaging with their actions and we cannot let this go on unchecked. It cannot be that the prime minister believes there to be a set of rules for the public and a totally different set of rules for himself. Downing Street has repeatedly insisted that no rules were broken, although it has not denied that social gatherings did take place at No 10 in November and December last year that, according to various reports of what was involved, do seem hard to square with what was allowed under the lockdown regulations. In the Financial Times (paywall), Laura Hughes reports further evidence that partying was happening in Downing Street last winter. She reports: One Downing Street insider told the Financial Times there often were get-togethers in the evenings in No 10 while the country was in lockdown last Christmas. “It was the only place you could get together and socialise. They happened most Fridays and they were the only things that kept us going, bearing in mind we were the only people in Whitehall in the office working throughout,” the person said. “We weren’t seeing anyone else outside of work and were our own bubble. “It was whoever was left, getting together to chat and drink and maybe some music. [There were] speeches for people leaving.” The Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice group has demanded an apology from the PM. Safiah Ngah, a spokesperson for the group, told the BBC: My Dad died in February from Covid-19, despite being in good health. The last Christmas period is sadly one I will never forget. One in 20 people in my borough had Covid-19 and my family were desperately trying to do what we could to keep each other safe. Unfortunately it wasn’t enough. To think that just a few miles away, No 10 was throwing a ‘Christmas party’, with no care for the rules they had set, is sickening. In the Commons, after Chris Bryant, the chair of the Commons standards committee made a statement about his committee’s report proposing changes to the code of conduct for MPs, Mark Francois, a Conservative, said he was concerned one of the recommendations might restrain freedom of speech for members. The report says the code should be amended so that it says MPs “must not subject anyone to unreasonable and excessive personal attack”. Echoing a point made earlier by Sir Desmond Swayne (see 11.46am), Francois said this was a “dangerous” proposal which “seriously impinges on article 9 of the Bill of Rights, if you take this literally”. He said an MP could theoretically fall foul of the new rule by putting a witness under pressure in a select committee, or by having a “heated disagreement” in the chamber. Bryant said article 9, which says no proceeding of parliament can be impeached in a court of law, or any other place, has the force of statute law, and his proposals would not change that. He said committee chairs can already reprimand MPs for being too rude to a witness. He went on: It may be that this rule isn’t perfectly worded as it is now. But nonetheless ... it just seems odd that we would want to argue that we have to continue the right to make unreasonable and excessive personal attacks on others, especially when we’re using the reputation of those letters, MP, behind it. Nicola Sturgeon has apologised after admitting people had been wrongly turned away from Covid booster jab appointments, as she came under intense pressure from the Scottish Conservative leader, Douglas Ross, during a rowdy first minister’s questions. Ross pressed the first minister to explain why a number of Scottish health boards had failed to honour booster jab appointments for those aged 40 and over, despite Sturgeon, the health secretary, Humza Yousaf, and chief medical officer, Gregor Smith, all urging people to immediately book boosters earlier this week. Ross said the Tories had surveyed Scotland’s 14 health boards and found only five had publicly confirmed the new booster rules (which said boosters can be booked three months after a second jab) had been implemented; five said they would “soon” and four had not provided an update. “We know that the proper procedures haven’t been put in place; we know people were being turned away,” he said, leading to the presiding officer, Alison Johnstone, to ask Scottish National party MSPs to stop shouting him down. Sturgeon said glitches were unavoidable, and added: “I absolutely accept for anybody who is finding themselves in this position, it’s really frustrating and I’m sorry they’re having that experience.” She urged those affected to rebook appointments online. But she said only a small number of people were affected. Scotland had the best vaccinations uptake rate of any part of the UK, and was also boosting people fastest. “This is an enormous logistical exercise,” she said. Smith had only officially issued the updated advice from the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) yesterday, she said. And here is a fuller account of what was said at the Downing Street lobby briefing about Christmas parties. No 10 said it did not want people to cancel Christmas parties. Some organisations have been doing this, because of concerns about the Omicron variant. But the PM’s spokesman said: The prime minister has been very clear on this. On Christmas parties, we don’t want people to cancel such events. There is no government guidance to that end. It is right that post step 4 (of the road map out of lockdown), we returned to the position where people can use their individual judgment, but there is certainly no government guidance to that end, and the prime minister has been very clear. The spokesman would not comment on the decision of the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial to cancel its own Christmas party, saying he had not spoken to the PM about this. This morning George Freeman, a minister in the business department, told Times Radio: “The department of business, we won’t be having a big Christmas party this year. Nobody would expect us to.” The spokesman refused to back Freeman’s suggestion that people should not hold big parties. (See 9.40am.) Asked about what the minister said, the spokesman told journalists: There is nothing in the rules to prevent anyone from having Christmas parties or gathering in that way. There are a limited number of restrictions that we have set out on a precautionary basis while we do further investigation into this variant. Beyond that, the position has not changed since we moved past step 4. Asked if Freeman was wrong to suggest large parties should be avoided, the spokesman said: “That is not in the guidance, it is not in the regulations.” The spokesman said government guidance did not set any limit on the number of people who could attend a party. As a reader points out BTL, one person who does seem to be ignore the George Freeman take on Christmas parties is Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons. He is the guest speaker at the North Somerset Conservative association Christmas dinner. The association, which has Liam Fox as an MP, is holding its event on Friday. At the Downing Street lobby briefing the prime minister’s spokesperson refused to endorse the suggestion from George Freeman, the science minister, that firms should avoid holding big Christmas parties (see 9.40am), the i’s Paul Waugh reports. Voters are going to the polls in the Old Bexley and Sidcup byelection today. It is a safe Conservative seat - the late James Brokenshire had a majority of 18,952 at the last election - and, as my colleague Aubrey Allegretti discovered when he was there yesterday - there is very little evidence that that is about to change. After his own trip to the constituency, Andrew Gimson from ConservativeHome concluded: “Boris Johnson came in for heavy criticism from Conservative voters for his recent performances, but few could yet name an alternative leader they would rather see in Downing Street.” In their FT story (paywall) about the byelection, George Parker, Jasmine Cameron-Chileshe and Sebastian Payne say the Lib Dems have run a minimal campaign in Old Bexley and Sidcup, making it easier for Labour to scoop up the anti-Tory vote, and Labour is doing the same in North Shropshire, where the Lib Dems are seen as having a better chance against the Tories than Labour in the byelection on 16 December. It says this is evidence of an informal pact between the two parties. The byelections are a warning sign for Johnson that Labour and the Lib Dems are starting to ruthlessly allocate resources, giving each other a clear run against the Conservatives according to their respective local strengths. There is no formal pact – Labour leader Sir Keir Starmer has dismissed calls for a “progressive alliance” of parties including Labour, Lib Dems and Greens – but evidence of what one Labour figure called “organic” non-aggression pacts on the ground is mounting ... Tory strategists are carefully watching the impact of what one described as “below the radar” collaboration between the Lib Dems and Labour in both byelections. “If the left actually got their act together, it could make things much more difficult in 2024,” one said. “We were lucky that the centre-right vote was entirely united at the last election and they weren’t. It could be a game changer.” Chris Bryant, the Labour chair of the Commons standards committee, will be making a statement in the Commons soon on his committee’s report (pdf) proposing changes to the code of conduct for MPs. One of its proposals is for a change to the behaviour code for MPs saying MPs should “demonstrate anti-discriminatory attitudes and behaviours through the promotion of anti-racism, inclusion and diversity”. During business questions in the Commons Sir Desmond Swayne (Con) signalled that he was strongly opposed to this. He said: Some of the aspects of the report, such as the potential extension of the jurisdiction of an official into what happens in the lobbies and in select committees, touches on the principles of the Bill of Rights that no proceeding in parliament be questioned in any place or any court other than parliament itself. Indeed, the principle of democracy is undermined by the requirement that we may be required to subscribe to behaviours to promote certain attitudes. I hope that my constituents never elect a racist or a misogynist, but they have a right to do so. Jeremy Corbyn posted a tweet this morning promoting a virtual Stop the War fundraiser this Christmas, not an in-person one. So my earlier post (now removed) about this being an example of a party going ahead that might not meet with George Freeman’s approval was completely wrong. I apologise for the mistake. The Cabinet Office has been fined £500,000 for accidentally disclosing the postal addresses of the 2020 new year honours list recipients online, in breach of data protection laws. In a statement about the decision, the Information Commissioner’s Office said: On 27 December 2019 the Cabinet Office published a file on GOV.UK containing the names and unredacted addresses of more than 1,000 people announced in the new year honours list. People from a wide range of professions across the UK were affected, including individuals with a high public profile. After becoming aware of the data breach, the Cabinet Office removed the weblink to the file. However, the file was still cached and accessible online to people who had the exact webpage address. The personal data was available online for a period of two hours and 21 minutes and it was accessed 3,872 times. Steve Eckersley, the ICO director of investigations, said: When data breaches happen, they have real-life consequences. In this case, more than 1,000 people were affected. At a time when they should have been celebrating and enjoying the announcement of their honour, they were faced with the distress of their personal details being exposed. The Cabinet Office’s complacency and failure to mitigate the risk of a data breach meant that hundreds of people were potentially exposed to the risk of identity fraud and threats to their personal safety. “The fine issued today sends a message to other organisations that looking after people’s information safely, as well as regularly checking that appropriate measures are in place, must be at the top of their agenda.” In his interview on Sky News this morning George Freeman, the science minister, implied that people in their 20s could contact their GPs about getting a booster jab. Kay Burley, the presenter, told him he was wrong. The NHS has said younger people should wait to be called for their booster, so that the older, more vulnerable people can be jabbed first. In his interview with Sky News this morning George Freeman, the science minister, said that Boris Johnon was not a clown, and that it was “unhelpful” of President Macron to call him one. He suggested the jibe was linked to electioneering. Asked about Macron’s comments, Freeman said: I think we are into pantomime season, aren’t we? And there is a French election coming. It is a pretty unhelpful word. Of course, the prime minister isn’t a clown, he is the elected prime minister of this country with a very big mandate, leading this country through the pandemic. The truth is we are looking to work very closely with France on the border issue, on tackling the problem of European migration at source – which is why we are investing in trying to stabilise countries so people aren’t coming here – and, with France, we need to make sure that people in France aren’t being supplied with boats and being pushed out into the Channel. I’m confident, actually, that Anglo-French relations are rather better than that quote suggests. Firms are already starting to cancel Christmas parties, a leading business figure told the Today programme. Sir Martin Sorrell, who runs the S4Capital advertising agency, told the programme: It’s not so much what we’re doing as what we see our clients doing and other people. The answer is they are doing that, they are cancelling, [there has] been quite a sharp series of cancellations since this happened just, what, three, four, five days ago. So, the uncertainty is extreme and government policy - understandably, I mean to be a little bit sympathetic to the government - it is an extremely difficult situation. Sorrell also said that he thought the government was not giving enough guidance as to what people should or should not be doing. Albert Bourla, chairman and CEO of Pfizer, has said that people may need annual Covid vaccines. In an interview with the BBC, in which he said Pfizer was already working on a vaccine against the Omicron variant, he said: Based on everything I have seen so far, I would say that annual vaccinations ... are likely to be needed to maintain a very robust and very high level of protection. In the US the Food and Drug Administration has approved the Pfizer vaccine for use with children aged five to 11 and Bourla said he favoured this happening in the Europe. He explained: Covid in schools is thriving. This is disturbing, significantly, the educational system, and there are kids that will have severe symptoms. So there is no doubt in my mind that the benefits, completely, are in favour of doing it. The tenth case of the Omicron variant identified in Scotland has no direct link to the previous nine cases which were connected to one event, PA Media reports. PA says: Authorities have said the nine cases across Lanarkshire area and Greater Glasgow and Clyde (NHSGGC) identified earlier in the week were connected to an event on 20 November. Public Health Scotland recorded an additional confirmed case of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 on Wednesday in the NHSGGC area. A Scottish government spokesman said: “The individual affected is in the NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde health board area and while there is no direct link with the event on the 20 November which connected the previous nine cases, investigations are ongoing. “As First Minister Nicola Sturgeon told parliament on Tuesday, it was already suspected that some degree of community transmission of this variant was taking place in Scotland. However, there is no indication as yet that transmission of the new variant is either sustained or widespread.” The UK drugs watchdog has approved a new Covid treatment after trials found it cut the likelihood of hospital admission and death by 79% in high-risk adults, my colleague Andrew Gregory reports. Here are some more lines from the George Freeman interviews this morning on Covid. Freeman, the science minister, said that he did not know if a Christmas party was held in Downing Street - but that all the guidance was followed. Asked by Justin Webb on the Today programme if there was a party, Freeman replied: “I’ve no idea. I wasn’t there.” But he went on: “But I’m told by those who were that all the guidance was observed.” When it was put to him that, if the guidance was followed, then there can’t have been a party, because they weren’t allowed, he replied: “I can’t say, I wasn’t there.” When Webb tried again, Freeman just gave the same answer. But he did say that he had “checked” and that he had been told by people who were there that “all the guidance was followed”. As the Telegraph’s Cat Neilan points out, there was an obvious hole in Freeman’s argument. He said that “a ton of work” was being done in government to understand the possible impact of the Omicron variant. Asked on LBC whether experts were close to working out how “potent” Omicron was, Freeman, the science minister, said: Yes, the chief scientist Patrick Vallance and Chris Whitty and the team are literally monitoring the data on that. A ton of work is being done right now. He said ministers were taking advice on whether vaccines should be extended to children aged five to 11. He said: The data at the moment suggests that young children are much less vulnerable but, as and when that data changes, we are guided by the science and we stand ready, which is partly why we have procured the vaccines - to make sure we can deliver what our citizens and patients need. Good morning. It is the time of year when many of us are planning, looking forward to (or dreading) Christmas parties. But should you go ahead with them? If you are looking to the government for clear guidance, it is even foggier this morning than it has been. On Tuesday Boris Johnson – once dubbed a Merrie England Tory, and obviously at the hedonistic end of the government spectrum – said that parties should go ahead. “We don’t want people to cancel such events,” he said at his press conference on Tuesday. Last night Thérèse Coffey, the work and pensions secretary, offered a nuanced alternative. Christmas should go ahead, she told ITV’s Peston programme, but she said it was best to avoid “snogging under the mistletoe”. Asked for clarification on the snogging point, she said: “Well, not with people you don’t already know!” But this morning George Freeman offered an alternative take. Freeman is minister for science at the business department, and so perhaps he is more at the evidence-based end of the government spectrum (or killjoy end, as they would put it in the Covid Recovery Group). He told the Today programme that, while small firms might want to go ahead with a Christmas bash, bigger companies may prefer to rethink. He said: Individual businesses, in the end, have to make judgments on what is appropriate internally. It slightly depends on the nature of the business. For many small businesses, four or five staff, who are working together every day anyway, gathering to have a drink isn’t a big step up in risk. But some companies might normally bring hundreds of people in from around the world to a big party, and they may decide, this year, is that sensible given the pandemic and given where we are? In the end, I think business people know how to make those decisions. But Freeman also said that his own parliamentary team – which is not a hundreds-strong outfit – would be having its do over Zoom. He told LBC: I can tell you that my parliamentary team and I normally have a Christmas party. We’ve decided this year that it is probably sensible to do it by Zoom and wait for the spring. It won’t be the best party in the world. We’ll be getting a lobby briefing later, and it will be interesting to see see whether Freeman gets the Jenny Harries treatment over what he’s said. If you are confused, you should probably just make your own decision, which seems to be what the government thinks people should do anyway. Alternatively, you could try the approach that No 10 seems have adopted – which is to hold a party, but pretend you haven’t. Here is the agenda for the day. 9.30am: The ONS publishes a report on long Covid. 10am: George Eustice, the environment secretary, gives a speech to the Country Land &amp; Business Association conference. At 11.15am he holds a press conference. After 10.30am: Jacob Rees-Mogg, leader of the Commons, answers questions in the Commons about next week’s business. 11.30am: Downing Street holds a lobby briefing. After 11.30am: Chris Bryant, chair of the Commons standards committee, makes a statement in the Commons about his committee’s new report proposing changes to the code of conduct for MPs. 2pm: The UK Health Security Agency publishes its weekly Covid surveillance report. And at some point today Boris Johnson will get his booster vaccine. And Keir Starmer is visiting an offshore platform in the North Sea. I will be covering UK Covid developments here, as well as non-Covid politics, but for global Covid developments, do read our global live blog. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comA treasure trove of fossils of a herd of 11 dinosaurs has been identified for the first time in Italy, including the biggest and most complete dinosaur skeleton ever found in the country. Although isolated dinosaur remains have been discovered in Italy since the 1990s, palaeontologists have now identified an entire group at Villaggio del Pescatore, a former limestone quarry close to the north-eastern port city of Trieste. The fossilised remains belong to the species Tethyshadros insularis, which lived 80 million years ago and reached up to five metres in length. “Italy is not known for dinosaurs and, although we had a few lucky strikes in the past, now we have a whole herd at one dinosaur site,” said Federico Fanti, a professor at the University of Bologna and leader of a research team whose findings have been published in the Scientific Reports journal. Villaggio del Pescatore first became known for dinosaurs in 1996 after the discovery of a dinosaur skeleton that palaeontologists named Antonio and initially believed was a “dwarf species”. But the latest discoveries dispute this, with Antonio now believed to have been a young dinosaur who was part of the same herd that died together. The largest of the fossilised remains among the group has been named Bruno. “Bruno is the biggest and oldest of the group, and the most complete dinosaur skeleton ever found in Italy,” said Fanti. “We knew there were dinosaurs at the site after the discovery of Antonio, but up until now nobody actually checked to see how many. What we have now are multiple bones belonging to the same herd.” Fossilised remains of fish, crocodiles, flying reptiles and even small shrimp have also been found at the site, which 80 million years ago formed part of the ancient Mediterranean area. “This is super cool as we can figure out the kind of environment the dinosaurs lived and died in,” added Fanti. “During that period, the area was very close to the shoreline in a tropical, warm and humid environment capable of feeding herds of dinosaurs.” Some of the fossils so far found at Villaggio del Pescatore, a protected area, are on display at the civic museum of natural history in Trieste, and experts hope eventually to open part of the site to the public. In January, footprints believed to have belonged to a crocodile-like prehistoric reptile were found in the Italian Alps.The costume designer Emi Wada, who has died aged 84, won an Academy award for her work on Ran (1985), Akira Kurosawa’s epic adaptation of King Lear, which transposed the play to ancient Japan. Of the four nominations received by the movie, hers was the only one to be converted into a prize. Accepting the Oscar from Audrey Hepburn, she held the naked statuette and observed: “This figure doesn’t need my costume.” Wada, who also worked in theatre and opera, spent three years on Ran. She designed and helped to manufacture almost a thousand costumes for Kurosawa’s film, fusing influences that ranged from Noh theatre to the Renaissance. She weaved yarn that she had dyed herself, and drew inspiration for the colour of one character’s costume from Botticelli, incorporating that painter’s influence into a Japanese kimono. “It is really demanding to create costumes that are both faithful to history and innovative,” she said. “But for me, trying something new in every project is a must.” She maintained that the ultimate effect, and the truthful expression of character, were more important than strict historical fidelity. “Even in the case of period dramas, we have to remember that the audience is made up of our contemporaries. While we try to preserve certain historical elements of plays set more than a hundred years ago, I add modern colours to the mix.” When production on Ran was suspended due to financial problems, Kurosawa shut down all departments except for costume. Having already commissioned the fabrics she needed, Wada pledged her own money to pay for the $200,000-worth of materials that had already been ordered from four factories in Kyoto. When a Japanese company stumped up the money to resume production six months later, she burst into tears. “It was six in the morning,” she said. “Kurosawa called and told me we had the money. My tears just streamed out.” It was not unknown on Ran for the entire crew and hundreds of extras to spend many days waiting around for the director’s preferred clouds to materialise in the sky before he would begin shooting. Wada described him as “a perfectionist who would never compromise until he got what he wanted”. She might have regarded him as a kindred spirit: when Chinese water failed to produce the precise shade of red she had wanted for the sumptuous costumes on Zhang Yimou’s Hero (2002), it was said that she got through truckloads of mineral water before arriving at her preferred dye. For that film, she also crafted a minuscule flower for the robe worn by the actor Zhang Ziyi, telling the cinematographer Christopher Doyle: “Please, shoot the flower clearly.” Wada was born in Kyoto, Japan, to a prosperous family. Educated at the Kyoto City University of Arts, she hoped initially to become a painter. But after marrying the television director Ben Wada at the age of 20, she agreed to design for him. It was not until 1973 that she made her film debut, when she provided the lavish, lively costumes for Marco, a knockabout US-Italian musical comedy with Desi Arnaz Jr as Marco Polo and Zero Mostel as Kublai Khan. It was another 12 years before she returned to cinema with Ran, but her success on Kurosawa’s picture kickstarted a film career. She collaborated with another revered Japanese master, Kon Ichikawa, on The Hall of the Crying Deer (1986), set in 19th-century Tokyo, and the fantasy Princess from the Moon (1987). When Hiroshi Teshigahara, whose 1964 film Woman in the Dunes is one of the masterpieces of Japanese cinema, returned to film-making after a 17-year absence with Rikyu (1989), he enlisted Wada to design the costumes, among them the extravagant brocaded robes, for his 16th-century characters. The following year she was reunited with Kurosawa for the whimsical Dreams (1990). Her costumes enhanced the lyricism of the martial arts romps The Bride with White Hair and its sequel (both 1993). In the same year, she shared with the director Julie Taymor a Primetime Emmy for Taymor’s ambitious production of Stravinsky’s opera Oedipus Rex, starring Philip Langridge, Bryn Terfel and Jessye Norman; staged at the Saito Kinen festival in Japan in 1992, it was filmed for the Great Performances strand on PBS. The New York Times included Wada’s contribution, containing “echoes of classical Japanese drama”, among the elements that it said lent the opera its “extraordinary power”. Wada continued to divide her time between cinema and opera. She made three films with the British director Peter Greenaway: Prospero’s Books (1991), for which she designed the embroidered cloak worn by John Gielgud; The Pillow Book (1996); and 8½ Women (1999). Other screen credits include Nagisa Oshima’s gay samurai drama Gohatto (also 1999), Yimou’s House of Flying Daggers (2004) and two films for Tian Zhuangzhuang, The Go Master (2006) and The Warrior and the Wolf (2009). On stage, her work this century included a 2002 revival of Stephen Sondheim’s Pacific Overtures by the New National Theatre, Tokyo, and Tan Dun’s The First Emperor, directed by Yimou first in 2006 and then in a streamlined version two years later; both iterations were staged with Placido Domingo at the Metropolitan Opera in New York and featured hundreds of Wada’s dazzlingly coloured costumes. She remained discerning and principled in the work she took on, turning down the opportunity to design the 2005 film Memoirs of a Geisha, for instance, because it depicted “a Japan of the American’s imagination”. Her final film was Love After Love, directed by Ann Hui, which premiered at last year’s Venice film festival. Her husband died in 2011. • Emi Wada (Noguchi Emiko), costume designer, born 18 March 1937; died 13 November 2021Jonathan Penrose, who has died aged 88, won the British chess championship a record 10 times, and in 1960 was the first English player for 61 years to defeat a reigning world champion. Yet he always remained an amateur, whose chess career was fitted into vacations at Middlesex University, where he lectured in psychology. Penrose’s special moment came at the Leipzig Olympiad when he resoundingly beat Mikhail Tal in the only game that the USSR gold medal team lost all tournament. He characteristically understated his achievement, describing his feelings as “like playing an Essex v Middlesex county match”. That morning he had studied a newly published game that Tal’s teammate Paul Keres had lost to the Finnish master Kaarle Ojanen a few weeks earlier in the world champion’s favourite defence. Penrose was so impressed that he decided to drop his normal king’s pawn opening 1 e4 in favour of the queen’s pawn 1 d4, to provoke Tal’s Modern Benoni. The strategic concept was simple. When Tal, following one of his own previous wins, moved a rook from f8 to e8, Penrose unleashed a pawn sacrifice which enabled the Englishman’s queen and rook to breach the black defences via the the vacated f1-f8 line. Tal fell acutely short of time, lost a piece, belatedly resigned, and blamed Keres. The game created a furore because of its decisive style and its dent to the Soviet team’s invincibility. Penrose was given a standing ovation when he entered the players’ dining hall that evening, and next morning the Guardian and other English broadsheets headlined the result on their front pages. Penrose actually scored two wins and a draw against world champions at Leipzig. He outplayed the former holder Max Euwe of the Netherlands, then caught Bobby Fischer’s king in mid-board, forcing the American to settle for an endgame a pawn down. Short of time, Penrose offered a draw, Fischer replied “Sure!”, then demonstrated a forced win for Penrose. Penrose was born in Colchester, Essex, the third son of the geneticist Lionel Penrose and his wife, Margaret (nee Leathes), a medical specialist. Jonathan’s siblings, Oliver, Roger and Shirley, all became distinguished academics; Roger was awarded a Nobel prize for his work on black holes and relativity. Jonathan learned chess at the age of four, and soon displayed unusual talent. He was the British under-18 champion at 13 and London champion at 15, then defeated the former world title challenger Efim Bogolyubov in his first international tournament, at Southsea, Hampshire, in 1950. In that year’s British championship, he beat the 1948 winner, Reginald Broadbent, in the very first round, after which Broadbent cautioned him about spending too much time on chess at the expense of his studies and career. Penrose heeded the warning, and his progress slowed in the next few years as he gave priority to his degree and doctorate in psychology at London University. His next breakthrough came with his first British championship in 1958. It was the first of six successive titles, and coincided with his playing peak at both Leipzig and the next Olympiad in 1962 at Varna, Bulgaria, where he amassed 12.5/17 on top board for England. Then he narrowly missed qualifying for the later stages of the world championship at the 1963 zonal tournament. A further run of four British titles from 1966 to 1969 broke Henry Atkins’s longstanding record of nine wins, while at the 1968 Olympiad in Lugano, Switzerland, his unbeaten 12.5/15 total on top board was second only to the world champion Tigran Petrosian. In 1970 he fainted twice at the board, first at Ilford and then, following a blunder, at the Olympiad in Siegen, Germany. He soon returned to action, but his results dropped well below those of his peak years. Nice 1974 was his final Olympiad, while in the 1977 British championship he was beaten by the new prodigy Nigel Short, then just 12. Penrose was grandmaster strength, though he only held the lesser international master title. The global body Fide refused his GM application in 1978, but in 1993 his friend Bob Wade, himself a British champion, was a member of the Fide qualifications committee and successfully renewed the bid. After giving up over-the-board play, Penrose became very successful at correspondence chess, where at one time he was ranked No 1 in the world. Eventually he abandoned that, too, and for most of his last decade played social bridge at his local club in Welwyn, Hertfordshire. Penrose was soft-spoken, with a slight transatlantic accent dating back to his war years as a child, spent in Canada. His demeanour at the board was invariably quiet and calm, with flushed cheeks during time pressure the only sign of inner tension. The company of colleagues sparked his creativity, and his best results were all in team events, notably for England in the biennial Olympiads but also including club and county games for Hampstead and Essex, or when his friends were present. His earliest attempts at the British title brought mixed results, so for the 1958 event he formed a collective and stayed at the same guest house as Peter Clarke and myself, where we spent the mornings preparing and the evenings in post-mortems. This arrangement continued until 1961, and Penrose won all four titles. He was less successful in travelling on his own to the top overseas tournaments, which he only tried twice, at Mar del Plata, Argentina, in 1962, and Palma de Mallorca, Spain, in 1969. In both, he began well, and was in mid-table until the closing rounds. Penrose’s playing style was generally classical and logical, in the tradition of José Capablanca and later of Anatoly Karpov. He was better with the white pieces, where he used the solid Ruy Lopez against strong opponents and the unfashionable Goring Gambit, which he had studied in depth, against lesser lights. He was made OBE in 1971 for services to chess. In 1962, he married Margaret Wood, who was a British ladies’ championship competitor. They separated in 1978. Their daughters, Katy and Harriet, survive him. • Jonathan Penrose, chess grandmaster, born 7 October 1933; died 30 November 2021The Omicron variant of Covid-19 appears to be reinfecting people at three times the rate of previous strains, experts in South Africa have said, as public health officials and scientists from around the world closely monitor developments in the country where it was first identified. As the EU’s public health agency warned that Omicron could cause more than half of all new Covid infections in Europe within the next few months, evidence was emerging, however, that vaccines still appear to offer protection against serious illness. According to new evidence collected in South Africa by its National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) the latest epidemiological evidence suggests that Omicron can evade immunity from infection with earlier variants and is causing reinfections at three times previous rates. The South African Centre for Epidemiological Modelling and Analysis along with the NICD said the latest findings “provide epidemiological evidence for Omicron’s ability to evade immunity from prior infection”. “We believe that previous infection does not provide protection from Omicron,” said Anne von Gottberg, an expert at the NICD. In mid-November South Africa was reporting about 300 Covid cases a day. On Wednesday, it reported 8,561 new cases, up from 4,373 the day before and 2,273 on Monday. Outlining early research into the newly emerged variant, Von Gottberg said doctors were seeing “an increase for Omicron reinfections [of Covid-19]”. She said: “We believe the number of cases will increase exponentially in all provinces of the country. We believe that vaccines will still, however, protect against severe disease. Vaccines have always held out to protect against serious disease, hospitalisations and death.” Scientists from the same institute have said initial data suggests that Omicron may provoke less severe illness than previous variants although that may be skewed by the fact that many of the first Omicron cases have been identified in younger individuals or detected in very recently screened travellers. But even as South Africans have rushed to get vaccinated – nudged by President Cyril Ramaphosa’s warning on Sunday that stricter lockdowns may have to be imposed if vaccination rates don’t improve – Aslam Dasoo, of the Progressive Health Forum, warned that the recent increase in vaccinations may be insufficient. “It’s not enough to make a dent in the fourth wave,” he told the country’s News 24 news channel. “The test positivity rate was 1% last Monday. And it is now in the double digits. We are in the teeth of the fourth wave. Everyone you know is a potential risk to you,” he said. Doctors in Gauteng province said Covid patients were presenting with flu-like symptoms including a dry cough that could be treated at home. On Tuesday, the epidemiologist Prof Salim Abdool Karim said current vaccines still provided high levels of protection against hospitalisation and death. The emergence of Omicron has led to a steep rise in the number of people seeking vaccination. As well as an exponential jump in case numbers, South Africa has seen a sharp increase in its case positivity rate – the number of those tested who test positive – in the same period, from 10.7% to 16.5%, with the positivity rate in Gauteng reaching 19%. Even more worrying has been the hospitalisation rate in Gauteng, which jumped by 144% last week, doubling approximately every six days. South Africa has reported close to 3m Covid infections during the pandemic and more than 89,000 deaths, the most on the African continent. While most of the focus on Omicron has so far been on Gauteng province, there were indications that the Omicron variant was taking hold elsewhere in South Africa. In Cape Town on Thursday morning, Dr Keith Cloete, the head of the Western Cape health department, announced that the country’s southernmost province had entered a new wave of Covid-19. “The week-on-week percentage change in the seven-day moving average of new cases has been more than 20% for more than a week, indicating that we have officially entered a resurgence,” he said, adding: “A very large increase in absolute numbers is expected for the coming weeks.” Although only 16 cases of Omicron have been positively identified in the province, Cloete said that based on a proxy marker in PCR tests, the Omicron variant could be prevalent in as much as 80% of the new cases in the last week. And while much has been written about the issue of a lack of vaccines in the developing world, this has not been the main issue in South Africa. For several months, supply there has outstripped demand and in late November the government asked Johnson and Johnson and Pfizer to delay the delivery of vaccines as they had too much stock. The latest figures suggest about 36.3% of adults are fully vaccinated (although 64% of over-60s have had at least one dose). Vaccination, however, is lowest among younger age groups. Only 26% of South Africans between 18 and 34 – the cohort currently showing the highest rate of Omicron infections – have had one vaccine dose.The Opec cartel and its allies have agreed to pump more barrels of oil from January, but left the door open to putting the brakes on production should the Omicron variant lead to further restrictions on travel and trade. The global price of crude briefly fell to $66 (£49.60) on Thursday, its lowest level since mid-August, after ministers from some the world’s biggest oil producing countries agreed to go ahead with a plan to increase production by 400,000 barrels a day in the new year. The oil price climbed back towards $70 a barrel after Opec+ agreed the meeting would not formally close. The unusual move was so the cartel could “continue to monitor the market closely”, pending any new developments, and make “immediate adjustments” rather than wait for the next meeting on 4 January. The move is likely to cap global oil prices at around their current level, well below the three-year highs of $86 a barrel reached in October, and pile pressure on fuel retailers to pass the savings on to hard-hit motorists. The cartel’s decision to leave its oil production policy unchanged for now may suggest that Opec+ is banking on new travel restrictions being short-lived if existing vaccines prove effective against the Omicron variant of Covid-19, or if its symptoms are milder than earlier variants of the virus. But if the situation worsens, the oil alliance would be able to bring in immediate cuts to its planned production in order to shore up prices on the global oil market. Oil prices fell more than $10 a barrel since last Thursday, when news of Omicron first rattled markets. Louise Dickson, a senior oil markets analyst at Rystad Energy: “The Omicron variant has sobered up markets during the last few days, halting the oil demand recovery enthusiasm and sending traders scrambling to limit risk in their portfolios.” The cooling of the oil market is likely to have come as a relief to major economies, which fear rising prices will fuel a prolonged period of inflation. It is also likely to bring some respite to motorists in the US and across Europe who have faced steadily increasing petrol prices at the same time as higher home energy bills. In the UK, the slump in oil prices is also likely to pile pressure on fuel retailers to cut pump prices, which have reached record highs in recent weeks. The motoring group RAC has accused large retailers of profiteering at the expense of drivers by using rising markets as an excuse to inflate the price of petrol and diesel and failing to drop them when markets recede. A litre of petrol reached a record h 144.9p last month, while diesel climbed to 148.84p. Simon Williams, a spokesperson for the RAC, said the biggest retailers, have “taken advantage of their customers by collecting bigger profits on every litre they sell than they traditionally do”. Goldman Sachs said the Opec+ decision to leave the door open for a cut “assuages tensions with the US” after fears the rising oil price could inflate costs across the economy prompted the Biden administration to order the release of 50m barrels from the country’s strategic reserves to help cool the market. Some traders had hoped that the Opec+ cartel would abandon its policy to gradually increase production after the discovery of the Omicron variant led to new travel restrictions, which could dent the global demand for transport fuels. The lower prices would also send a signal to US oil companies to “adopt cautious spending plans for 2022” rather than embolden “aggressive growth plans” that could eat into the cartel’s share of the global market, Goldman Sachs added.The chair of National Poetry Day, Martin Thomas, is expected to be awarded the politically sensitive role of head of the Charity Commission. Thomas, a finance and insurance specialist, is set to take up the £62,000-a-year job at the end of December. The culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, named him as the government’s preferred candidateto leadthe voluntary sector watchdog. Thomas is chair of trustees of the Forward Arts Foundation charity, which is responsible for the promotion and enjoyment of poetry in the UK. There has been much speculation about who would be appointed to the post given its central role in several recent political controversies involving high-profile charities that found themselves in “culture wars” over alleged “woke behaviour”. The commission has had to adjudicate in a series of high-profile complaints in recent months brought by rightwing backbench Tory MPs against the National Trust, Barnardos, and the Runnymede Trust. Each organisation was accused of pursuing a politicised, leftwing, anti-racist agenda at odds with their charitable missions. In each case the commission exonerated the charities, none of whom had broken charity law and are not to face regulatory action. The previous culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, caused a row in September when he said the commission chair should be taken only by someone who committed to tackling charities which, he suggested, had been “hijacked by a vocal minority seeking to burnish their woke credentials”. This advice triggered a legal challenge by the Good Law Project charity, which claimed it was an unlawful attempt to politicise the charities watchdog. There was also wide concern in the voluntary sector that Dowden’s intervention was a signal that the government would seek an overtly political commission chair. However, Thomas’s appointment appears to have defused much of that concern. Thomas has not declared any political activity, and has a strong track record in the voluntary sector, including holding several senior charity trustee posts. He is also the chair of NHS Resolution, the health service’s medical negligence agency. The National Council for Voluntary Organisations welcomed Thomas’ “breadth of experience” in the charity sector, adding: “The Charity Commission needs strong, independent leadership, and we hope this reflects a recognition from the government that political appointments to this role have caused concern.” Thomas will appear before MPs on the digital, culture, media and sport select committee for a pre-appointment scrutiny hearing next week. Sue Tibballs, chief executive of the campaigning charity Sheila McKechnie Foundation, which has tracked increasingly negative political and media attitudes towards campaigning charities, said: “I hope we have a chair that can restore confidence in the Charity Commission.” The Forward Arts Foundation, whose funders include Arts Council England, runs the Forward Book of Poetry, an annual anthology, and the Forward Prizes for Poetry, besides National Poetry Day.The Mail on Sunday’s failed appeal over its publication of a letter written by Meghan, the Duchess of Sussex, to her estranged father is a sign that public figures now hold many more cards when it comes to taking on the British media. While the case did not change the law, it was emblematic of the changing balance of power between news organisations and celebrities since a statutory right to privacy was introduced in England and Wales in 2000. The much-publicised revelations that Meghan had written the letter with the possibility it might be leaked in mind and that one of her team had supplied authors of a book about her with information, apparently with her knowledge, were not enough to override her right to privacy. Sailesh Mehta, a human rights lawyer, said that these issues were treated as a “sideshow” of “froth and frenzy” by the court of appeal judges. Persephone Bridgman Baker, a senior associate at the leading law firm Carter-Ruck, said: “The case cites and applies the long legal principle that ‘[a] person may attract or even seek publicity about some aspects of his or her life without creating any public interest in the publication of personal information about other matters’; a crucial tenet of privacy law in this jurisdiction which enables public figures who live aspects of their life in the public domain to still retain control over private matters.” While Meghan described her victory as “precedent-setting”, the written judgment by the master of the rolls, the president of the court’s civil division, seemed concerned to stress that it was not, referring to the “narrowness of the issues” and “very confined, mostly factual, questions”. British news outlets can still legally publish private correspondence, but they have to be confident that doing so is in the public interest – or, alternatively, be confident that the subject of the story will not sue. On the first point, British judges have increasingly found against media outlets when it comes to invasions of privacy, leaving newspapers and broadcasters needing to prove an ever-higher level of public interest in order to justify running stories. In this case, the appeal court judges agreed with the initial ruling that the contents of Meghan’s letter to her father “were personal, private and not matters of legitimate public interest” – and therefore the Mail on Sunday could not legally justify publishing it in a national newspaper. On the second, Meghan and her husband Prince Harry’s decision to launch an all-out legal battle with the British tabloid media may have caught the Mail on Sunday by surprise. Although there are previous court cases involving the royals taking on the media – in 2005, Prince Charles won a court battle with the Daily Mail after it published extracts from his personal account of the handover of Hong Kong – on the whole they tend to prefer more discreet behind-the-scenes deals to settle scores. The precedent Meghan may have set may be more in terms of her willingness to take legal action against a media outlet – thereby following in the footsteps of other celebrities who fiercely protect their image – rather than the ruling itself. Mehta said: “A slowly moving pendulum which sometimes appears to swing in favour of the press’s right to publish and sometimes appears to side with the right to privacy, has not moved at all and is unlikely to do so for some time. “There are parallels between the ‘Princess and the Pea’ fairytale and the ‘Duchess and the Press’ modern drama. Both tales are about testing the sensitivity of a royal by an irritating intrusion. In both, the royal passed the test.” The case also plays into the behind-the-scenes intrigue at the Daily Mail. Ted Verity, the Mail on Sunday editor who published original letter back in August 2018, was last month promoted to run the Daily Mail following the sacking of the former editor Geordie Greig. Now, the newspaper has one final decision to make: does it risk running up an even bigger legal bill with one last roll of the dice by seeking the right to challenge the court of appeal’s decision at the supreme court? Or do they fold and implicitly accept that the boundaries of British privacy law have tightened?The slogan of Borussia Dortmund is “Echte Liebe”, which means “real love”. These days, however, it conjures up mixed emotions among Dortmund fans. For many it is a nostalgic throwback to the club’s heyday under Jürgen Klopp, when the phrase first became popularised. For others it is little more than an empty marketing jingle, a hashtag, a symbol of how a club built on working-class passion has begun to take on an increasingly corporate character. At the human heart of this divide lies the club’s approach to young players. Over the last decade, Dortmund have made little secret of their business model: sign the world’s most promising teenagers, offer them meaningful game time in an elite environment, then look to move them on at a profit. For supporters, this poses an insoluble dilemma: under this policy, Dortmund have fielded some of the most thrilling attacking sides in Europe, playing rapid football with young hungry players. But by the same token, is it entirely possible to attach real love to someone who may well leave in a couple of years? This, perhaps, is why Dortmund fans have often been slightly restrained in their adoration of Erling Haaland, despite the fact that he is one of the greatest strikers in the world. Jadon Sancho was more popular, and his inevitable departure to Manchester United over the summer was accepted with a shrug of the shoulders rather than any genuine animosity. But it’s hard to think of a young foreign player more straightforwardly loved by Dortmund fans than Jude Bellingham: the 18-year-old midfielder from Stourbridge who in the space of a season and a bit has made himself indispensable not just to the Dortmund team but their psyche. Bellingham is recovering from a knee injury and may not start Saturday’s Klassiker against Bayern Munich. Until missing last weekend’s game against Wolfsburg he had been an ever-present in the Bundesliga and Champions League this season, and it is a measure of his importance that in his absence the coach, Marco Rose, felt the need to rework his entire midfield, bringing in Emre Can and Mahmoud Dahoud. With his ability to make decisive contributions in all five phases of the game – attack, defence, attacking transition, defensive transition and set pieces – Bellingham has a balanced skillset that few in his position – and certainly nobody at his club – can match. Bellingham is both the most fouled player in the Bundesliga and its third most prolific tackler. He ranks fourth for pressures and fourth for goal-creating actions. He can score incredible individual goals such as the one against Arminia Bielefeld, in which he snaked past three players before dinking the ball over the goalkeeper. Even if you disregard his age, is there a more complete midfielder in world football right now? “I love his style of play,” Rose has said of Bellingham. “He has this focused aggression, works unbelievably hard for the team, and for all his youth plays a very courageous brand of football. His mentality, the intensity with which he plays football, the will to win and the football solutions he finds – all of that is extraordinary.” Mats Hummels, one of the oldest players in the squad, is even more gushing: “I think I’ve already told Jude 25 times that I love him,” the centre-back said in October. “He’s the most mature, most serious 18-year-old I’ve ever seen.” It’s telling how many people mention Bellingham’s mentality. Pretty much everyone who worked with him growing up – whether at Birmingham City or with England age-group teams – knew he was going to be good. He had the technical ability, he had the physical makeup, he had the footballing brain. But that last step you never quite know for sure, and the real lesson of Bellingham’s rise from a Championship academy to the Champions League is that his personality – the ability to lose oneself fully in football and yet remain largely unchanged as a person – is perhaps his strongest attribute of all. “When I’m alone, there is nothing else in my head except football,” Bellingham has said. He claims to be “almost obsessed with the smallest details of the game”, which may explain why he has been able to maintain his rapid rate of improvement even as the level of expectation continues to rise. Not simply a passer, not simply a tackler, not simply a creative influence or a physical presence: the sheer complexity to Bellingham’s game is what sets it apart, and maybe you need a mind of similar complexity to keep it going. And yet Bellingham is the very opposite of a bloodless footballing machine. There was a moment earlier in the season when angry Bayer Leverkusen fans were hurling cups of beer at him and Haaland as they celebrated a goal in the corner. Instinctively, Bellingham caught one of the cups one-handed and took a swig: “my first beer,” he joked on social media. On another occasion he startled Haaland by interrupting one of his post-match interviews to plant an impromptu kiss on his cheek. “My game reflects my origins,” Bellingham said in an interview with DAZN this season. “It’s a working-class style, because my game is based on energy and hard work.” Small wonder Dortmund fans can’t get enough of this guy right now. Of course, Dortmund know that one day Bellingham too may well end up leaving for pastures new, even if he is contracted to the club for 2025 and it would probably need a bid in excess of £100m to shift him. But for now few players seem to encapsulate the way the modern Dortmund likes to see itself. Young and brilliant, but humble with it. Committed and loyal, but not boring like they are at Bayern. A player worth getting behind. A player worth fighting for. A player worthy of real love.The Conservative peer Michelle Mone has been accused of sending a racist message to a man of Indian heritage who alleged in an official complaint that she told him he was “a waste of a man’s white skin”. The phrase was allegedly used in a WhatsApp message sent by the Tory member of the House of Lords in June 2019 during a disagreement following a fatal yacht crash off the coast of Monaco. The message was part of a series of WhatsApp exchanges, screenshots of which have been sent to the House of Lords commissioner for standards as part of a complaint alleging that Lady Mone sent racist and abusive messages. The Guardian has seen the complaint and screenshots of the exchanges, in which Mone also appears to make derogatory remarks about the mental health of the man’s partner, describing her as a “mental loony” and “nut case bird”. The commissioner responded that he was unable to investigate Mone because the messages were not sent in the course of her parliamentary duties. Contacted by the Guardian, a representative of the Tory peer initially said: “Baroness Mone is 100% not a racist. Baroness Mone and her husband have built over 15 schools in Africa in the past three years.” Her lawyers later provided another statement in which they said Mone had “no access” to the messages and no “detailed memory of them”. “She is not prepared to comment on the messages unless and until their authenticity has been confirmed but Baroness Mone, in any event, very strongly denies that she is a racist, a sexist or that she has a lack of respect for those persons genuinely suffering with mental health difficulties.” The statement added that it was “as illogical as it is inconceivable that she could or would have made such a comment or made it with the slightest racist intent” as, at the time, she had no knowledge that the complainant “was anything other than white British, as his appearance is 100% white, with a cut-glass English accent”. Mone was appointed to the House of Lords by David Cameron in 2015, a year after selling an 80% stake in her Ultimo lingerie company. She was then selected to lead a government review on entrepreneurship. Iain Duncan Smith, then work and pensions secretary, said at the time: “There’s no one I can think of that’s better qualified to help young entrepreneurs from deprived backgrounds to turn a good idea into a flourishing business.” In separate correspondence, her lawyers also said their client believed at the time that the man had “no trace whatsoever of non-white colouring or any features” that would suggest he was not “100% white and British”. The yacht crash occurred in late May 2019, at the end of a day that Mone and her husband, the Isle of Man-based businessman Douglas Barrowman, had spent socialising on their boat with friends and guests who had arrived on another yacht. As their friend’s yacht was departing to head back to shore in Monaco, it crashed into Barrowman’s and a crew member was killed. In the weeks following the collision, Mone appears to have become embroiled in a disagreement on WhatsApp with the man of Indian heritage, who describes his appearance as brown-skinned, who had been a guest on the other boat along with his partner. According to the complaint, on 13 June 2019 Mone used a WhatsApp group to question whether the man’s partner had genuinely suffered psychologically after the accident, claiming that she had been partying “only a few days after”. The man replied that his partner had been seriously traumatised by the yacht incident, adding: “I would prefer you back the fuck off.” According to the complaint and the WhatsApp screenshots, the Tory peer then said: “OMG what a pile of crap!! You are talking to me, a smart, bright individual who doesn’t get taken in by your shit! In fact my bullshit detector was on you from day 1. You &amp; your mental loony of a girlfriend have been parting [sic] like mad! … You need to get a grip and have respect for a guy that was killed!!! Funny how your mad girlfriend has now deleted all the pictures, don’t worry I have screenshots of the dates and times. 48 hours after the guy was killed. Your [sic] a low life, a waste of a mans [sic] white skin so don’t give us your lies. Your [sic] a total disgrace.” She added: “Now you deal with the police enquiries including your nut case bird.” The man sent an immediate reply in which he said: “A waste of a white mans skin? Did not know you were racist, Michelle.” Fifteen minutes later, Mone said: “Your [sic] blocked and take your mental case to the police station.” Responding to questions from the Guardian, Mone’s lawyers also questioned the motives of the complainant, who is a financial consultant who briefly worked for Barrowman. Seeking to cast doubt on the authenticity of the messages, they suggested they were “written in a manic way, in keeping with someone with coherency issues, rather than from a well-educated and articulate Baroness”. The complainant, who does not want to be named, made a complaint to Martin Jelley, the Lords commissioner for standards, in August 2021. The document alleges that Mone’s conduct in the WhatsApp messages amounted to bullying and harassment, arguing that the messages were “derogatory and racist” towards him and “abusive and derogatory” towards his partner’s mental health. Jelley replied that he could not investigate because the Lords code of conduct, which incorporates the “Nolan principles” for people in public life, applies only to members “in the course of their parliamentary duties and activities”. The commissioner informed Mone that the complaint had been made, but that it would go no further. Contacted by the Guardian, Jelley said the Lords code prevented him from confirming or denying information regarding the complaint. A House of Lords spokesperson said: “Where a complaint does not relate to a member’s parliamentary duties, it is not covered by the code or the remit of the commissioner for standards.” The complainant subsequently wrote to the Committee on Standards in Public Life, an advisory body to the prime minister, arguing that this case suggested the Lords code was not fit for purpose as it “takes no notice of its members’ conduct outside of the house, however reprehensible.” The Guardian’s publication of Mone’s WhatsApp messages will add to existing questions about her conduct. Last week Labour called for an investigation into Mone’s involvement in the award of £203m-worth of government contracts to a company, PPE Medpro. Mone repeatedly denied last year any association with the company. However, it emerged earlier this month that she had referred PPE Medpro to the government as a potential supplier. Her lawyers have maintained that all her statements in relation to PPE Medpro were true.China has attacked the Women’s Tennis Association’s boycott in response to the treatment of Peng Shuai, as two other major international tennis associations steered clear of the subject of future events in a market worth billions of dollars. Wang Wenbin, a foreign ministry spokesperson, said at a daily briefing that his government was “always firmly opposed to acts that politicise sports”. The WTA said on Wednesday it was suspending all tournaments in China in response to continued questions over Peng’s condition. Its chair, Steve Simon, said he did not see how he could ask his athletes to compete in mainland China and Hong Kong “when Peng Shuai is not allowed to communicate freely and has seemingly been pressured to contradict her allegation of sexual assault”. Peng, 35, accused a 75-year-old former senior Chinese official of having sexually assaulted her in a lengthy social media post on 2 November. The essay was quickly removed and she was not seen in public for more than two weeks. The WTA’s boycott decision marked a significant shift in how sports associations have dealt with China. In the past, organisations have rapidly backed down from rows with Beijing for fear of losing its lucrative market. By contrast, the International Tennis Federation (ITF) steered clear of the subject of future events in a statement on Thursday, saying that as the governing body of tennis, it stood in support of all women’s rights. “Our primary concern remains Peng Shuai’s wellbeing. The allegations Peng made must be addressed. We will continue to support all efforts being made to that end, both publicly and behind the scenes.” The WTA, which in the past decade has made huge investments in the Chinese market, has not held events in the country since the Covid pandemic. But in the 2019 season China hosted nine tournaments, including the season-ending WTA Finals, with a total of $30.4m (£22.6m) in prize money – a significant portion of the WTA’s revenues. Mark Dreyer, the Beijing-based founder of China Sports Insider, said the WTA’s decision would put pressure on other associations, such as the men’s professional tennis tour, the ATP. “The WTA is winning the moral battle in the west, and it’s going to be quite hard for other organisations to do it differently.” In a statement on Thursday, the ATP instead called for “a line of open direct communication” between Peng and the WTA, and said that it will “continue to consult with our members and monitor any developments as this issue evolves.” “We know that sport can have a positive influence on society and generally believe that having a global presence gives us the best chance of creating opportunity and making an impact,” the organisation’s chair, Andrea Gaudenzi, wrote. The International Olympic Committee, which was accused of staging a “publicity stunt” for Beijing by holding a video chat with Peng on 21 November and reporting that she said she was “safe and well”, said it had held a second call with her on Wednesday. “We share the same concern as many other people and organisations about the wellbeing and safety of Peng Shuai,” it said. “We are using ‘quiet diplomacy’ which, given the circumstances and based on the experience of governments and other organisations, is indicated to be the most promising way to proceed effectively in such humanitarian matters.” No details were given of the conversation. The WTA was one of the first international sports associations to question Peng’s wellbeing. Fellow tennis stars from Naomi Osaka to Serena Williams have tweeted in solidarity with Peng using the hashtag #WhereIsPengShuai. In the past month Chinese state-affiliated media organisations have attempted to show Peng was fine by releasing videos and photos of her. But instead these efforts have transformed a #MeToo complaint into a diplomatic incident. Multiple western governments including the US and Australia have called on Beijing to prove Peng is safe. The Biden administration said it was considering a “diplomatic boycott” of the Beijing Winter Olympics in February. Tennis stars have praised the WTA’s decision to put human rights before profits. “I applaud Steve Simon and the WTA leadership for taking a strong stand on defending human rights in China and around the world,” said Billie Jean King, the American former world No 1. “The WTA is on the right side of history in supporting our players. This is another reason why women’s tennis is the leader in women’s sports.” Novak Djokovic, the men’s No 1, said he fully supported the WTA’s stance, and said other organisations such as his Professional Tennis Players Association and the Association of Tennis Professionals were “asking for clarity on what is going on”. “We don’t have enough information and I think it’s a very bold, very courageous stance from WTA,” Djokovic said. The narrative from Beijing’s side, however, is rather different. In a tweet on Wednesday the editor of the Global Times, a hardline nationalist state-owned newspaper, criticised the WTA for “coercing Peng Shuai to support the west’s attack on Chinese system”. Hu Xijin wrote: “They are depriving Peng Shuai’s freedom of expression, demanding that her description of her current situation must meet their expectation.”Coups are always something other people do. So Sudan’s army chief, Abdel Fattah al-Burhan, has insisted that the removal and detention of the prime minister and other politicians in October “was not a coup”. Instead, it was “correcting the track of the transition” that began with the ousting of Omar al-Bashir in 2019 following mass protests, and his replacement with interim arrangements under which the military and civilians shared power, uncomfortably. The tens of thousands who protested against military rule in Khartoum and other cities on Tuesday disagree with the general’s analysis. Though the military has now reinstated the prime minister, Abdalla Hamdok, his former allies see him as a Potemkin leader whose presence whitewashes rather than reverses the coup. Twelve ministers, including those for foreign affairs and justice, resigned in protest at the deal; the Sudanese Professionals Association (SPA), one of the leading protest groups, called it “treacherous”. The deal does not appear to mention the Forces for Freedom and Change, the civilian coalition that ousted Mr Bashir. Nor is it believed to specify when the military will hand power to an elected civilian government, though it now claims that there will be elections in 2023. Mr Hamdok says that he reached the agreement to stop the “bloodbath” continuing – at least 41 people have been killed by security forces as they protested against the coup, according to a Sudanese doctors’ group – and to prevent a slide to potential civil war. But a teenager was shot dead even as Mr Hamdok was reinstated, and security forces have been filmed arresting protesters in hospital. The transitional arrangements were always fragile. Competing political parties, Islamists, military and paramilitary leaders, and rebel groups were brought together only by the desire to oust Mr Bashir. The generals certainly do not want to risk being held responsible for crimes committed under his presidency or the Khartoum massacre of protesters in June 2019 that followed his removal. Nor do they want to lose control of their hefty agricultural and industrial interests; the transitional administration had tried to bring military companies under civilian control. They need Mr Hamdok not only to try to shift domestic opinion, but also because they cannot afford international condemnation: the US and World Bank froze funds following the coup. Antony Blinken, the US secretary of state, called Mr Hamdok’s return a first step; the administration has wisely said that any resumption of the suspended $700m of aid will require more progress. Mohamed Hamdan Dagalo (known as Hemedti), the head of the paramilitary Rapid Support Forces – which have been linked to war crimes and other atrocities in Darfur – has underlined the regime’s cynicism by telling Europe and the US that they could face an influx of refugees if they do not support it. There are obvious parallels with other parts of Sudan’s history. In 1964 and 1985, popular protests gained the military backing they needed to topple regimes; in both cases, the army soon ended up in charge again. It would be easy to see the events of last month as inevitable: it has never been easy to dislodge men with guns and money, and, despite frictions, the army, the RSF and security apparatus appear broadly united so far. But one could also say that the Sudanese people have repeatedly and bravely made it clear that they do not accept authoritarian rule. They demand, and will continue to demand, something better.It was at the end of the 1840s, writes Kenneth Hamilton in the superbly comprehensive notes to his new collection, that Franz Liszt began his transformation from pianistic superstar to a composer of real weight and significance. The starting point for Hamilton’s two-disc collection, the first in a projected series devoted to Liszt’s piano music (a second instalment will be devoted to transcriptions and arrangements) is the music from that crucial period, when he gave up his glamorous life of international touring to settle in Weimar. But this selection ranges much more widely chronologically, extending right up to the end of Liszt’s life with several of the extraordinarily forward-looking pieces from the 1880s, including Czardas Macabre, Nuages Gris and the first version of La Lugubre Gondola. There’s his famous transcription of the Liebestod from Wagner’s Tristan und Isolde, too, while the first disc ends with the Sonata in B minor. “I have tried as much as possible to imagine myself a student of Liszt,” writes Hamilton of his approach. “To absorb his performance advice, or at least what survives of it, and to read his scores in a 19th-century (rather than a ‘modern’) fashion.” The performances never duck any of the considerable technical challenges that the piano writing regularly presents, but never seem to regard them as an end in themselves. It is a long way from the world of Liszt’s early piano music, such as the Transcendental Studies; instead, there’s directness, clarity and an absolute lack of unnecessary point-making in everything Hamilton does. His account of Funérailles seems all the more menacing for its icy control, while that of the sonata never sacrifices its coherence and sense of musical purpose for spectacular effect. As in Hamilton’s earlier discs – his recordings of Ronald Stevenson’s piano works especially – there is always the feeling that the music comes first, that the performances are a means to an end rather than a self-regarding end in themselves, and that is both liberating and totally refreshing for the listener. This week’s other pick In his collection, Hamilton includes four of the 10 pieces that Liszt composed in 1847 and published in 1853 as Harmonies Poétiques et Religieuses, including the best known of them, Funérailles and Bénédiction de Dieu dans la Solitude. Saskia Giorgini’s new recording for Pentatone includes the whole set of 10. Giorgini first made her name by winning the international Mozart competition in Salzburg five years ago, but she is clearly a very fine Lisztian, too. These supple, rich-toned performances are perhaps a bit less incisive than Hamilton’s but equally persuasive in their own way.Another day, another set of bad Covid figures, and another jumble of mixed messages from Boris Johnson. Ever since the threat from the Omicron variant arose, the UK government has hedged its bets on how seriously it should be taken. The semi-reputable reason is that the data about the variant and its impact is not yet clear; things will be better in two weeks. The wholly disreputable reason is that it takes avoidable risks with lives and health for political reasons. This week the government has ramped up the booster vaccine rollout; on Thursday it announced the purchase of 114m new doses. Yet it has also run a mile from giving clear guidance to the public on how to respond over the Christmas period. On Thursday this happened again, twice. First the work and pensions secretary, Thérèse Coffey, one of Mr Johnson’s more independent-minded cabinet ministers, told an interviewer that snogging under the mistletoe with strangers should be avoided for health reasons. She was quickly disowned by Downing Street for trespassing into decisions it sublets to individuals (though not for overlooking that people you know and kiss may be carriers too). Then the science minister, George Freeman, one of the government’s more sensible voices, said that he was against large Christmas parties this year and that his department had cancelled its own. A couple of hours later, Downing Street hung him out to dry too. This is a hopeless approach. It has all the intellectual coherence of the “Go to work. Don’t go to work. Go outside. Don’t go outside” shambles mocked by the comedian Matt Lucas 18 months ago. It seeds confusion into the public mind about how to behave. People “shouldn’t be cancelling things”, says Mr Johnson with his eye on the Daily Mail front page. Yet many are already doing so because, rightly, they don’t trust the message or the messenger. The ambivalence also gives permission to the minority who behave irresponsibly. All this is a deliberate policy and not an oversight. Mr Johnson knows that there is a serious threat from Omicron and the other active variants. But he is too scared to face up to it. There are many reasons for this feckless approach. Mr Johnson is by temperament a rule-breaker not a rule-maker. He is also frightened of the dozens of Conservative backbenchers who have become serial Commons rebels and threaten his majority. He is under serious pressure from commercial interests – especially the hospitality and travel industries – to prioritise their businesses over public health, a stance supported by the Treasury. In addition, he hates being pilloried by the once-supportive tabloid press about the threat to Christmas. And he sees his ratings slipping, so is terrified of doing anything he thinks might be unpopular or help Nigel Farage rise from the political grave. It adds up to a contemptible way of leading the country. The consolation is that Mr Johnson is gradually being found out, though too slowly. Stories about crowded Christmas parties in Downing Street last year cut through this week because they speak to a larger scandal. They underscore that while the public obeys the rules, Mr Johnson ignores them. It is what he always does. It is what his henchman Dominic Cummings did. Emmanuel Macron was reported this week as telling his aides that Mr Johnson is a gougnafier – a good-for-nothing. On this, the president is spot on.A British teenager has been reportedly attacked by a crocodile while travelling with friends on a gap-year holiday in southern Africa. Amelie Osborn-Smith, from Andover, Hampshire, was white water rafting in the Zambezi below Victoria Falls in Zambia when the reptile pounced at her, MailOnline reports. The 18-year-old’s father said his daughter had been resting her leg over the side of the boat when the crocodile bit her and dragged her under the water. Osborn-Smith, who was backpacking after finishing her A-levels at school in Winchester, was reportedly saved by a friend who punched the crocodile on the nose until it released her. She has been airlifted to hospital in the capital, Lusaka, about 240 miles (380km) away, where she is being treated for serious injuries to her leg. Her father, Brent Osborn-Smith, told reporters: “She wasn’t actually swimming but just sitting on the boat and the crocodile saw her leg dangling in the water and thought: ‘There’s lunch.’ “She’s in a pretty bad state at the moment in Zambia and we’re doing our best to try and get her back to have some proper definitive care here, but obviously with a crocodile bite there’s a huge risk of infection and she’s got a very severely damaged leg. It’s quite a distressing situation. “She’s been stabilised as best they can but it’s still pretty touch and go.” He said Zambia was on the Covid red list, presenting further challenges in getting his daughter home. An unnamed friend of Osborn-Smith’s told reporters: “As soon as it happened the male friend dived under the water and started punching the crocodile furiously. Then others jumped in to help. It was chaos. There was blood and people thrashing everywhere. She is lucky to be alive.” Osborn-Smith was reportedly white water rafting with Bundu Rafting, based in Livingstone in Zambia. The company has been operating in the Victoria Falls area since 1996. Its website says: “Be assured that we don’t compromise on safety issues on the river. Our trip leaders are the most experienced guides around: some with 20 years rafting on the mighty Zambezi.” Another rafting company that operates in the area says on its website that the “Nile crocodile is endemic to the Zambezi River” but adds “they are not a problem”. An adult male is usually between 2.94 metres and 4.4 metres in length and weighs between about 225kg and 414kg, although crocodiles exceeding 6.1 metres in length have been recorded. In 2018, a woman canoeing above Victoria Falls in Zimbabwe with her fiance had her arm bitten off by a giant crocodile. Zanele Ndlovu and Jamie Fox, from south-east England, were out in an inflatable raft when the reptile attacked and punctured the vessel. Ndlovu fell into the water and her right arm was bitten off above the elbow, just days before her wedding. She was taken to hospital where medics saved her life, and she was married in the hospital chapel the following month.Spare a thought for George Freeman. For reasons best known to himself, the decent if decidedly forgettable Tory MP had been desperate to return to Boris Johnson’s ministerial team after being sacked from a minor position in the transport department in February last year. He had even been overheard talking nonsense about the prime minister’s integrity and competence that everyone knew he didn’t believe for a second. And his desperation paid off in September, when Johnson made him parliamentary undersecretary of state for science, research and innovation. Some might have thought an appointment to one of the most junior roles in the business department as, at best, a damning with faint praise and at worst a snub for an MP whose own assessment of his capabilities was out of line with that of his boss. But beggars can’t be choosers, so Freeman happily accepted what was on offer and since then has applied himself to his job unnoticed by everyone. Including himself. Then on Thursday night, George got the phone call he had been dreading. After weeks of bad headlines, culminating in frequent parties inside No 10 during lockdown, absolutely everyone in government – even the lowest of the low – had made themselves unavailable for the following morning’s media round. Headaches, holidays, Christmas parties, vacuuming the stables: you name it, the excuses came tumbling out. So eventually the No 10 communications team decided Freeman was their man. When the chips were down, George was a safe pair of hands. As in, the only pair of hands. The only person in government with so little self-worth he was unable to turn down a hospital pass. Though even he hesitated. And with good reason, because by the time he had finished with the media, he was a nervous wreck. Freeman began by hoping that denial was the best line of defence. Asked by Justin Webb on Radio 4’s Today programme if No 10 had been a hotbed of lockdown ravers and refuseniks the previous year, he gave a dead-bat reply that he couldn’t possibly know as he hadn’t been there. Which was fair enough. Only George then panicked, thinking he might have landed Boris in trouble by being so noncommittal, so he immediately followed up by saying he had spoken to people who had been at the party and they had told him all the guidelines had been met. That’s weird, said Webb. Because parties were specifically banned. So if the guidelines had been met, the people he had spoken to about the party couldn’t actually have been there. Because parties with large groups of people getting pissed, playing music and having fun up close and personal were banned. We were now in the realms of Schrödinger’s Night Out. One that had both taken place and not taken place, and which people had both been present at and absent from simultaneously. Having established that No 10 had been quite happy to have any number of parties while the rest of the country either diligently obeyed lockdown rules or fought for their lives in intensive care units, the interview moved on to parties this Christmas. Where did Freeman stand on this? Was he “Live and let die, the more, the merrier”? Did he agree with Thérèse Coffey, the works and pensions secretary, that you should only snog people you knew under the mistletoe? Because as every fool knows, you can only get infected with Covid by strangers. Freeman froze. He didn’t want to get drawn on snogging; given Boris’s past record on physical contact at parties – after all, hadn’t Amber Rudd once described him as not the bloke you would want to drive you home? – the prime minister should probably decide that for himself. So he made the schoolboy error of giving an honest and sensible answer. With so much still unknown about the Omicron variant, it was best to steer clear of big parties and crowded rooms, while smaller bashes were probably OK to go ahead. WRONG ANSWER! The klaxons went off in Downing Street and Freeman’s phone began to vibrate. Sod the virus. The prime minister was planning a bumper Christmas and was planning on holding as many parties as possible. It would be such a relief to be able to have these ones out in the open rather than keeping them secret like last year. Not that there had been anything to keep secret last year, as there hadn’t been any parties. Just loads of people pretending to have a party. So George had blown it again. By now he was in such a state, he even screwed up on Sky by saying 20-year-olds should contact their GPs for booster jabs. Within minutes of Freeman completing his media duties, he had been comprehensively slapped down by No 10. Now was the time for everyone to party, party, party, and to hell with the consequences. Everyone except Freeman, that is. He could merely reflect on his all too brief return to a ministerial role and wonder how long it would be before he returned to the back benches. There are some Tories who are just too good for government. This government, at any rate. A Farewell to Calm by John Crace is published by Guardian Faber, price £9.99. To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Asylum seekers looking to enter the US from its southern border will again be sent to Mexico while their claims are assessed, with the Biden administration announcing the reinstatement of the controversial “Remain in Mexico” policy on Thursday. The US and Mexican governments haver agreed to a resumption of the program, put in place by Donald Trump in 2019, following its previous suspension by Joe Biden after he became president. It will initially begin in San Diego and in the Texas cities of Laredo, Brownsville and El Paso next week. Biden had called the arrangement inhumane after it was used by Trump’s administration to return more than 60,000 asylum seekers across the border to Mexico, where they were often preyed upon by criminal gangs. Many people were left waiting for months in limbo in Mexico as their fate was determined. In October, Alejandro Mayorkas, the homeland security secretary, said that the program “had endemic flaws, imposed unjustifiable human costs, pulled resources and personnel away from other priority efforts, and did not address the root causes of irregular migration”. However, Republican officials in Missouri and Texas sued Biden’s administration in federal court to prevent the scrapping of the return to Mexico policy, claiming that it would place an undue burden on them from incoming migrants. The supreme court ultimately concurred with the states, placing an injunction on the federal government in August which forced it to resume the program. Since then, federal officials have been negotiating with their Mexican counterparts on how the scheme will resume. Under the reinstated deal, single adult asylum seekers will be the primary focus of the removals, with those transferred offered Covid-19 vaccinations. Mexico will accept asylum seekers from Spanish-speaking countries, the Washington Post reported. The US will aim to complete migrants’ claims within 180 days, amid fears they will be left to languish in Mexico. The US Department of Justice is assigning 22 immigration judges to work specifically on these cases. Supporters of the system have claimed it will help reduce the flow of migrants into the US but advocates have argued that there is little evidence that this will happen and point to the often dire humanitarian situation the program has exacerbated on the border. People expelled by the US often end up in sprawling tent camps or sub-standard housing in places such as Tijuana and Reynosa that often lack basic foods and amenities for asylum seekers. According to Human Rights First, a US human rights group, there have been more than 1,500 cases of reported kidnappings and attacks against migrants subjected to the system, known as Migrant Protection Protocols (MPP), and thousands more under another Trump policy known as Title 42 that uses public health concerns to eject asylum seekers. “President Biden and his administration must stop implementing Trump policies that endanger the lives and safety of people seeking refuge in the United States,” said Eleanor Acer, senior director for refugee protection at Human Rights First. “Remain in Mexico and other policies that flout asylum laws and treaties are inhumane and unjust. Every day they are in place, they deliver people seeking protection to places where they are targets of brutal attacks and kidnappings perpetrated by deadly cartels and corrupt Mexican officers.” The Biden administration has also been sharply criticized by refugee advocates for the growing number of immigrants being held at private facilities. Biden had promised to end the private, for-profit jails but has exempted the Immigration and Customs Enforcement (Ice) agency from this effort and the number of immigrants in detention has nearly doubled to 29,000 since he took office. “Frankly, it’s infuriating,” Setareh Ghandehari, advocacy director for Detention Watch Network, told the Washington Post. “It’s incredibly disappointing. We really expected more.”Adam Gemili and Laviai Nielsen have been removed from UK Athletics’ world-class programme after opting to stay with their coach Rana Reider, who is the subject of a Safe Sport US investigation after multiple complaints of sexual misconduct were made against him. It means that both sprinters will no longer receive lottery funding, which can be worth up to £28,000, or medical support from UKA while they remain with Reider in Florida. However, a third British athlete Daryll Neita, who was coached by Reider to the women’s Olympic 100m final, will stay on funding after deciding to leave his Tumbleweed training group. In a statement, UK Athletics said: “UKA’s position has not changed in that any athlete working directly with Rana Reider given the confirmed complaints of sexual misconduct against him from US Safe Sport, will not be able to be supported through the world-class programme. “Adam Gemili and Laviai Nielsen have elected to remain in Florida and accept they will not be supported through the WCP for the time being. UKA understands the significant commitment these athletes have made to be based in Florida for the winter and that they will remain part of the training group until a further update from US Safe Sport is provided.” Reider has earned a glittering reputation in the sport after guiding several Olympic and world champions to glory, including the Tokyo 2020 Olympic 200m gold medallist Andre De Grasse and the world triple jump champion Christian Taylor. When the Guardian broke the story that he was about to be investigated last month, Reider’s lawyer, Ryan Stevens, said the allegations against his client were “unvetted” and “unproven”. Gemili said he had decided to stay with Reider while the investigation continued. “Having spoken with UKA, US Safe Sport and various athletes within the Tumbleweed group, I feel as though it is correct to trust that the proper organisations will conduct a thorough investigation and quickly outline their findings,” he said. “UKA are understanding of my decision and although I will not be on the WCP programme whilst the investigation is ongoing, we shall continue to closely work together.”The world of children’s entertainment has provided a rich seam for comedians: see Justin Edwards’ alcoholic clown Jeremy Lion or the delinquent gameshow Funz and Gamez. The joke in those cases was inappropriate content purveyed to innocent audiences – which isn’t quite what Ed MacArthur and Ghosts star Kiell Smith-Bynoe are up to here, in a show that’s as delightful as those predecessors. String v Spitta instead dramatises (I use the world loosely) an arch-rivalry, between aristocratic Sylvester String, reigning king of the west London party circuit, and from-the-streets TikTok upstart MC Spitta, kids’ favourite and pretender to String’s throne. We first encounter the twosome resentfully paired up at the sixth birthday of a Russian oligarch’s daughter – then flash back to the genesis of this odd-couple arrangement. Toffee-nosed String – think classical music and the smack of firm discipline – is losing gigs fast to a grime-toting east London arriviste. He proposes a partnership, the only way yesterday’s man String might stay in the game. The show is glancingly droll about entitled white men falling out of fashion, and – as the duo trade invective in song – sharply funny about the social scorn coursing between the silver-spooned and the barely fed. After initial distaste for one another’s working practices (“the last time somebody in my family improvised,” says String, “it triggered a recession”), the show traces the pair’s tentative steps towards common ground. But this is an act more than a play, and plot is secondary to the fun MacArthur and Smith-Bynoe have turning this all out to their supposedly infant audience – and to the oligarch’s supermodel wife, the recipient of Spitta’s showstopping bump’n’grind serenade. With no frills to the staging, the amplification a bit irregular, and the ending less of a climax and more of the same, there’s space for the show’s qualities to be brought into sharper focus. But it’s still great fun, as Smith-Bynoe, twinkle in eye, drops a few magic tricks, String becomes a convert to beatboxing, and the lyrics sample the songs and rhymes of school to fine comic effect. “Heads, shoulders, knees and toes above the rest!” may overstate the case – but only just. String v Spitta is at Soho theatre, London, until 11 December.