The energy regulator is responsible for a series of mistakes and missed opportunities that allowed the collapse of dozens of energy suppliers and led to spiralling household bills, according to a report by a leading consumer rights charity. Citizens Advice has blamed the industry regulator, Ofgem, for failing to take action against rule-breaking suppliers for almost 10 years despite mounting concerns over the energy market. In a damning report, the consumer watchdog warned that there was evidence of financial weakness in the energy market “long before this year’s crisis”, but said Ofgem had failed to heed warnings, meaning households would bear the brunt of its “catalogue of errors”. The market has lost 26 suppliers amid record high gas prices, which could mean household bills rising by an extra £94 to cover the cost to companies of taking on the extra customers. Clare Moriarty, chief executive of Citizens Advice, said households would face a multi-billion-pound bill “in large part because Ofgem missed multiple opportunities to regulate the market and tackle rule-breaking by suppliers”. The report found that Ofgem failed to act following repeated warnings from Citizens Advice over the precarious finances of a raft of small suppliers that entered the energy market between 2010 to 2019. It had also been slow to take action in recent years even as the industry’s customer service levels declined and financial instability increased, according to the report. “Recent wholesale price rises would have been hard to handle in any circumstances, but they need not have led to the collapse of a third of companies in the market,” Moriarty said. The regulator brought in plans to toughen financial checks on small suppliers at the beginning of 2020, but has taken action against only one despite evidence that many in the market relied on their customers’ credit balances to stay afloat. It has also opened only one formal customer service investigation in the last three years, after the number of people working on enforcement at Ofgem fell by a quarter. Citizens Advice has called for an independent review of the causes of the market collapse, including Ofgem’s regulation and reforms, and action by the government and Ofgem to protect consumers from unnecessarily steep increases to bills to pay for the cost of supplier collapses. “If consumers lack confidence in the energy market, or feel they’re getting a bad deal, it will be even harder to transition to net zero. So reform is vital for the future as well as for avoiding the mistakes of the past,” Moriarty added. An Ofgem spokesperson said the regulator had accepted that “the current system was not designed for this sort of extreme market event” and that the energy market needed “reform and quickly”. The regulator plans to set out changes in the next few weeks which “demonstrate the seriousness” with which it is tackling the “pace of change needed”, the spokesperson added. The spokesperson also welcomed the opportunity to work alongside all consumer groups, including Citizen Advice, “to protect energy consumers now and in the future”.A number of schools in Wales are extending their day by an hour to try to help youngsters catch up after Covid lockdowns. The Welsh government will invest up to £2m on the trial, allowing 14 primaries and secondaries across south Wales to open for groups of children for an extra five hours a week. Schools can choose what they do with the time and may put on sessions such as art, music and sport or academic lessons. If successful, the trial could lead to a longer school day being introduced permanently and school leaders, children and parents are also to be asked to think about whether the shape of the academic year should also be reformed with, for example, the summer holiday being made shorter. Earlier this week the head of the Ofsted schools inspectorate in England, Amanda Spielman, said almost all children had felt the impact of lockdowns and struggled with a “hokey-cokey education”. The Welsh scheme is designed to try to find ways to address issues such as children falling behind with lessons and experiencing mental health issues. The government said the trials will be focused on supporting disadvantaged pupils and schools particularly affected during the pandemic. Headteachers will decide on how and what is delivered in each school during the trial period, which is due to start in the new year and run for up to 10 weeks. Jeremy Miles, the Welsh education minister, said: “We are funding trial schools so that they can provide exciting activities around the school day, which can develop personal skills and resilience which will also impact on academic attainment. “We will be working closely with schools and local authorities to evaluate the impact on learners and on staff. “Over the coming months, I’ll also be talking to young people, education staff, families and people working beyond the sector – in areas such as tourism and public services – to seek their views on reforming the school year. “Reforming the year could help to narrow the disruption caused by the long summer holiday on learners.” Staff and children at one of the schools involved in the trial, Cadoxton primary in Barry, expressed enthusiasm. The head of school, Rhian Milton, said it planned to offer year six pupils four after school sessions and, on a Friday, a breakfast time activity. It will put on cooking, gardening and DJ clubs, weaving in literacy, numeracy and digital skills. Milton said children felt they had missed out during lockdown and social skills as well as learning had been affected. Ten-year-old Seren said she was excited at the prospect of a longer day. “Lockdown was really rough for me,” she said. “I didn’t know what to do, sitting in my bedroom wondering why I wasn’t at school.” Another pupil said her head “went weird” during lockdown. There was a mixed response from teachers’ unions. Neil Butler, the NASUWT national official for Wales, said the trial was “sprung on us without consultation”. He warned: “There are implications for teacher workload and, indeed, health and safety as schools still struggle with Covid mitigations.” Dilwyn Roberts-Young, general secretary of UCAC, a Welsh teaching union, said it was open to discussion about changes to the school day and the school year. He added: “Our education system needs to be in tune not only with the current needs of the education workforce, but also of learners and families. “Naturally, as a union, we will want to ensure that there is no detriment to teachers’ terms and conditions.”Wednesday was a good day for the business select committee to announce an inquiry into the crisis in the retail energy market, and why so many suppliers – 26 at the last count – have failed. Citizens Advice has just provided MPs with a perfect pre-read: a quietly devastating analysis of the “catalogue of errors”, as it puts it, committed by Ofgem, the regulator. The report is an excellent counterblast to the self-serving official narrative that says mass collapses appeared out of a clear sky, and that “unprecedented” spikes in the prices of gas were the sole culprit. Nobody, of course, doubts that the surges in wholesale markets triggered the crisis, but the story is more complicated. The relevant question is whether Ofgem should have been prepared for possible upsets, and whether more rigorous policing of the retail market would have saved consumers a few hundreds of millions of pounds. Citizens Advice offers compelling evidence that the answer to both questions is: yes. In its statutory role as consumer champion in the retail energy market, the body seems to have been warning the regulator for years about the dangers of allowing so many undercapitalised firms – “some being run out of owners’ living rooms and kitchens” – to enter the market. As long ago as 2013, it called for a formal review of the licensing regime. “Many [companies] have been lightly capitalised, often with few signs of external funding and an apparent dependence on credit balances to provide their working capital,” says the report. “Few were profitable or had any reasonable prospect of becoming so.” Ofgem eventually did review the rules on new entrants – but not until 2018, with tighter conditions applying the following year. By then, another 45 new companies had been given licences to trade in the 2015-18 period; and new rules for existing suppliers only arrived in 2021. The picture adds to the impression that Ofgem, under political pressure to show it was promoting competition, was happy to welcome any Johnny-come-lately wishing to have a punt. Note, too, Ofgem’s account that it flagged concerns about Avro Energy, the biggest supplier to fail before Bulb fell over, on 10 occasions between 2018 and 2021 as the company expanded to more than 500,000 customers. Under the industry’s “mutualisation” rules that effectively dump the costs of corporate failures on to bills, Avro’s failure alone is expected to cost consumers £679m. The total industry-wide bill stands at £2.6bn, on Citizens Advice’s estimate, or £94 per household. That is why the role in the crisis of Ofgem matters. The regulator obviously could not have been expected to run a zero-failure regime, but it was still astonishing to read its former chief executive Dermot Nolan candidly concede to the FT a few weeks ago that he “did not think about a situation where the price cap was the cheapest tariff in the market”. That, surely, represents a basic failure of regulatory imagination: commodity markets have always been prone to wild price swings. Rather like the bank regulators in the Noughties, the models never tested for extreme shocks. The business committee’s inquiry is wider than just Ofgem, but the question of “whether there should be a more interventionist approach from the regulator” should not be hard for MPs to crack. Next Taylor Wimpey boss would do well to ape predecessor’s approach Pete Redfern, one of the FTSE 100’s longest serving bosses, says he’ll be laying down his trowel at housebuilder Taylor Wimpey next year. This news comes days after Elliott Management was reported to be building a stake in the firm. Are these developments connected? Actually, almost certainly not. Redfern has been in post for almost 15 years, so his plea that it’s time for a break, and then something different, rings true. He might have skipped off earlier if Covid hadn’t turned up to sow confusion in the sector. On the pandemic front, he got two things right. First, he tapped shareholders for £500m to bag more land while prices were temporarily depressed. A few shareholders grumbled but, 18 months later, the timing looks excellent. Prices have more than recovered. Second, he declined to join the industry chorus lobbying Rishi Sunak for an extension to the stamp duty holiday in England and Northern Ireland at the start of this year. Demand for houses was already strong and the chancellor should allocate resources to where they are most needed, Redfern argued. Shockingly, Sunak ignored the advice and extended the holiday. It was a ridiculous decision that probably cost the Treasury the thick end of £2bn. One hopes Redfern’s successor can similarly see the wider picture, even when the chancellor doesn’t.The £3tn windfall from soaring house prices in the past 20 years should be subject to a capital gains levy so that poorer households can be spared paying more in tax, a thinktank has urged. A report from the Resolution Foundation said the government should consider applying capital gains tax (CGT) to increases in the value of main residences in the UK as well as to sales of second homes, instead of increasing tax on income and profits. The thinktank admitted it would be a hard sell but said house prices had risen by 86% more than inflation in the past two decades and the gains had been “unearned, unequal and untaxed”. The increase in national insurance contributions and the 2023 rise in corporation tax will mean taxes as a share of the economy returning to levels last seen in the 1950s, yet property windfalls have been entirely absent from the debate, the Resolution Foundation said. Other capital gains attract tax rates of between 10% and 28%, and the benefits of the property boom had been disproportionately enjoyed by the better off, older people and those living in London, it added. Households over the age of 60 gained £80,000 in property on average, against less than £20,000 for the under-40s. For the wealthiest 10% of households it was £174,000, while the poorest third it was £1,000. Average gains in London (£76,000) were almost four times those in the north-east (£21,000). Adam Corlett, the principal economist at the Resolution Foundation, said the £3tn capital gains on main residences represented one-fifth of all wealth in the UK. “Choosing not to tax this huge housing wealth windfall because of the political and administrative challenges involved has real consequences, including higher taxes for workers and businesses,” he said. “With the government on course to raise taxes by an equivalent of £3,000 for every household in Britain by the middle of the decade, it’s time to reconsider a range of practical options for taxing these unearned windfall gains if we are to protect workers’ living standards in the years ahead.” None of the main political parties has indicated it would be willing to take the risk of angering homeowners, but Labour has been exploring the possibility of wealth taxes on shareholders. The Resolution Foundation report, which was conducted in partnership with abrdn Financial Fairness Trust, said levying CGT on main residences at 28% would raise £11bn a year – slightly less than the £12bn the Treasury will get from increasing national insurance contributions next April. Under the plan, property owners would be required to pay nothing until they exited home ownership or died. The thinktank said more modest proposals would still raise significant amounts. Setting a £75,000 allowance would mean more than half of estates would not have to pay any tax, while still raising £4bn a year. If unearned capital gains on a primary residence could no longer be covered by the inheritance tax residence nil rate band, up to £3bn would be raised.The American dream says anyone’s success is assured by self-reliance, a streak of adventure and a smile. It is a durable, muscular mythology built on the notion fortune favours the likeable individual who can slash through the jungle’s undergrowth. Failure is down to personal flaws such as laziness, rather than the rapacious reality of corporate overlords keeping labour costs low. Playwright Arthur Miller was a dogged critic of capitalism’s pyramid marketing scam. The working-class Brooklyn alpha male at the centre of his 1949 play Death of a Salesman is trying to keep up appearances but is ultimately crushed by his material pursuit, and not for the first time in Miller’s oeuvre. In Paige Rattray’s new production of this classic work for Sydney Theatre Company, salesman Willy Loman is never alone on stage, surrounded by characters plucked from future scenes to witness his inexorable nervous breakdown, like Sunday drivers rubbernecking at a road accident or a choir gathering to ultimately harmonise a requiem. It’s an interesting way to fill a large stage, if occasionally distracting. Rattray has cast well, with Jacek Koman channelling fury and passionate pride into Loman, stripped of his salary base in a portent of the redundancy to come. He is matched by Josh McConville as son Biff, who rages at his father’s refusal to accept his shortcomings, while Helen Thomson evokes pathos and dignity as Willy’s wife Linda, imploring her sons to support their father, given “he’s only a little boat looking for a harbour”. Callan Colley has a magnetic presence as sporty son Happy, blind to the end to how the capitalist dream is killing his father, while Bruce Spence uses his comedic dexterity and height to get all the juice out of the Lomans’ neighbour Charley as well as doubling as a scene-stealing drunk waiter. The simple set is a cavernous rendering of the Lomans’ living quarters, sparsely furnished with a card table, chairs and battered refrigerator, the ceiling paint peeling: a domestic setting writ large and crumbling. But how to stop this play from becoming a museum piece? Travelling salesmen surely grew just about extinct as the 20th century closed and the internet reached peak use. Wouldn’t the Willy of today be a non-unionised gig economy worker, maybe a food delivery cyclist knocked off his bicycle at the traffic lights? I’m being facetious, not least because directors have only so much licence. The estate of Arthur Miller, of course, would block liberties with the playwright’s script, as director Simon Stone discovered in 2012 when he was forced to reinstate both the epilogue he’d cut from the play and Willy’s method of destruction in the denouement. But one thing Stone kept was his cast’s Australian accents for relatability among a local audience. It might have been a useful strategy here too, given Koman’s European inflections and Thomson’s occasional Strine sometimes audibly place the pair poles apart from their characters’ Brooklynese. The truth, of course, is that the growing disparity between rich and poor in the US, UK or Australia today marks Death of a Salesman with evergreen relevance. Willy and Linda bemoan that their appliances break down before they can pay them off, that the achievement of a mortgage being paid rings hollow when the house is emptied of children. Today, generations will never own property because their government has purposefully distorted the market, unless they withdraw funds for insanely huge housing deposits from the bank of mum and dad. The play’s masculine folklore of the pioneering forefather, the sons vying for their father’s approval, the father allowing pride to get in the way of expressing filial love, still resonate too of course. “Isn’t that remarkable?” realises Willy, “Biff, he loves me, he always loved me.” The epiphany is too late in the piece, Willy having devoted a lifetime to contradictions about what he wants from his sons that Biff cannot reconcile. Willy finally confirms his paternal adoration, or at least, he’s no loveless patriarch like, say, Succession’s Logan Roy, for whom life is a fight for a knife in the mud, especially between his children. To waste too much time on pity for Willy, however, might blind the audience to Miller’s deeper point that there was – and is – something decaying behind the smile of America’s big industrial complex. Rattray has captured the dehumanising wallop of capitalism for those on the bottom with an intensely satisfying production. Absorbing to the end, the run time didn’t seem as long as the almost three hours that went by, including the interval. Death of a Salesman plays at the Roslyn Packer theatre, Walsh Bay, until 22 DecemberGuardian and Observer journalists have won five awards at the British Journalism Awards (BJA), including the coveted news provider of the year. The columnist Marina Hyde took home the prize for comment journalism, while Sirin Kale and Lucy Osborne won in the arts and entertainment journalism category. Meanwhile, Stephanie Kirchgaessner won in technology journalism for her stories on the Pegasus project, while there were commendations for the Queen’s consent investigation and the Observer’s James Tapper in the health and life sciences journalism category. Aniefiok Ekpoudom won the Barbara Blake Hannah award for his work for the Guardian and Observer. Commenting on the Guardian winning the news provider of the year award, the judges said: “The Guardian has marked its 200th anniversary in style this year. Its Pegasus Project investigation exposed governments using technology to spy on journalists, politicians and campaigners. “Its Noel Clarke investigation gave a voice to ignored victims and secured lasting change to the TV industry. “The Guardian’s podcasts and innovative digital storytelling have reached record audiences. And it has all been underpinned by a pioneering business model which has made it the biggest member-funded newsroom in the world.” The success broke the Financial Times’s three-year winning streak. The five awards for Guardian journalists was the most won by any organisation. Rukhshana Media, the Afghan women’s media organisation, won the Marie Colvin award – with judges praising “women banding together to provide different perspectives of male-dominated Afghanistan in the face of death threats and intimidation”. The Guardian partnered with Rukhshana Media for the Women report Afghanistan series during the summer. Accepting the award, Zahra Joya said: “It is an honor for me to stand here tonight and accept this award on behalf of my colleagues at Rukhshana Media. This award comes as press freedom in Afghanistan is increasingly under attack. “I want to thank the Guardian particularly editor in chief [Kath Viner], and rights and freedoms editor [Annie Kelly] for partnering with us, for helping to amplify the voices of Afghan women, and for nominating our work for the British Journalism Awards.” Kale and Osborne took the honours in the arts and entertainment journalism category for a series of stories about the actor Noel Clarke being accused of sexual harassment. “This winner was a brave investigation which gave a voice to dozens of whistleblowers and had a huge impact,” the judges said. Meanwhile, recognising Hyde’s success in comment journalism, the judges said: “At a time when people are terrified of being thought offensive, Marina Hyde skewers her targets with a fluent savagery.” The Queen’s consent stories by Rob Evans, David Pegg, Severin Carrell and Michael Barton were highly commended in the BJA’s investigation of the year category, with judges saying it was an “incisive investigation which exposed allegations of corruption at the very top of the British establishment”. Other top awards included ITV News’s Robert Moore winning journalist of the year for his reporting from the US Capitol riots, while the Sun won scoop of the year for revealing former health secretary Matt Hancock’s office affair in the midst of the pandemic. Geoff Hill, the ITV News editor who died in September aged 52, was posthumously given the Public Service Award. For a full list of the winners, click here.Who says change is impossible in Australian politics? After decades of denial there is finally bipartisan agreement that all of Australia’s coal-fired power stations will shut down, no new ones will be built, and the steady decline of our coal exports has already begun and will not stop. It’s hard to believe it was only March this year when Labor and the Nationals fought the Hunter byelection on who was the most optimistic about coal’s future. While economic modelling is as overrated as it is misunderstood, the competing models released by the Coalition and Labor do reveal some underlying truths about how both sides see the economy, our politics and even the role of government evolving in the decades ahead. The Coalition’s modelling of its net zero target captures Scott Morrison’s essence in one giant spreadsheet. Ambitious long run goals, no clear policies to get there, and a devil not so much buried in the detail, but whose existence is simply denied despite all evidence to the contrary. There’s absolutely no doubt that the Coalition’s modelling relies on a carbon price of some sort to drive emissions down, and, true to form, he denies that simple truth, safe in the knowledge that no one is as good at semantic arguments as himself. The Coalition relied on a computable general equilibrium (CGE) model, which compares the entire economy today with the entire economy in 2050. It assumes that in 2050 emissions would be 85% below their 2005 levels (not 100%); a wide range of new technologies would be invented soon (though no new spending to create such wonderful new machines); and – it needs repeating – a carbon price of $24 to “motivate” (in the words of the modellers) firms to install new technology. It also relies on “offsets” in the form of soil carbon and carbon capture and storage (whose integrity and reliability are already in doubt). Scott Morrison’s approach to modelling turns convention on its head. Modelling usually revolves around the concept of “cause and effect” – for example, how might a change in taxes impact the broader economy. But the Coalition has simply modelled the effect of emission reductions and has said nothing about what might cause it. Morrison literally relies on “faith” in markets and presents no actual plan for what his government will do differently to drive such enormous change. Labor’s approach could not be more different. Their starting point is the Coalition’s existing forecasts for Australia’s emissions trajectory for 2030 (not 2050). Rather than model an economy-wide carbon price like the Coalition they have modelled how some very specific energy and transport policies would reduce emissions in specific sectors. Rather than use a “top down” CGE model of how imaginary new policies drive deployment of imaginary new technologies Labor’s “bottom up” modelling focuses on how policy change would drive emissions down. While neither party’s targets are based on the science of limiting climate change to 1.5C, given that both major parties now support net zero by 2050, the big difference between the 2030 targets is both environmentally and diplomatically significant. Labor’s 2030 target of a 43% reduction from 2005 levels means a commitment to reduce emissions by 170Mt from the latest levels while Morrison’s 26-28% target range means a cut of only 80Mt. So Labor’s short-term emission reduction target is more than double Morrison’s. More importantly, they have spelled out the actual policies and technologies they’re planning to use to get there. It’s no surprise that the Business Council of Australia (BCA), the Australian Industry Group (AIG) and the National Farmers’ Federation (NFF) are supporting Labor’s position, while politely ignoring the blancmange of Morrison’s slim plan and modelling fantasy. The BCA shredded its credibility and split its membership when it called Bill Shorten’s 2019 target “economy-wrecking”. The AIG knows that spending billions paying farmers for “soil carbon” will not help heavy industry reduce emissions. And the NFF knows that while some farmers are happy to take millions for offset credits, the biggest threat to Australian agriculture isn’t climate policy, it is the climate change that comes with the lack of climate policy. The Australian climate debate is moving fast as the Liberals try to avoid being wedged between the pressure from independent candidates and the petulance of their National party colleagues. This March, the NSW Liberals sacked Malcolm Turnbull from a climate advisory role for admitting we don’t need to build any new coalmines. Imagine where we might be by next March? • Richard Denniss is the chief economist at independent thinktank the Australia Institute. @RDNS_TAINew Zealand faces “a substantially more challenging and complex strategic environment”, in large part because of China’s rise and “increasingly strong nationalist narrative”, according to a stark report released by the country’s defence ministry. The remarkably explicit warning on Wednesday included a detailed discussion of China’s military modernisation and emphasised the importance of New Zealand’s deep security relationships with Anglosphere countries such as the United States, United Kingdom, Canada and Australia. “It paints a pretty sobering picture of changes in New Zealand’s strategic environment,” says Professor David Capie, director of Victoria University of Wellington’s Centre for Strategic Studies. “It argues the South Pacific is no longer a benign backwater, but rather that some of the challenges we’ve seen playing out in the wider Indo-Pacific are now coming closer to home.” The report comes as New Zealand plunges into a fraught debate over how to manage strategic competition between America and China in its Pacific backyard. Many officials and observers in Wellington have taken a more hawkish view of China in recent years and pushed for a closer security partnership with America. The ministry’s report seems designed to influence that discussion. Some will see it as pushback to the foreign minister, Nanaia Mahuta, who earlier this year expressed discomfort with expanding the remit of the Anglosphere’s Five Eyes partnership beyond intelligence-gathering. The report noted that “the defence aspect [of Five Eyes] is as long-standing and as fundamental as the intelligence aspect”. It strongly endorsed New Zealand’s continued involvement in the partnership, saying the country “derives enormous benefit from this partnership, including in terms of access to defence capabilities, information technologies and military developments that would otherwise be unachievable”. Strategic competition between America and China was singled out as a “major driver” of increased insecurity. The ministry characterised the Indo-Pacific as the “central global theatre for strategic competition”. It warned an external power – almost certainly China – could establish a military base or use paramilitary forces in the region, and implicitly cautioned American policymakers that delivery on President Joe Biden’s “renewed commitment” to the Indo-Pacific “will be important in determining the future for this region”. Another driver of the increased security threats which New Zealand now faces, per the ministry, is intensified climate change. It noted that climate change’s impacts are already present and include extreme fires, intense cyclones and prolonged droughts. These will drive greater social and political instability. “More frequent disasters means reduced recovery time between events, and more intense disasters means more damage from which to recover.” “After decades of deployments to Afghanistan and the Middle East, [the report] makes clear that the South Pacific is where New Zealand needs to focus its primary defence efforts in the future,” says Capie. It remains to be seen whether that will prompt a change in New Zealand foreign policy going forward. “The government has set out a very worrying picture of New Zealand’s strategic environment, but is it willing to spend any more or do anything different from what it has in the past?”This blog will now close but you can catch up with all the latest Covid developments by following our new blog here. You can also read all the key coronavirus stories from our team of reporters here. A number of schools in Wales are extending their day by an hour to try to help youngsters catch up after Covid lockdowns. The Welsh government will invest up to £2m on the trial, allowing 14 primaries and secondaries across south Wales to open for groups of children for an extra five hours a week. Schools can choose what they do with the time and may put on sessions such as art, music and sport or academic lessons. If successful, the trial could lead to a longer school day being introduced permanently and school leaders, children and parents are also to be asked to think about whether the shape of the academic year should also be reformed with, for example, the summer holiday being made shorter. Read the full story here. Early data indicates the Omicron Covid variant may more easily reinfect people who have already had the virus or been vaccinated than previous variants, but could also cause milder disease, the WHO said Wednesday. World Health Organization chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus told reporters: Emerging data from South Africa suggests increased risk of reinfection with Omicron ... there is also some evidence that Omicron causes milder disease than Delta”. But he stressed that more data was needed before drawing firm conclusions, and urged countries everywhere to boost their surveillance to help provide a clearer picture of how Omicron is behaving. WHO emergencies director Michael Ryan said that so far the data indicates the variant is “efficiently transmitting, and probably more efficiently transmitting even than the Delta variant.” “But it means the virus is more efficient at transmitting between human beings. And therefore we have to redouble our efforts to break those chains of transmission to protect ourselves to protect others.” Even if the new variant turns out to be less dangerous than previous variants, if it transmits more rapidly, it could still sicken more people, overburden health systems, “and more people die,” he said. Hello I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be taking over the blog from my colleague Tom Ambrose. As I’m reporting to you from Sydney, Australia, here are some recently released numbers from Down Under. The state of NSW has recorded 420 new Covid-19 cases and one death. Victoria recorded 1,232 new Covid-19 cases and nine deaths. The states of Queensland and the Northern Territory just announced they hit the 80% fully vaccinated mark. Deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce also announced this morning that he has tested positive for Covid-19 while in Washington. Reading their phone halfway down a wintry Whitehall early on Wednesday morning, a breathless cabinet minister was agog at the leaked news that the prime minister was about to introduce plan B measures. “It’s just one fucking thing after another, isn’t it?” By the time plans got to a virtual cabinet signoff on Wednesday afternoon, the response was muted and routine. During the Covid-O meeting that preceded it, Boris Johnson agreed to temper the measures slightly, including adding the option of a rapid negative test to Covid passports – the measure that had been the main focus of opposition. But though a tense agreement was finally reached, the private mood in SW1 among MPs and cabinet ministers in the run-up to the prime minister’s hastily arranged press conference was nothing short of mutinous. Many told the Guardian that Johnson’s personal character and authority were now on the line – with no excuses made for bad advice. Sajid Javid, once seen as the bright hope of anti-lockdown MPs, rose to give his evening statement in the Commons to a shout of “resign” by MP William Wragg. “What a load of old tripe,” another yelled as Javid said the decision was not taken lightly. Omicron cases could exceed 1 million by the end of this month on the current trajectory, Sajid Javid has told MPs, describing the new variant as “an even more formidable foe”. In a statement delivered to the House of Commons, the UK health secretary said that there were 568 confirmed cases of the Omicron variant but that the estimated current number is “probably closer to 10,000”. In a statement on Wednesday evening, he said: “The UK health security agency (UKHSA) estimates that the number of infections is approximately 20 times higher than the number of confirmed cases, and so the current number of infections is probably closer to 10,000. “UKHSA also estimate that at the current observed doubling rate of between two and a half and three days, by the end of this month, infections could exceed 1 million.” Javid said there was now confidence that Omicron is “far more transmissible” than Delta, but he said there was still a lot to learn about the new variant. He said Delta cases had doubled in around seven days, and that Omicron was spreading at an even faster rate. “Based on the latest data from here and around the world, our latest analysis is that it’s been around, it’s between 2.5 and three days.” The statement followed scientific advice to ministers on Tuesday that provided a stark outline of the potential consequences of failing to take action to suppress the spread of the virus. Good evening. I’m Tom Ambrose and will be bringing you the latest Covid news over the next hour or so. We start with the news that US federal health officials have authorised a new Covid-19 antibody drug for people with serious health problems or allergies who cannot get adequate protection from vaccination. Antibody drugs have been a standard treatment for treating Covid infections for more than a year. But the AstraZeneca antibody drug cleared by the Food and Drug Administration is different. It is the first authorised for long-term prevention against Covid-19 infection, rather than a short-term treatment. People who could benefit from the antibody drug include cancer patients, organ transplant recipients and people taking immune-suppressing drugs for conditions like rheumatoid arthritis. Health experts estimate about 2% to 3% of the US population falls into that group. Below is a snapshot of the latest Coronavirus stories from around the world: In the UK, Boris Johnson has announced a move to further restrictions saying Omicron is spreading faster than Delta and that the known cases are almost certainly an underestimate. Johnson said: “It’s now the proportionate and the responsible thing to move to plan B.” From Monday, people are advised to work from home if they can. Denmark will again impose restrictions aimed at curbing the rapid spread of Covid including the new Omicron variant, the country’s prime minister said on Wednesday. France has reported 93,071 Coronavirus deaths in hospital, up by 129. It reported that 2,426 people were in intensive care units for Covid, up by 75 on the previous day’s figures. Governments should urgently reassess their national responses to Covid-19 and accelerate their vaccination programmes to slow the spread of the Omicron variant, WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said. The World Health Organsation’s chief scientist said it was too soon to say whether a reduction in neutralising antibodies found in Pfizer’s vaccine against the Omicron variant meant the jab was less effective. Slovakia will on Friday reopen non-essential shops and some services for those vaccinated against Covid-19 while at the same time extending a lockdown for others and closing some schools, health minister Vladimir Lengvarsky said. South Africa has approved Pfizer’s coronavirus booster shots for over-18s, as the Omicron variant dominates rising new infections.The South African Health Products Authority said in a statement that it was authorising a third vaccine dose “in individuals aged 18 years and older, to be administered at least six months after the second dose”. Italy has reported 17,959 Coronavirus cases, up from 15,756 on Tuesday.Elsewhere, Bolivia, Peru and Colombia continue to see an increase in cases, while Ecuador, Chile and Argentina saw a drop. UK figures show 51,342 new people had a confirmed positive test result reported on 8 December 2021.Between 2 and 8 December, 339,861 people had a confirmed positive test result, an increase of 11.3% compared to the previous week. BioNTech and Pfizer said on Wednesday a three-shot course of their Covid-19 vaccine was able to neutralise the new Omicron variant in a laboratory test and they could deliver an Omicron-based vaccine in March 2022 if needed. • This post was amended on 9 December 2021 to clarify the guidance on working from home. In the UK, Boris Johnson has announced a move to further restrictions saying Omicron is spreading faster than Delta and that the known cases are almost certainly an underestimate. Johnson says: “It’s now the proportionate and the responsible thing to move to plan B.” From Monday, people are advised to work from home if they can. Additionally, from this Frida the legal requirement to wear face masks in public indoor venues will be extended to include theatres and cinemas. Johnson said: “[We] will also make the NHS COVID pass mandatory for entry into nightclubs and venues where large crowds gather, including unseated indoor venues with more than 500 people, and seated outdoor venues with more than 4000 people and any venue with more than 10,000 people.” • This post was amended on 9 December 2021 to clarify the guidance on working from home. France’s Ile-de-France region on Wednesday said that all hospitals are activating an emergency plan due to the strained Covid-19 situation. The plan includes stepping up the number of intensive care unit beds and, if necessary, reschedule treatments to free up capacities. With more than 12 million people, the Ile-de-France - with the capital Paris at its centre - is France’s biggest region. Denmark will again impose restrictions aimed at curbing the rapid spread of Covid including the new Omicron variant, the country’s prime minister said on Wednesday. France has reported 93,071 Coronavirus deaths in hospital, up by 129. It reported that 2,426 people were in intensive care units for Covid, up by 75 on the previous day’s figures. Elsewhere, South Africa reported nearly 20,000 new cases of the virus on Wednesday, a record since the Omicron variant emerged. Interesting explainer on the new Covid rules that could be imminent in England. The World Health Organsation’s chief scientist said it was too soon to say whether a reduction in neutralising antibodies found in Pfizer’s vaccine against the Omicron variant meant the jab was less effective. “I think it is premature to conclude that this reduction in neutralising activity would result in a significant reduction in vaccine effectiveness. We do not know that,” Soumya Swaminathan told a media briefing, adding a coordinated research effort was needed to avoid jumping to conclusions. Slovakia will on Friday reopen non-essential shops and some services for those vaccinated against Covid-19 while at the same time extending a lockdown for others and closing some schools, health minister Vladimir Lengvarsky said. The central European country of 5.5 million people has struggled with one of the world’s worst coronavirus waves in the past few weeks, and shut shops and services for all people for two weeks ending 9 December. Lengvarsky had sought to extend the general lockdown until 26 December, and to ease it for the vaccinated from 17 December. But the government, seeking to raise the appeal of vaccinations in one of Europe’s least inoculated countries, opted to ease rules now for those who received the shots while extending them until 9 January for the rest. South Africa’s economy has rebounded after Covid, the IMF said while predicting slower growth than the government’s forecast with a “lackluster” mid-term outlook. While the country’s finance ministry predicts the economy will grow by 5.1% this year, the International Monetary Fund said it expects growth to be 4.6%. “The recovery was also supported by external factors, such as favourable commodity prices and benign financial conditions, which are likely temporary,” the IMF said. South Africa’s economy contracted 6.4% last year, when a strict lockdown brought most economic activity to a standstill in the continent’s most industrialised country. Rolling power cuts forced by ageing and poorly designed power plants have added to the economic woes. Austria has cancelled its famous Vienna Opera Ball for the second year running over the coronavirus pandemic, the government said. Keeping the February 24, 2022 date would have sent “the wrong signal” as the country is only to start emerging from a partial lockdown this Sunday, state secretary for culture Andrea Mayer said. “The Opera Ball is typically the kind of event at which social distancing is impossible,” she told the Austrian news agency APA. The ball, a major event in Austria’s cultural calendar attended by the country’s political and economic elites as well as foreign celebrities, was also cancelled last year over the Covid-19 pandemic. South Africa has approved Pfizer’s coronavirus booster shots for over-18s, as the Omicron variant dominates rising new infections. The South African Health Products Authority said in a statement that it was authorising a third vaccine dose “in individuals aged 18 years and older, to be administered at least six months after the second dose”. Severely immuno-compromised children aged between 12 and 17 years can be given a third shot at least 28 days after their second dose, it added. The statement came hours after BioNTech and Pfizer announced that two doses of their vaccine may not be enough to protect against the highly-mutating Omicron variant which is causing global concern that it can transmit faster than previous strains. In preliminary results released on Wednesday, the pharmaceutical companies stressed their jab “is still effective in preventing Covid-19, also against Omicron” after a third shot. Preliminary results from a small study in South Africa suggested there was up to a 40-fold drop in the ability of the antibodies from the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine to neutralise Omicron, compared to the earlier Beta variant of coronavirus. With a cumulative tally of 3,051,222 detected infections and 90,002 deaths, Covid has hit South Africa harder than any other country on the continent. The Omicron variant of Covid has been detected so far in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico and the United States, according to the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO). It said Covid infections were increasing in Canada and Mexico’s Baja California. Italy has reported 17,959 Coronavirus cases, up from 15,756 on Tuesday. Elsewhere, Bolivia, Peru and Colombia contrinue to see an increase in cases, while Ecuador, Chile and Argentina saw a drop. UK figures show 51,342 new people had a confirmed positive test result reported on 8 December 2021. Between 2 and 8 December, 339,861 people had a confirmed positive test result, an increase of 11.3% compared to the previous week. There were 161 deaths within 28 days of a positive test for coronavirus. Governments should urgently reassess their national responses to Covid-19 and accelerate their vaccination programmes to slow the spread of the Omicron variant, WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said. The global spread of the variant suggests it could have a major impact on the pandemic, and the time to contain it is now, before more Omicron patients are hospitalised, he told a news briefing. “We call on all countries to increase surveillance, testing and sequencing,” he said. “... Any complacency now will cost lives.” A bereaved relative of two Covid victims has called into question the ability of the UK prime minister Boris Johnson to continue to lead his nation through the pandemic after the allegations his staff breached rules designed to stop the spread of Covid. Jane Roche, whose father Vince Pettitt and older sister Jocelyn Pettitt died within a week of each other in April last year, spoke after the prime minister responded to her case being raised in Parliament by urging her to get herself a booster jab. Her MP Jack Dromey had said she was “devastated and appalled” at the allegations a party had taken place in Downing Street while the rest of the country was following the prime minister’s instructions to lock down. Johnson apologised and replied: “I urge her and everybody else to get their booster jab and look after themselves.” Roche subsequently told the PA news agency: I’m not happy with the heartbreak he has already caused. Telling people to go and get their booster jabs is a kick in the teeth. I feel he is constantly letting us down ... I have looked after myself, and so have thousands of others. We don’t need him telling us what to do. It’s insensitive – very insensitive, but then I’m used to him making wrong decisions. We reported earlier that BioNTech and Pfizer said a three-shot course of their vaccine was able to neutralise the new Omicron variant in a laboratory test. Now the former company’s chief executive has told reporters the interval between the second and third doses can be reduced to at least three months to enable better protection in the crucial winter season. Ugur Sahin said new data would prompt a discussion about bringing the third shot of its currently available vaccine forward. We believe this is the right way to go. It is very clear that our vaccine for the Omicron variant should be a three-dose vaccine. There have also been four additional cases of the Omicron variant in Wales, the UKHSA said, and the first three cases reported in Northern Ireland. Across the UK in total, there have been 131 additional cases, bringing the total number of confirmed Omicron cases in the UK to 568, the agency said. In the UK, a further 115 cases of the Omicron variant have been reported across England, the UK Health Security Agency said. It brings the total number of confirmed Omicron cases in England to 448, the agency said. US stock index futures edged higher after Pfizer and BioNTech said a three-shot course of their Covid-19 vaccine was shown to have a neutralising effect against the new Omicron coronavirus variant in a laboratory test. Shares of Pfizer rose 1.0% in premarket trading. The drugmakers added that, if needed, they can deliver an Omicron-based vaccine in March 2022. “This is really the first positive news in terms of the potential effectiveness of existing vaccines,” said Rick Meckler, partner at Cherry Lane Investments in New Vernon, New Jersey. “Anything that suggests we’re not headed for a period of a return to the problems we had earlier this year is a positive for most stocks.” Travel stocks recouped earlier declines, with Norwegian Cruise Line and Alaska Air Group rising 2.6% and 1.9%, respectively. Futures tracking US stock indexes had pared gains earlier in the day after reports said Britain could implement tougher Covid measures, including advice to work from home, as early as Thursday in a bid to slow the spread of the Omicron variant. In the UK, the prime minister’s office at Downing Street would not be drawn on whether plan B measures – stricter rules to deal with the Omicron variant – were due to be put in place. An official spokesman said Johnson had taken part in a “standard meeting” on Wednesday where he was presented with the latest data on coronavirus. He said: “We would set up any changes should they be required in the normal way.” Asked whether people should go into work on Thursday, he added: “The restrictions are as set out, there are no restrictions on that, and as we have throughout we will update should any changes be necessary.” Britain has urged private Covid test firms to stop exploiting travellers, after a former competitions chief said the market was a “rip-off jungle”. “We’ve been clear it is unacceptable for any private testing company to take advantage of holidaymakers,” the Department of Health and Social Care said in a statement. “The government has taken action to drive down the cost of tests for international travel.” The call came one day after Britain rolled out new travel curbs to try and prevent transmission of the Omicron variant. The price of private Covid testing has fallen considerably this year in the face of pressure from the government and the travel industry. However, Lord Andrew Tyrie, former chairman of the Competition and Markets Authority, labelled the market a “rip-off jungle”. Tyrie told the BBC on Wednesday that “misleading online advertisements, overpricing (and) unacceptably poor service … are still widespread” in the market. “To allow this to continue over the peak Christmas period would be scandalous,” he warned. The latest stories around Coronavirus from around the world: • BioNTech and Pfizer said on Wednesday a three-shot course of their Covid-19 vaccine was able to neutralise the new Omicron variant in a laboratory test and they could deliver an Omicron-based vaccine in March 2022 if needed. In the first official statement from vaccine manufacturers on the likely efficacy of their shot against Omicron, BioNTech and Pfizer said two vaccine doses resulted in significantly lower neutralising antibodies, but that a third dose of their vaccine increased the neutralising antibodies by a factor of 25. • The Omicron variant has been reported in 57 nations and the number of patients needing hospitalisation is likely to rise as it spreads, the World Health Organization said on Wednesday. The WHO, in its weekly epidemiological report, said more data was needed to assess the severity of disease caused by the Omicron variant and whether its mutations might reduce protection from vaccine-derived immunity. • Germany records highest daily Covid deaths since February Germany recorded the highest number of deaths from Covid-19 since February on Wednesday as it battled to stop a fourth wave of the pandemic. • A total of 69,601 new infections were reported, 2,415 more than the same time a week ago, and another 527 people died – the highest number since 12 February – to bring the total to 104,047, the Robert Koch Institute for disease control said. • South Korea will consider expanding home treatment of coronavirus patients, a health official said, as both new daily infections and severe cases hit record highs, putting hospital capacity under strain. Infections in the country have skyrocketed after the government began to ease restrictions under a so-called “living with Covid-19” scheme in November. • The EU expects European plants to produce 3.6bn shots in 2022 Vaccine plants in the European Union are expected to produce 3.6bn Covid-19 shots next year, out of a global output of more than 20bn, two senior EU officials said. • Nigeria’s health minister said some Covid-19 doses donated by rich western countries had a shelf life that left only weeks to administer the shots. BioNTech and Pfizer said on Wednesday a three-shot course of their Covid-19 vaccine was able to neutralise the new Omicron variant in a laboratory test and they could deliver an Omicron-based vaccine in March 2022 if needed. In the first official statement from vaccine manufacturers on the likely efficacy of their shot against Omicron, BioNTech and Pfizer said that two vaccine doses resulted in significantly lower neutralising antibodies but that a third dose of their vaccine increased the neutralising antibodies by a factor of 25. Blood obtained from people that had their third booster shot a month ago neutralised the Omicron variant about as effectively as blood after two doses fought off the original virus first identified in China. “Ensuring as many people as possible are fully vaccinated with the first two dose series and a booster remains the best course of action to prevent the spread of Covid-19,” Pfizer boss Albert Bourla said in the statement. Though the necessity remains unclear, the companies said they would continue their effort to bring an Omicron-specific Covid-19 vaccine to market, which they kick-started when the new lineage first raised global concern among scientists on 15 November. In the UK, Boris Johnson said that the Omicron Covid-19 variant was spreading much faster than other mutations. During prime ministers questions, he was asked by the Labour leader, Kier Starmer, about reports of a Christmas party at No 10 during last year’s lockdown. He replied that the focus should be on the spread of the concerning new Covid variant, Omicron, which he said was infecting people at a “much faster” rate than previous iterations of the virus. Countries considering introducing vaccine mandates in the fight against Covid-19 must ensure they respect human rights, the UN rights chief said, stressing that forced vaccination was never acceptable. Speaking to a Human Rights Council seminar via video message, Michelle Bachelet warned there were significant rights considerations that needed to be taken into account before making vaccination compulsory. Any “vaccine mandates must comply with the principles of legality, necessity, proportionality and non-discrimination”, she said, according to a transcript. “In no circumstances should people be forcibly administered a vaccine.” The first person in the world to be given a fully-tested Covid-19 vaccine, 91-year-old Briton Margaret Keenan, urged people on Wednesday to get vaccinated, one year on from her shot. Keenan described receiving the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine on 8 December 2020 as the “best thing that has ever happened”. “It was wonderful. I cannot believe it now, what happened at the time... I’m so happy I got the jab,” Keenan, known to friends as Maggie, said in a broadcast clip to mark the anniversary. “I encourage everyone to have it.” Prime minister Boris Johnson has highlighted Britain’s early success in rolling out Covid vaccines and said it is why he was able to reopen England’s economy in July. He is now urging officials to scale up the country’s ongoing booster programme to a similar level as the initial rollout in light of concern over the new Omicron variant, which has also seen him reintroduce some mask mandates and travel restrictions. In the UK, a new set of coronavirus restrictions including orders to work from home and the introduction of vaccine passports is being considered to deal with rising cases and the spread of the Omicron variant. Downing Street sources insisted “no decisions have been made” but there is widespread speculation that further measures could be imminent. A prominent member of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) warned that a full UK-wide lockdown to deal with the threat of the Omicron variant cannot be ruled out, although the current threat posed by the strain remains unclear. Any move to impose fresh restrictions would be viewed with suspicion in Westminster at a time when Johnson is under pressure over allegations No 10 staff breached lockdown rules by holding a Christmas party last December. The main political Covid story of the day in the UK continues to be the fallout from the allegations that Downing Street staff held a Christmas party last year, contrary to the Covid regulations at the time. A series of senior ministers spent a week strenuously denying it took place, and then last night a video emerged which appeared to show Downing Street staff a couple of days after the party laughing and joking about it. I should add that in the last few minutes there has been a lot of chatter from political journalists that an announcement on imposing further Covid restrictions in England in the run-up to this Christmas is being mooted for today or tomorrow. Andrew Sparrow has our live coverage of the politics side of that over on our UK blog. On this live blog, I’m just about to be replaced by my colleague Sarah Marsh. She will be bringing you the latest Covid developments around the world, plus any of the non-political Covid lines from the UK, around the Omicron variant and booster jab programme and so forth. Here’s what we’ve been reporting so far today: It is the first anniversary of the first vaccination against Covid, and it has been announced that the booster jab programme in England. Every adult aged 40 and over and all those in high-risk groups will be able to arrange their Covid booster jab to take place three months after their second dose. However, amid the Christmas party scandal, both health secretary Sajid Javid and vaccines minister Maggie Throup pulled all their media appearances. Northern Ireland’s chief medical officer has said he expects to see a “rapid increase” in cases of the Covid-19 Omicron variant before Christmas. The former chairman of the UK competition regulator has condemned the market for PCR tests for travellers, describing it as a “rip-off jungle”. Germany has recorded its highest number of deaths from Covid-19 since February. However, the country’s seven-day incidence rate of cases per 100,000 people continued to fall, declining to 427 from 432 on Tuesday. The Philippines will ban travellers coming from France to prevent the spread of the Omicron variant. Japan has reported its fourth case of the Omicron coronavirus variant. South Korean authorities are urging people to get vaccinated as case rise in the east Asian nation generally regarded as having dealth with the pandemic well. Daily cases exceeded 7,000 for the first time on Tuesday, the government reported on Wednesday, heaping pressure on hospitals. Serum Institute of India, the world’s biggest vaccine maker, says it will halve the output of the AstraZeneca Covid-19 shot from next week as it had no fresh orders from the government. Leading scientists in the World Health Organization and the US have said the Omicron variant appears to be no worse than other coronavirus strains – but have warned that more research is needed to judge its severity. WHO’s emergencies director Michael Ryan said that while it is likely more transmissible than previous variants, Omicron is also “highly unlikely” to completely evade vaccine protections. Virologist Sandra Ciesek of the University hospital Frankfurt, on the other hand, has published data that appears to show a weakened immune response from vaccinated blood cells when faced with the Omicron variant. The study has not been peer-reviewed or formally published. In Australia, prime minister Scott Morrison has urged Gerard Rennick to listen to medical experts after the Liberal senator labelled the approval of the Pfizer vaccine for children aged five to 11 “completely irresponsible”. A quick snap from Reuters here, that the Philippines will ban travellers coming from France to prevent the spread of the Omicron variant, the presidential office said. The ban, which applies to everyone who has been in France in the past 14 days, runs from 10-15 December. This adds to an earlier ban on travellers from South Africa and 13 other countries to prevent Omicron, which has yet to be detected in the Philippines. I am going to caveat this as ever by saying that most experts agree that it is too early to tell what impact the Omicron variant will have on vaccination efforts. However, Reuters is carrying a somewhat bleak analysis that has emerged from virologist Sandra Ciesek of the University hospital Frankfurt. Stressing that she has posted only selected findings and a paper hasn’t been presented yet, she has said exposing the blood of vaccinated individuals to different virus variants, she found that the ability to mount an antibody response to Omicron in people who had three shots of BioNTech/Pfizer was up to 37 times lower than the response to Delta. An antibody response to Omicron half a year after a two-shot regimen of Pfizer/BioNTech, Moderna or a mixed course of AstraZeneca/BioNTech was not even measurable, Ciesek added. “The set of data underscores that it makes sense to develop a vaccine that is adapted to Omicron,” Chiesek tweeted, adding that no conclusion could be drawn about protection against severe disease. Japan has reported its fourth case of the Omicron coronavirus variant, TV Asahi said on Wednesday. The fresh case was a man in his 50s who had stayed in Nigeria, the network reported. Reuters reminds us that the Japanese government has enforced tighter border controls against the Omicron variant. Northern Ireland’s chief medical officer has said he expects to see a “rapid increase” in cases of the Covid-19 Omicron variant before Christmas. Sir Michael McBride was speaking after the first three cases of the Omicron variant detected in Northern Ireland were confirmed on Tuesday evening. He said all three confirmed cases are linked to travel and there is not thought to be community transmission of the variant yet. However, PA Media reports Sir Michael said there are likely to be more cases than currently identified. He said measures are being taken to try to delay community transmission of the variant, but that is is “absolutely inevitable”. “I think it is absolutely the case that we have more cases in Northern Ireland at present than we have currently detected given the fact that we have community transmission in other parts of these islands, given the freedom of movement of people in these islands which is really important for so many reasons,” he told the BBC’s Stephen Nolan Show. “I think what we will see is a rapid increase in the number of cases identified in the coming days in the run-up to the Christmas period. “What appears to be happening is this virus is getting established very, very quickly in communities where the Delta variant has already been established and it may be the case that in the next period of time that we see this new Omicron variant replacing the Delta variant as the dominant variant in the United Kingdom, in these islands and indeed eventually globally.” Russia’s official Covid numbers have continued their glide down since the country had an enforced week’s holiday at the beginning of November. They recorded 30,752 cases in the last 24 hours, and 1,179 deaths. Cases peaked at just over 40,000 on 6 November. Here’s an updated map showing how caseloads vary across Europe. Andrew Sparrow has launched our UK politics live blog. I expect he is going to be very busy this morning – and then there is PMQs at noon to ratchet it up. You can find that here. I will be continuing with the latest coronavirus news worldwide here, and I’ll also bring you any top Covid-related lines from the UK. I’ll leave the politics to Andrew. The former chairman of the UK competition regulator has condemned the market for PCR tests for travellers, describing it as a “rip-off jungle”. After the return of the requirement to take the tests on return from abroad, Lord Tyrie accused the government of once again allowing the companies offering PCR tests to manipulate the system by making them available at unrealistic prices. “For this policy to get into a mess once might be seen as a misfortune but for it to resurface again after all the warnings over the summer would have to be described as carelessness,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “It was a scandal waiting to happen and it’s now happened and it needs very urgent action.” Last week, the Guardian revealed that a slew of the cheapest deals on PCR tests had been removed from the government website amid concerns travellers were being misled by companies advertising the coronavirus testing service for less than £1. Read more of Mark Sweney’s report here: Covid PCR test market a ‘rip-off jungle’, says ex-chair of competition regulator If you are rushing to book your booster jab in England today, a note from my colleague Helen Pidd: The NHS put out a press release last night saying that “people aged 40 and over, along with those in high-risk groups, will be able to book in for their life-saving Covid booster jab three months after their second dose as the NHS vaccine programme is extended today”. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, was tweeting about the move this morning, encouraging people to go online today to book. Yet 40-somethings trying to book their booster have been frustrated this morning as it emerged the NHS vaccine booking service hasn’t yet got the memo. You can still only book in for an imminent third jab if your second dose was 152 days ago (five months), as per the old rules. A message on the site says: “The booking system is currently being updated.” In the UK, Robert Halfon, who is chairman of the Commons education committee, appears to be the most senior MP to have come out with a statement about the Downing Street Christmas party story. PA Media quotes him telling BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “I certainly think that those who were doing the video should apologise for the insensitivity of it when people were suffering and struggling all through that time.” He stopped short of calling for the prime minister to apologise. Halfon also said the fact that the Department for Education held a social gathering of staff last December was “pretty grim”. “I feel seriously upset about what went on in the Department for Education in my own area,” he said. “They have admitted that there was a party. I think that’s pretty grim given that children were being sent home, schools were being shut down.” “And I think that the new secretary of state, who cares deeply about these issues, should call those in and hold whoever was responsible … hold them accountable.” UK health secretary Sajid Javid has just been tweeting about the increased rollout of booster jabs in England. Alan White, the editor-in-chief of Politics Home, had a suggestion for him: In Australia, prime minister Scott Morrison has urged Gerard Rennick to listen to medical experts after the Liberal senator labelled the approval of the Pfizer vaccine for children aged five to 11 “completely irresponsible”. Rennick has experienced a meteoric rise in reach on Facebook, adding 70,000 followers in a little over a month, as he shared stories of vaccine adverse events he admits he can’t be sure are “100% accurate” and videos of anti-lockdown protests in Melbourne. Since the Therapeutic Goods Administration approved Pfizer for kids on Sunday, Rennick has lashed out over “serious concerns” about the sample size of clinical trials and again refused to vote for government legislation, this time warning he will do so until the approval is revoked. At a Covid-19 committee hearing on Tuesday senior health officials rejected Rennick’s claims vaccinations amount to “experimenting” on children and pointed to the US experience of administering 5m doses of Pfizer to children aged five to 11 as evidence it is “worthwhile, safe and effective”. Read more of Paul Karp’s report here: Scott Morrison tries to rein in Gerard Rennick after senator says Pfizer for children is ‘completely irresponsible’ Here’s my colleague Archie Bland’s review of how the British press have been covering the Downing Street Christmas party storm this morning. Well, most of them anyway. It is an ill-wind that blows no good, and there are at least some members of the Conservative party today using the government’s discomfort over the Downing Street Christmas party allegations to take the opportunity to push their agenda. Charles Walker, the MP for Broxbourne in Hertfordshire, has repeatedly railed against Covid restrictions. He told Times Radio this morning that these developments probably means the end of mandatory restrictions in England. He said: I think now that, going forward, any measures will be advisory. I think it would be very difficult to enshrine them in law and then once again ask our poor police forces to enforce them. To be very proscriptive about this now, particularly as we’ve had such a successful vaccine rollout … is much more difficult, and was always going to be much more difficult. And the events of the last 24 hours make it probably almost impossible now. Walker was the Tory MP who threatened to protest against lockdown restrictions earlier this year by carrying a pint of milk around with him at all times. Serum Institute of India (SII), the world’s biggest vaccine maker, will halve the output of the AstraZeneca Covid-19 shot from next week as it had no fresh orders from the government, its CEO Adar Poonawalla told CNBC-TV18, Reuters report “I am going to be reducing production by at least 50% to begin with, going forward on a monthly basis, until orders again pick up either in India or the world,” Poonawalla said. SII is producing 250m doses of the vaccine, which it brands Covishield. The shot accounts for nearly 90% of the 1.3bn total vaccine doses administered in India. Earlier this year, India prevented the export of vaccines in order to shore up the delivery of its own domestic vaccination programme. In the UK, Labour’s shadow foreign secretary, David Lammy, has been doing the media round – unopposed since the government have declined to send anybody to be interviewed today. He told Sky News it was “Boris Johnson’s moment to come clean, to speak the truth. And probably to apologise to the British people.” He said: He [Johnson] is the public health lead for our country in chief. If there are people sitting opposite you on the tube, or on the train, not wearing a mask, you can understand why they might say why should I bother when Boris Johnson doesn’t bother? This is important because this cost lives, this recklessness. This casualness with the truth costs lives. We’re facing a very serious mutation of the virus. We may have to have more restriction. That is why this is so serious. This business of ‘we stayed within the rules, we followed’ the guidance, we all know it’s hogwash. We all know a lie when we see one. And that appears to be what we’re facing today. Prof Neil Ferguson, from Imperial College London, has been on the airwaves in the UK this morning saying the Omicron variant was concerning but it was still unknown what its impact will be on severe disease. PA Media quotes him telling BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: Certainly case numbers of Omicron are doubling at least every three days, maybe even every two days at the moment, so it’s accelerating very fast and put that in context, it’s the same if not faster than we saw with the original strain of the virus in March of last year. So it is a concern. It’s likely to overtake Delta before Christmas at this rate, precisely when is hard to say. Prof Ferguson said the peak of this wave of infection will be in January if no measures are taken to slow it down. If you don’t do anything at the current time, it will most likely be sometime in January, But I think the key question is whether the country decides to adopt measures to either slow it down or try to stop it and that will critically depend on really the threat it poses in terms of hospitalisations. There is a rationale, just epidemiologically, to try and slow this down, to buy us more time principally to get boosters into people’s arms because we do think people who are boosted will have the best level of protection possible, but also to buy us more time to really better characterise the threat. So if you imagine a kind of plan B plus with working from home might slow it down – it wouldn’t stop it but it could slow it down, so it’s doubling rather than every two or three days, every five or six days. That doesn’t seem like a lot, but it actually is potentially a lot in terms of allowing us to characterise this virus better and boost population immunity. You can’t really do the equivalent on a live blog, but here’s my colleague Peter Walker describing how the BBC’s Today programme have handled not having a UK government minister to interview this morning. Sir Roger Gale is another Conservative MP who has been prepared to go on the airwaves today in the UK. He told Sky News that he had some details of what happened at the alleged Downing Street Christmas party from “a source”. He told them: The health service could be in trouble, and people’s lives could be at stake. This party, and I’m told by sources that food was taken in, drink was taken in, entertainment was had. And if that is so, that sounds to me pretty much like a party. This is a Barnard Castle moment potentially isn’t it? We cannot say one thing and do another. A cynic might point out that ultimately nobody was held responsible for their actions over Barnard Castle. In Scotland yesterday, the first minister Nicola Sturgeon urged people to work from home if possible until at least January over fears of the spread of the Omicron variant. Last night, news broke that a Scottish primary school is closing until next week after Covid cases thought to be Omicron variant were identified among teaching staff. St John’s Primary school in Hamilton is closing because of the impact of the variant on school staff numbers. There are some more quotes from Matthew Taylor, chief executive of the NHS Confederation, which represents NHS trusts. He said there are signs hospital admissions for Covid-19 were increasing. On the pressure currently facing the NHS, Taylor told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: The overwhelming majority of NHS leaders say that the situation is extremely difficult. I think we’re facing the hardest winter the NHS has ever had to face, and the care system as well. What we’ve got here is a combination of factors: we’ve got the impact of a decade of austerity which left the health service with a depleted workforce and with capital stock in a poor condition; you then add in Covid, and although the numbers are much less now than they were a year ago, we have still got several thousand people in hospital and unfortunately, there are signs of hospitalisation rates increasing. You’ve then got the backlog of people who didn’t get care, and over the last two years. Not just those people waiting for treatment, but people turning up in emergency departments because they’ve been dealing with an illness for many months, even years, that hasn’t been addressed. He went on to urge people to celebrate Christmas “modestly”. Asked about the Omicron variant, PA Media quote him saying: “As for the new strain, what we know is that the numbers are growing and although the relationship between the number of people who have the condition and those who end up in hospital has become increasingly attenuated, the fact is if you get an enormous number of people getting the disease, some of those people will end up in hospital and will end up in intensive care unit.” He added: “I think if you can make changes to your life, which are not huge inconveniences and reduce the risk then you should do so. We all want to have a good Christmas, but it is better, I think, to plan for a modest Christmas and we can achieve it, than to hope that things are going to be better than they are and end up having to kind of abandon your plans a few days beforehand.” It is, of course, one year since the first vaccination against Covid was given in England, and also today it has been announced that the booster jab roll-out is being expanded with every adult aged 40 and over in England, and all those in high-risk groups, able to arrange their Covid booster jab to take place three months after their second dose. You would think that the government would be out crowing about these achievements, but as we have seen health secretary Sajid Javid has pulled out of all his planned media appearances this morning, in the wake of the emergence of video footage last night showing staff at Downing Street appearing to laugh at having held a Christmas party that broke the Covid restrictions. PA have just snapped that vaccines minister Maggie Throup is also understood to have pulled out of her planned round of regional television interviews. Throup has already been widely criticised for her lack of visibility compared to her predecessor Nadhim Zahawi. CEO of University Hospitals Coventry and Warwickshire NHS Trust Prof Andy Hardy has been on Sky News. He described the situation facing the NHS in his area as “tight”. Beds are always challenge this time of year. I think to put it into context for Covid patients, my hospital has 1,200 beds, of which at the moment 35 are taken up with Covid patients. If we go back to the peak back in January, February of this year, that was in excess of 260. So there are a lot that’s available. It’s tight. It’s always tight this time of year and it’s always a matter of management on a day to day basis. But at the moment, we’re confident that we can deal with what’s coming our way. Asked about what types of patients they were seeing with Covid, Prof Hardy said: There’s a few older people, but very clearly we are starting to see an increased proportion of our Covid patients who need hospital treatment, and importantly, critical care intervention, are those who were unvaccinated. And there are a number of those who have been pregnant ladies. And of course we know that can affect both the mum and the baby. So again, it comes back to the influence of vaccination. It does make a difference. It stops people getting hospitalised. It stops people needing critical care. He was also asked what he made of information about the Omicron variant, and with the caveat that he said it was early days, he said “early signs are encouraging” about both the severity of illness and the effectiveness of vaccines. One Conservative MP who has been prepared to go on the TV has been Matt Hancock. Asked on ITV’s Good Morning Britain about whether there would be security records that might indicate who attended a Christmas party in Whitehall or Downing Street, he said: Lots of people work in the building. Lots of people come and go from the building. There isn’t a record of who comes and goes, I don’t think, but I don’t know. This isn’t what I was doing at the time. He was asked if his department – like Gavin Williamson did at the education department – had a Christmas gathering around this time. He said: Not that I’m aware of, we were working pretty hard. He was also asked if he was still health secretary, what he would be doing now. He said he would be putting all his efforts into finding out more about the Omicron variant: I’d want to make sure that we are getting a new vaccine ready for this variant, which the system can now do, we’re told, in 100 days in case the vaccine doesn’t work as effectively, and we need a fourth, which is a possibility. Matthew Taylor, chief executive of the NHS Confederation, which represents NHS trusts, said the news of the Downing Street Christmas party was a “blow to morale” among those working in the NHS. Asked whether the story matters to people running the NHS, Taylor told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “In any difficult situation we all need to feel that we’re pulling together, that we’re a part of an effort and if it feels as though people have not been playing by the rules, if it feels as though powerful people are not playing by the rules, then there is a blow to morale, it does make it harder to get people to follow the advice. So no, it really isn’t what we need at the moment.” On what the message should be to the public at the moment, PA Media quote Taylor saying: “We are saying now that masks are mandatory, but we need a really strong message we need to say: ‘The healthcare system is in an emergency situation and is going to be in that situation for several months’. “And the public need the clearest possible message, and spending a lot of time dealing with what happened last year is not helping get that message across.” ITV’s Good Morning Britain have mocked the UK govermnet’s refusal to put anybody on the airwaves this morning to answer questions about Downing Street Christmas parties by showing the empty chair in their Westminster studio and saying “We’ll take anyone”, appealing for any Conservative MP to appear. Host Adil Ray said: It’s not just Good Morning Britain. Apparently most of the broadcasters this morning are still waiting for somebody from the government. But if any Conservative MP, anybody connected to the government is watching, and you would like to take your duty and answer to those people that lost family members … we’ll take anyone. we’ll take anyone anybody.” Germany has recorded its highest number of deaths from Covid-19 since February. A total of 69,601 new infections were reported, 2,415 more than the same time a week ago, and a further 527 people died – the highest number since 12 February. However, the country’s seven-day incidence rate of cases per 100,000 people continued to fall, declining to 427 from 432 on Tuesday. Experts have questioned whether the metric means Germany has passed the peak of this wave of the pandemic or whether the figures are unreliable because some health authorities are so overwhelmed, particularly in the hardest-hit areas. Reuters notes that the country agreed last week to bar the unvaccinated from access to all but the most essential businesses such as grocery stores, pharmacies and bakeries and to ramp up its vaccination campaign. The latest Downing Street Christmas party development has been called a “bullet to the chest” of families who have lost loved ones during the pandemic. Dr Saleyha Ahsan, from the Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice, told BBC Breakfast the saga was “an example of how the government have run this from the start: One rule for them and the rest of us have to adhere to different rules.” PA Media reports that Dr Ahsan, who said she had been working in north Wales at the time of the mock press conference, said: “Numerous people around the country couldn’t spend those precious last few days, hours, minutes with loved ones. It was heartbreaking. In 14 years in the NHS I’ve never seen anything like it. “And this latest revelation is just a bullet to the chest, it really is. It just demonstrates the lack of regard for the rest of us.” Dr Ahsan said the saga showed why an independent inquiry into the handling of the pandemic was needed “now”. BBC Radio 4’s Today programme have just confirmed that they were expecting the health secretary, Sajid Javid, to appear on the programme this morning, but that now no minister is available to speak to them. While we are waiting to see if any UK government minister is prepared to be interviewed this morning, here is a reminder of the current Covid situation in the UK. Over the last seven days there have been 336,893 new coronavirus cases recorded in the UK. Cases have increased by 12.1% week-on-week. There have been 857 deaths recorded in the last week. Deaths have increased by 3% week-on-week. Hospital admissions have decreased by 0.1% week-on-week. At the latest count on the UK government’s own dashboard, there were 7,317 people in hospital in total, of whom 901 are in ventilation beds. These are the countries affected by England’s travel red list. Hello, it is Martin Belam here taking over in London from Martin Farrer on what you imagine is going to be a torrid morning for the UK government on the airwaves. However, the latest information I have is that the government hasn’t put anybody up yet for the Sky News 7am interview slot. I’m sure if someone does appear, they will be pointing to the further roll-out of booster jabs. Every adult aged 40 and over in England, and all those in high-risk groups, will be able to arrange their Covid booster jab to take place three months after their second dose as the vaccine programme widens significantly today. However, you know a story has crossed out of the “Westminster bubble” when Ant and Dec are doing skits about it on I’m A Celebrity. Here’s our timeline, from 2 December 2020 when London was moved into tier two restrictions, to 10 December when Gavin Williamson was holding a Christmas party, to 16 December when Boris Johnson urged the public to severely limit Christmas gatherings, to 18 December, the date on which a staff party is allegedly held inside Downing Street, and beyond. I’ll be bringing you all the latest on that and Covid developments from around the world. Leading scientists in the World Health Organization and the US have said the Omicron variant appears to be no worse than other coronavirus strains – but have warned that more research is needed to judge its severity. In an interview with Agence France-Presse, the WHO’s emergencies director Michael Ryan said that while it is likely more transmissible than previous variants, Omicron is also “highly unlikely” to completely evade vaccine protections. “The preliminary data doesn’t indicate that this is more severe. In fact, if anything, the direction is towards less severity,” Ryan said. Ryan also said there was no sign that Omicron could fully sidestep protections provided by existing Covid vaccines. “We have highly effective vaccines that have proved effective against all the variants so far, in terms of severe disease and hospitalisation... There’s no reason to expect that it wouldn’t be so” for Omicron, he added, pointing to initial data from South Africa, where the strain was first reported. Meanwhile, US Covid expert Dr Anthony Fauci echoed the WHO’s view, saying Omicron did not appear worse than prior strains based on early indications – and was possibly milder. The new variant is “clearly highly transmissible,” very likely more so than Delta, the current dominant global strain, Fauci said. The biggest Covid story of the day in the UK seems set to be the fallout from the discovery of a video showing Downing Street officials joking about a party allegedly held in No 10 during the height of last year’s lockdown. In the video of a practice televised press briefing filmed on 22 December, an adviser to Johnson is seen joking with Allegra Stratton, the prime minister’s then press secretary, about “a Downing Street Christmas party on Friday night”. Multiple sources have said there was a staff party inside Downing Street on that Friday, which would have contravened strict Covid regulations in place at the time. Quizzed in the leaked footage, Stratton laughingly says: “This is recorded … This fictional party was a business meeting and it was not socially distanced.” Boris Johnson is facing accusations of lying about the issue because he and his aides have repeatedly denied that the event, reportedly held for staff at No 10 in December last year, broke Covid rules or took place at all. The full story is here: It is one year since the first person in Britain was vaccinated against Covid-19 outside clinical trials, launching the biggest NHS vaccination drive in history. Since 90-year-old Margaret Keenan received the Pfizer jab in Coventry, more than 51m first doses of vaccine have been given in the UK, along with more than 46m second doses and 20m extra doses. Almost 3,000 vaccine sites have been established across the country, staffed by more than 92,000 NHS staff and over 118,000 volunteers - who have given over 1.9m hours to help protect millions of people at speed. The NHS is recruiting more staff to help with the new booster scheme – as well as volunteers to help the rollout. And here is a brief history of the vaccination development: The financial markets are in the glass-half-full camp when it comes to Omicron with indices roaring ahead in Asia after a strong showing from Wall Street in Tuesday’s session. The Nikkei in Japan is up 1.4% and the ASX200 in Sydney has closed up 1.25%. The Hang Seng is still down a touch in Hong Kong. Futures trade points to decent gains in New York again later although the outlook for the FTSE100 has slipped to flat in the last few hours. Kyle Rodda of IG Markets in Melbourne puts it well when he says “traders seem to be taking it as given that Omicron is of about as much economic significance as a head cold”. Such ebullience seems a bit premature based upon what’s only some crude data right now, along with a vague assurance from Pfizer that it’s vaccine is partially effective against the new variant. But misguided or not, it’s risk on in markets, with the move higher in equities probably supported by a healthy short-squeeze. Concerns about Omicron have prompted authorities in England to widen the vaccination scheme so that millions of over-40s and all those in high-risk groups will be able to book their booster vaccine from Wednesday. People had to wait six months after their second shot before they could receive their booster, but the NHS has reduced that to three months in order to try to get ahead of the Omicron curve. The online booking system for vaccines will be updated in the morning and details will be updated throughout the day, officials revealed on Tuesday night. Here’s the full story: The plot thickens over the Omicron “like” variant announced by health officials in Queensland on Wednesday (see this earlier post). My colleague at Guardian Australia, Cait Kelly, reports that experts are casting doubt on the claim. The new Omicron Covid sub-lineage, dubbed Omicron “like”, was identified in an overseas arrival to Queensland from South Africa. But Prof Peter Collignon, infectious disease physician and microbiologist at the Australian National University, said the new sub-lineage was not a new variant. “It is mainly at the moment an issue about the technicalities on how they are picked up,” he said. “If the genes have been deleted, and there’s another lineage where the gene hasn’t been deleted, you may not think it is Omicron when in fact it is,” he said. Full story here: Reuters has an exclusive story that up to one million Covid vaccines are estimated to have expired in Nigeria last month without being used. Governments on the continent of over one billion people have been pushing for more vaccine deliveries as inoculation rates lag richer regions, increasing the risk of new variants such as the Omicron coronavirus now spreading across South Africa. But the story, confirmed by two sources, shows the difficulty of getting the jabs into arms before they expire. In Nigeria, Africa’s most populous nation and home to more than 200 million people, fewer than 4% of adults have been fully vaccinated, according to the World Health Organization (WHO). Faced with the shifting sands of geopolitics since the pandemic began, China has changed its approach to Africa from one of debt diplomacy to vaccine diplomacy. Analysts say the shift in approach signifies Beijing’s rethink about its overall strategy on the continent at a time of Covid health emergency and great power competition. “In a way Xi’s reduced financial pledge is not surprising because we’ve already seen signs in the last couple of years,” says Lina Benabdallah of Wake Forest University in North Carolina. “China has entered a phase of greater caution with regard to Africa. After two decades of heavy state funding, it is beginning to pull the brakes.” You can read the whole story here: There were another 8,439 cases in India in the past 24 hours for a total of 34.66 millions, according to the health ministry. The famed Teatro alla Scala in Milan has opened its new season with Verdi’s Macbeth to a fully seated house, despite another wave of Covid-19 forcing other theatres across Europe to close again. Guests included Giorgio Armani and Italy’s president, Sergio Mattarella, but the the mood was more restrained than usual for the event that is considered a highlight of the European cultural calendar. Venues in Vienna, Dresden and Liepzig have been closed again because of the pandemic. “When you see so many great theaters closed, I have to say we are lucky to arrive at the premiere,” La Scala’s general manager Dominique Meyer said. Germany reported 69,601 cases of Covid-19 and 527 deaths in the past 24 hours, according to the Robert Koch Institute, taking the total cases in the country to 6,291,621. There have been 104,047 deaths. South Korean authorities are urging people to get vaccinated as case rise in the east Asian nation generally regarded as having dealth with the pandemic well. Daily cases exceeded 7,000 for the first time on Tuesday, the government reported on Wednesday, heaping pressure on hospitals. here’s the full report by our correspondent Justin McCurry. Financial markets appear to have shrugged off concerns about Omicron with stocks rallying all over the world in the past 24 hours. Shares in Asia have made a strong start to Wednesday’s session as with Japan’s Nikkei up 1.3%, the ASX200 in Sydney up 1.2%, the Korean Kospi up 0.8%, and Shanghai has risen 0.8%. The only laggard is Hong Kong, down slightly, thanks to concerns about US regulations on tech stocks. Stefan Hofer, chief investment strategist for private bank LGT in Asia Pacific, said: “Markets are very sensitive to any slight new item relating to Omicron, and the absence of bad news is being taken very positively by equity markets, though - and I’m not a scientist - it seems too early to signal an all clear. “With each new variant, we go through a period of waiting for some signal from the scientific community, which is difficult for markets, but that’s what we got yesterday.” Officials in Queensland, Australia have detected what they described as an Omicron-like variant in a person who arrived from South Africa. The state also recorded a case of the original Omicron strain in a passenger from Nigeria. The state’s health minister, Yvette D’Ath, said on Wednesday that scientists in Australia had helped to reclassify Omicron “into two lineages”. Following on, there are also a couple of reports that there may be different “types” of Omicron. Our science editor, Ian Sample, reported earlier that scientists have identified a “stealth” version of Omicron that cannot be distinguished from other variants using the PCR tests typically used to get a snapshot of cases. The stealth variant has many mutations in common with standard Omicron, but it lacks a particular genetic change that allows lab-based PCR tests to be used as a rough and ready means of flagging up probable cases. The variant is still detected as coronavirus by all the usual tests, and can be identified as the Omicron variant through genomic testing, but probable cases are not flagged up by routine PCR tests that give quicker results. Read the full report here: A lot of new information has emerged about the new Omicron variant in the past 24 hours concerning such critical issues as whether it will evade vaccines, how transmissible it is and possible new types of the strain. While the WHO says the variant will not dodge the existing vaccines (see previous post), Reuters has reported that early data from South Africa shows some evidence that the Omicron variant can partially evade protection from the Pfizer Covid-19 vaccine. Researchers found there was about a 40-fold reduction in vaccine-induced antibodies that could neutralise Omicron relative to an earlier strain. Alex Sigal, a professor at the Africa Health Research Institute, said on Twitter there was “a very large drop” in neutralization of the Omicron variant relative to an earlier strain of COVID-19. The lab tested blood from 12 people who had been vaccinated with two doses of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine, according to a manuscript posted on the website for his lab. The preliminary data in the manuscript has not yet been peer reviewed. Blood from five out of six people who had been vaccinated as well as previously infected with COVID-19 still neutralized the Omicron variant, the manuscript said. “These results are better than I expected. The more antibodies you got, the more chance you’ll be protected from Omicron,” Sigal said on Twitter. He said the lab had not tested the variant against blood from people who had received a booster dose, because they are not available in South Africa yet. A leading World Health Organization official says that Omicron does not appear to cause more severe disease than previous Covid variants, and is “highly unlikely” to fully dodge vaccine protections. WHO emergencies director Michael Ryan said that while a lot remained to be learned about the new, heavily mutated variant of Covid-19, preliminary data indicated it did not make people sicker than Delta and other strains. “The preliminary data doesn’t indicate that this is more severe. In fact, if anything, the direction is towards less severity,” Ryan said in an interview with Agence France-Presse, insisting though that more research was needed. “It’s very early days, we have to be very careful how we interpret that signal.” At the same time, he said there was no sign that Omicron could fully sidestep protections provided by existing Covid vaccines. “We have highly effective vaccines that have proved effective against all the variants so far, in terms of severe disease and hospitalisation,” the 56-year-old epidemiologist and former trauma surgeon said. “There’s no reason to expect that it wouldn’t be so” for Omicron, he said, pointing to early data from South Africa where the variant was first detected that “suggest the vaccine at least is holding up in protection terms”. The Romanian government will ease some Covid restrictions on Wednesday, including scrapping a night curfew and an obligation to wear face masks outdoors ahead of winter holidays. Romania reported 1,421 new daily cases and 107 deaths on Tuesday, far off record highs reported in October and early November during its deadliest wave of the pandemic. Shops and restaurants will be able close at 10pm from Wednesday night., one hour later than at present. Entry to most non-essential public venues will be allowed not only for those who have been vaccinated or who have recovered from the virus, but also for those who can present a negative COVID-19 test. Wearing facemasks will continue to be mandatory in public transport and indoor public spaces, but will no longer be required outside except in crowded areas such as markets. Romania has the second-lowest vaccination rate in the EU, with only 39% of the population having taken it up. South Korea’s government is scrambling to bolster the country’s health system amid a surge in Covid cases that has seen the daily tally rise past 7,000 for the time since the pandemic began almost two years ago. The Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency (KDCA) reported 7,175 new coronavirus cases and 63 deaths for Tuesday, and hospitals are treating a record 840 critical and serious cases. The prime minister, Kim Boo-kyum, said on Wednesday that hospital capacity was under strain and that he was mobilising additional personnel to oversee coronavirus patients treating themselves at home, and to improve the emergency transfer system to hospitals for those who develop severe symptoms. Private clinics will also treat COVID-19 patients in addition to large hospitals. Infections in South Korea have skyrocketed this month after the government began to ease restrictions under a so-called “living with COVID-19 scheme in November. Kim urged the elderly to get booster shots as over 35% of infections were found in people aged 60 and above, who account for 84% of severe cases. He also urged adolescents to get vaccinated. South Korea has so far confirmed 38 cases of the Omicron variant. With 80% of cases in greater Seoul, authorities have struggled to secure enough beds for hospitalised patients in the area. Morning/afternoon/evening wherever you are, and welcome to the new blog covering the latest developments in the pandemic across the world: Here is a roundup of what’s been happening so far: Daily cases in South Korea have surpassed 7,000 for the first time since the start of the pandemic, the prime minister Kim Boo-kyum said on Wednesday morning, putting hospital capacity under strain as deaths and severe cases rise. Scientists have identified a “stealth” version of Omicron variant which cannot be detected with the routine tests that public health officials are using to track its spread around the world. The stealth variant has many mutations in common with standard Omicron, but researchers say it is genetically distinct and so may well behave differently. A new Omicron variant, known as Omicron “like”, has been identified in an overseas arrival to Queensland from South Africa, the health minister of the Australian state said on Wednesday morning. UK prime minister Boris Johnson is facing accusations of lying after senior No 10 officials were filmed joking about a staff Christmas party last year that would have contravened strict Covid regulations in place at the time. Johnson and his aides have repeatedly denied that the event broke Covid rules or took place at all. The Omicron variant can partially evade protection from the Pfizer Covid-19 vaccine, according to early data from South Africa. Researchers found there was about a 40-fold reduction in vaccine-induced antibodies that could neutralise Omicron relative to an earlier strain. The African Union has called for an urgent end to travel restrictions imposed on some of its member states, arguing that the measures effectively penalise governments for timely data sharing in line with international health regulations. US infectious disease expert Anthony Fauci said preliminary evidence indicates that the Omicron variant likely has a higher degree of transmissibility but causes less severe illness, warning it will take a few weeks to reach any definitive conclusions. Millions of people in England will be able to book their Covid booster vaccine on Wednesday as the NHS cuts the qualifying time from six months after a second dose to three. No more than 10 visitors will be allowed in private homes in Norway, and people must keep a distance of at least one metre from anyone outside of their household in new restrictions introduced by the government today. Swedes will face new measures to curb rising Covid infections from Wednesday, including renewed social distancing, home-working and the use of face masks on public transport. EU health agencies say vaccines should be mixed and matched for both initial courses and booster doses. Evidence suggests that the combination of viral vector vaccines and mRNA vaccines produces good levels of antibodies against the coronavirus, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) and the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) said in a joint statement.Joe Biden signed an executive order calling for the federal government to be carbon-neutral by 2050. “As the single largest land owner, energy consumer, and employer in the nation, the federal government can catalyze private sector investment and expand the economy and American industry by transforming how we build, buy, and manage electricity, vehicles, buildings, and other operations to be clean and sustainable,” the order says. The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection indicated it will move forward with plans to hold Mark Meadows in criminal contempt. The news comes one day after Meadows, the former chief of staff to Donald Trump, announced he would no longer cooperate with investigators out of deference to the former president’s claims of executive privilege over certain records. Meadows is suing Nancy Pelosi and members of the committee over subpoenas issued. Lab tests indicate three doses of the Pfizer coronavirus vaccine provide effective protection against the Omicron variant. In response to the news, Biden encouraged all eligible Americans to get their vaccine booster shot as quickly as possible. “This reinforces what my medical advisors have been emphasizing: that boosters give you the highest protection yet,” the president said. The House passed a $768bn defense bill last night, in a vote of 363-70. The bill passed despite criticism from progressive lawmakers, who had hoped to curb military spending now that Democrats control both chambers of Congress and the White House. The House overwhelmingly approved legislation to sanction China for goods produced by the forced labor of Muslim Uyghurs. The vote was 428-1 on the Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act, which bans imports of goods produced in internment camps. The Senate has already approved a similar measure. – Joan E Greve and Maanvi Singh The House has overwhelmingly approved legislation to sanction China for goods produced by the forced labor of Muslim Uyghurs. The vote was 428-1 on the Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act, which bans imports of goods produced in internment camps. “This is not a partisan issue,” said Democrat Jim McGovern of Massachusetts. “It is a human rights issue.” The Senate has already passed a similar measure. The sanctions follow a diplomatic boycott by the White House of the Winter Olympic Games in Beijing over China’s human rights record. The bill would task the Department of Homeland Security to create a list of entities that work with the Chinese government in its effort to repress members of the Uyghur minority and ban those goods. The bill also asks officials to assume all goods made in the Xinjiang province, where Uyghurs are being subjected to forced labor, are banned unless the commissioner of the US Customs and Border Protection specifically allows an exception. Liz Cheney, the Republican vice-chair of the House select committee investigating the insurrection, told reporters that she and her fellow committee members “look forward to litigating” Meadows’ lawsuit. Here’s more background on Mark Meadows, what the select committee is seeking from him, and his history of non-cooperation, from my colleague Joan E Greve: Mark Meadows has sued the House speaker Nancy Pelosi and members of the select committee investigating the 6 January insurrection. The former White House chief of staff is facing contempt proceedings after refusing to cooperate with the committee, which has sought information about Donald Trump’s role in instigating the capitol riot. The lawsuit asks the court to toss out the committee’s subpoenas. “Mr Meadows, a witness, has been put in the untenable position of choosing between conflicting privilege claims,” the suit says. Trump has also filed his own lawsuit against the committee. The former president and his associates have claimed executive privilege shields confidential communications between them – but Joe Biden’s administration has waived the right to executive privilege in this case. The House has already voted to hold another Trump associate, Steve Bannon, in contempt for refusing to cooperate. The committee has also recommended holding Jeffrey Clark, a former justice department lawyer, in contempt. In an upcoming Masterclass episode, Hillary Clinton shares what she would have said in her 2016 presidential victory speech, had she won the election. In an excerpt of the Masterclass released by NBC’s Today, Clinton begins her speech: “My fellow Americans, today you’ve sent a message to the whole world. Our values endure, our democracy stands strong and our motto remains ‘E pluribus unum’. Out of many, one. We will not be defined only by our differences. We will not be an us vs them country. The American dream is big enough for everyone.” “Fundamentally, this election challenged us to decide what it means to be an American in the 21st century,” she says. The former presidential candidate and secretary of state is teaching a Masterclass on “the power of resilience”. In introducing her speech, Clinton says: “I’ve never shared this with anybody. I’ve never read it out loud. But it helps to encapsulate who I am, what I believe in and what my hopes were for the kind of country that I want for my grandchildren, and that I want for the world.” Gloria Oladipo reports: Progressive congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez has spoken out about the hypocrisy of gun-wielding Christmas card photos, an emerging trend among several Republic lawmakers who have posted holiday photos showing themselves and their family holding military-style rifles. In a tweet on Wednesday, Ocasio-Cortez called out far-right congresswoman Lauren Boebert of Colorado, who had posted a picture of her family, including her small children, holding rifles in front of a Christmas tree. “Tell me again where Christ said ‘use the commemoration of my birth to flex violent weapons for personal political gain’?” said Ocasio-Cortez, recalling back in 2015 when conservatives declared that there was a “war on Christmas”, with companies like Starbucks facing threats of boycott. “lol @ all the years Republicans spent on cultural hysteria of society ‘erasing Christmas and it’s meaning’ when they’re doing that fine all on their own.” In addition to Boebert’s gun-themed Christmas photo, Kentucky congressman Thomas Massie recently posted a picture of his family holding rifles while posing in front of a Christmas tree, with the caption: “Merry Christmas! PS: Santa, please bring ammo.” The photo was posted only days after a school shooting in Oxford, Michigan, located an hour outside of the state’s capitol, where four students died and seven people were injured. Read more: The attorney general of California said his office will investigate the police department of Torrance, California following a Los Angeles Times investigation revealing that officers exchanged racist text messages. The investigation is “part of an effort to identify and correct potential systemic failures in the department’s policies and practices,” the attorney general Rob Bonta’s office said. “The review comes amidst deeply concerning allegations of excessive force, racist text messages, and other discriminatory misconduct, and follows a request for assistance by the Torrance Chief of Police.” The Times reported that police officers had exchanged racist and anti-Semitic messages: The officers’ comments spared no color or creed: They joked about “gassing” Jewish people, assaulting members of the LGBTQ community, using violence against suspects and lying during an investigation into a police shooting, according to district attorney’s office records reviewed by The Times. Frequently, hateful comments were targeted at Black people. Officers called Black men “savages,”and several variations of the N-word, according to documents reviewed by The Times. The officers also shared instructions on how to tie a noose and a picture of a stuffed animal being lynched inside Torrance’s police headquarters, according to the documents. The Times reported that the 15 officers on administrative leave over their involment in such exchanges were also involved in “least seven serious or fatal uses of force against Black or Latino men since 2013”. “Police departments are on the front lines of that fight every day as they work to protect the people of our state,” Bonta said in a statement. “However, where there is evidence of potentially pervasive bias or discrimination, it can undermine the trust that is critical for public safety and our justice system.” The head of Instagram began testimony before US lawmakers on Wednesday afternoon about protecting children online, in the latest congressional hearing scrutinizing the social media platform’s impact on young users. Adam Mosseri defended the platform and called for the creation of an industry body to determine best practices to help keep young people safe online. Mosseri said in written testimony before the Senate commerce consumer protection panel the industry body should address “how to verify age, how to design age-appropriate experiences, and how to build parental controls”. He also suggested Instagram may abandon its engagement-based algorithm and release a chronological timeline in the first quarter of 2022, a departure from its current controversial system. “We all want teens to be safe online,” Mosseri said in opening statements. “The internet isn’t going away, and I believe there’s important work that we can do together – industry and policymakers - to raise the standards across the internet to better serve and protect young people.” Meta Platforms (formerly Facebook), have been facing global criticism over the ways their services affect the mental health, body image and online safety of younger users. In opening statements, Senator Richard Blumenthal promised to be “ruthless” in the hearing, saying “the time for self policing and self regulation is over”. “Self policing depends on trust, and the trust is gone,” he said. “The magnitude of these problems requires both and broad solutions and accountability which has been lacking so far.” That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Maanvi Singh, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden signed an executive order calling for the federal government to be carbon-neutral by 2050. “As the single largest land owner, energy consumer, and employer in the nation, the federal government can catalyze private sector investment and expand the economy and American industry by transforming how we build, buy, and manage electricity, vehicles, buildings, and other operations to be clean and sustainable,” the order says. The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection indicated it will move forward with plans to hold Mark Meadows in criminal contempt. The news comes one day after Meadows, the former chief of staff to Donald Trump, announced he would no longer cooperate with investigators out of deference to the former president’s claims of executive privilege over certain records. Lab tests indicate three doses of the Pfizer coronavirus vaccine provide effective protection against the Omicron variant. In response to the news, Biden encouraged all eligible Americans to get their vaccine booster shot as quickly as possible. “This reinforces what my medical advisors have been emphasizing: that boosters give you the highest protection yet,” the president said. The House passed a $768bn defense bill last night, in a vote of 363-70. The bill passed despite criticism from progressive lawmakers, who had hoped to curb military spending now that Democrats control both chambers of Congress and the White House. Maanvi will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Outlining his economic vision for the country, Joe Biden differentiated himself from progressive Senator Bernie Sanders, who identifies as a democratic socialist. “I’m a capitalist,” Biden said. “I’m a good friend of Bernie’s, but we disagree. I’m not a socialist. I’m a capitalist. You should be able to make a million or a hundred million bucks, if you can. But pay your fair share.” The president’s speech in Kansas City has now concluded, and he will soon start his trip back to Washington. Joe Biden once again poked fun at his predecessor, Donald Trump, who repeatedly declared “infrastructure week” without ever signing any actual infrastructure bill. “I don’t think I could take one more phrase that it’s going to be infrastructure week,” Biden said as he touted the $1.2tn bill he signed last month. The president added, “Guess what? It’s gonna be infrastructure decade now, man.” Joe Biden is now delivering remarks in Kansas City, Missouri, on how the bipartisan infrastructure law will benefit the state’s residents through new jobs and improved roads and bridges. But before beginning his infrastructure speech, Biden took a moment to remember Bob Dole, the former Republican senator and presidential nominee who died on Sunday. The president noted that Dole grew up just a few hours away from the site of his speech today, in the small town of Russell, Kansas. “For those like me who had the honor of calling him a friend, Bob Dole was an American giant, a man of extraordinary courage – both physical and moral courage,” Biden said. “We didn’t agree on everything, but I always admired and respected him and his willingness to work with anyone, in any party when it mattered most. And our nation owes Bob Dole a debt of gratitude for the remarkable service and a life well lived.” John Bowman, managing director of government affairs at the Natural Resources Defense Council, said Joe Biden’s new executive order “aligns the government’s enormous buying power with the nation’s climate goals”. “Shifting to clean energy – in federal buildings, vehicles and power purchases – and using clean building materials for infrastructure projects will speed the transition to a low-carbon economy,” Bowman said in a statement. “It will help scale up efficiency and renewable power. And it twins with the climate investments embodied in the Build Back Better Act to set the country on the path to achieve the carbon reductions we need.” Elon Musk criticized new incentives and infrastructure for electric vehicles in a huge spending bill backed by Joe Biden, saying he would “delete” the measures and even ditch the entire legislation if he had the power. Musk, the multibillionaire founder of the electric car company Tesla, said that if he were in charge of the federal government, “I would just can this whole bill. That’s my recommendation.” The entrepreneur, speaking at a Wall Street Journal summit on Monday, added: “It might be better if the bill doesn’t pass because we’ve spent so much money, you know, it’s like the federal budget deficit is insane.” The nearly $2tn reconciliation package, called the Build Back Better bill, carries the weight of Biden’s agenda across numerous policy areas and has been hailed as the biggest, and arguably first, legislation in US history to tackle the climate crisis. The bill passed the House of Representatives last month and Democrats hope it can navigate through a sharply divided Senate before Christmas. Joe Biden has signed an executive order calling for the the federal government to be carbon-neutral by 2050. “As the single largest land owner, energy consumer, and employer in the nation, the federal government can catalyze private sector investment and expand the economy and American industry by transforming how we build, buy, and manage electricity, vehicles, buildings, and other operations to be clean and sustainable,” the order says. The AP reports: It directs that government buildings use 100% carbon pollution-free electricity by 2030; that the U.S. fleet of cars and trucks become all-electric by 2035; and that federal contracts for goods and services be carbon-free by 2050. Government buildings should be carbon-free by 2045, including a 50% emissions cut by 2032, Biden said. The executive action is a part of Biden’s commitment to support the growth of clean energy and clean technology industries, while accelerating U.S. progress toward achieving a carbon pollution-free electricity sector by 2035, the White House said. Joe Biden has arrived in Kansas City, Missouri, where he will soon deliver remarks on “how the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law delivers for Missourians by rebuilding roads and bridges, upgrading public transit, replacing water infrastructure, and creating good-paying, union jobs,” per his official schedule. The president was greeted at the airport by Missouri Governor Mike Parson, Missouri First Lady Teresa Parson and Kansas City Mayor Quinton Lucas. The top elections official in Colorado has made a plea for better security protection as a result of threats received by her and staff, driven by extremists who continue to spread the lie that the 2020 presidential election was actually won by Donald Trump. Jena Griswold, the secretary of state for Colorado, a Democrat, is not alone among election officials who have been receiving threats of violence and worse as divisions widened over the conduct of elections in the year since Joe Biden won the White House in November 2020. Griswold reported one incoming online message as saying: “I know where you sleep. I see you sleeping. Be afraid, be very afraid. I hope you die”, the Colorado Sun reported. The outlet writes: Griswold’s profile has risen in recent months as she has appeared on national television to lambast GOP [Republican] efforts to question the nation’s voting systems and the 2020 presidential election results. She’s also been at the center of a feud with Mesa County Clerk Tina Peters, a Republican who has spread baseless claims about the 2020 presidential election being stolen and who is under federal, state and local criminal investigation for her alleged role in a breach of her county’s election system... Nonpartisan legislative staff wrote in a budget briefing document that the Colorado Department of State “has significant safety concerns” for Griswold and that the department has not consistently or reliably had access to physical security for her. The Colorado State Patrol has at times provided security for Griswold, but the agency sometimes declines requests because threats against her “don’t meet their standards for actionability” or because it lacks the capacity, according to the briefing document. The agency is required to provide protection only for Gov. Jared Polis or for members of the legislature when statehouse leadership makes a request. “Like other agencies responsible for carrying out elections across the country, the Colorado Secretary of State’s office has experienced an unprecedented spike in threats toward the secretary of state and the office,” said Annie Orloff, a spokeswoman for Griswold. “Election administrators and workers have been the target of harassment, vitriol and violent threats.” The secretary of state’s office says the threats aren’t just scary; they also are hurting efforts to hire and retain the workforce needed to administer elections. Now, Griswold’s office has felt obliged to ask the Colorado legislature to provide $200,000 annually to pay for guards and other security measures to protect those receiving a sharply-elevated and intense level of threats from members of the public. The Guardian’s Sam Levine has looked at the pressure on election officials, who never sought to be high profile. The US has returned the first two migrants to Mexico since restarting a program begun under the Trump administration, MPP, also known as Remain in Mexico, in order to remove asylum seekers from US soil, the International Organization for Migration (IOM) said today. Reuters reports: The United States and Mexico last week agreed to relaunch the controversial scheme known as Migrant Protection Protocols (MPP) that obliges asylum seekers to wait in Mexico for U.S. immigration hearings, in keeping with a federal court order. Mexico made the restart conditional on Washington meeting certain criteria, including offering vaccines to asylum seekers. The first two migrants returned under the revamped scheme entered Mexico at a border crossing in Ciudad Juarez opposite El Paso, Texas, according to an IOM spokesperson. One of the two men, who identified himself as Enrique Manzanares from Nicaragua, said he felt a little sad, but gave thanks to God that he was still alive. “In the end, nothing was lost,” Manzanares told Reuters. “Some of us make it, others don’t.” A spokesperson for U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP)said the Department of Homeland Security began the court-mandated re-implementation of MPP at one location today. “For operational security reasons, DHS is not sharing details such as location of initial returns or number of individuals enrolled,” the CBP spokesperson said. Once fully operational, MPP returns to Mexico will take place at seven ports of entry in San Diego, Calexico, Nogales, El Paso, Eagle Pass, Laredo, and Brownsville, the CBP said. President Joe Biden, a Democrat, has struggled to reverse many hardline immigration policies put in place by his Republican predecessor, Donald Trump, and is facing a record number of migrant arrests at the U.S.-Mexico border. Biden ended MPP soon after his inauguration in January as he sought to pursue what he called a more humane approach to immigration. But a federal judge ruled Biden’s move did not follow proper procedure, and in August ordered MPP reinstated. Here’s the Guardian’s David Agren writing on the eve of the resumption of MPP. Here’s where the day stands so far: The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection indicated it will move forward with plans to hold Mark Meadows in criminal contempt. The news comes one day after Meadows, the former chief of staff to Donald Trump, announced he would no longer cooperate with investigators out of deference to the former president’s claims of executive privilege over certain records. Lab tests indicate three doses of the Pfizer coronavirus vaccine provide effective protection against the Omicron variant. In response to the news, Joe Biden encouraged all eligible Americans to get their vaccine booster shot as quickly as possible. “This reinforces what my medical advisors have been emphasizing: that boosters give you the highest protection yet,” the president said. The House passed a $768bn defense bill last night, in a vote of 363-70. The bill passed despite criticism from progressive lawmakers, who had hoped to curb military spending now that Democrats control both chambers of Congress and the White House. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Despite his severe warnings to Vladimir Putin, Joe Biden said he is not currently considering deploying US troops to Ukraine in the event of a Russian invasion. “That is not on the table,” Biden told reporters this morning. “We have a moral obligation and a legal obligation to our Nato allies, if they were to attack, under article 5. It’s a sacred obligation. That obligation does not extend ... to Ukraine.” The president added that the US response to a Russian invasion of Ukraine would also depend upon the reactions of fellow Nato allies. “But the idea that the United States is going to unilaterally use force to confront Russia invading Ukraine is not in the cards right now,” Biden said. “What will happen is, there will be severe consequences.” Joe Biden took a few questions from reporters this morning, as he left the White House to start his trip to Kansas City, Missouri. Asked about his summit yesterday with Vladimir Putin, Biden said, “I was very straightforward. There were no minced words.” Regarding Russia’s increased troop presence along its border with Ukraine, Biden said, “If in fact he invades Ukraine, there will be severe consequences, severe consequences – economic consequences like none he’s ever seen or ever have been seen.” Biden said he believed that Russia’s president understood the significance of the warning, and he noted their teams have been in “constant contact”. Joe Biden celebrated the news of the Pfizer coronavirus vaccine’s effectiveness against the omicron variant and encouraged all eligible Americans to get their booster shot. “The new data from Pfizer on vaccine effectiveness against Omicron is encouraging. This reinforces what my medical advisors have been emphasizing: that boosters give you the highest protection yet,” the president said on Twitter. “Anyone who is eligible and has not been boosted should go get a booster today.” Three shots of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine are likely to provide effective protection against the Omicron variant, laboratory tests suggest. The vaccine makers said they were keeping the option of an updated Omicron-based vaccine on the table, however, and could produce it by March 2022 if needed. In the first official statement from vaccine manufacturers on the likely efficacy of their shot against Omicron, BioNTech/Pfizer said that two vaccine doses resulted in significantly lower neutralising antibodies but that a third dose of their vaccine appeared to bring antibody protection up to a level equivalent to two vaccine doses against the original strain. The findings are broadly in line with a preliminary study published by researchers at the Africa Health Research Institute in South Africa on Tuesday, showing that Omicron can partially evade protection from two doses of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine. Mark Meadows has officially failed to appear for his scheduled deposition with the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection, per ABC News. Meadows, the former chief of staff to Donald Trump, indicated yesterday he would no longer cooperate with investigators, and the panel is now moving forward with plans to hold him in criminal contempt. In his letter to Mark Meadows’ attorney, select committee chair Bennie Thompson noted the former Trump aide turned over some documents to investigators before deciding to stop cooperating. “The text messages you did produce include a November 6, 2020, text exchange with a Member of Congress apparently about appointing alternate electors in certain states as par of a plan that the Member acknowledged would be ‘highly controversial’ and to which Mr. Meadows apparently said, ‘I love it’; an early January 2021 text message exchange between Mr. Meadows and an organizer of the January 6th rally on the Ellipse; and text messages about the need for the former President to issue a public statement that could have stopped the January 6th attack on the Capitol,” Thompson said. “All of those documents raise issues about which the Select Committee would like to question Mr. Meadows and about which you appear to agree are not subject to a claim of privilege. Yet, despite your recent agreement to have Mr. Meadows to come in and answer questions in a deposition, Mr. Meadows now, once again, refuses to do so.” The Guardian’s Martin Pengelly and David Smith report: Mark Meadows’ attorney, George Terwilliger, wrote in a letter on Tuesday that a deposition would be “untenable” because the 6 January select committee “has no intention of respecting boundaries” concerning questions that Donald Trump has claimed are off-limits because of executive privilege. Executive privilege covers the confidentiality or otherwise of communications between a president and his aides. The Biden administration has waived it in the investigation of 6 January. Trump and allies entwined in events leading up to the storming of the Capitol, around which five people died, have invoked it. Terwilliger also said he learned over the weekend that the committee had issued a subpoena to a third-party communications provider that he said would include “intensely personal” information. In an interview on the conservative Fox News network, the attorney added: “We have made efforts over many weeks to reach an accommodation with the committee.” But he said the committee’s approach to negotiations and to other witnesses meant Meadows would withdraw cooperation. The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection has indicated it will advance a measure to hold former White House chief of staff Mark Meadows in criminal contempt for refusing to cooperate with the panel. The Democratic chair of the committee, Bennie Thompson, has released a letter to Meadows’ attorney, George Terwilliger, indicating the panel’s plans. “The select committee is left with no choice but to advance contempt proceedings and recommend that the body in which Mr Meadows once served refer him for criminal prosecution,” Thompson said. The news comes one day after Meadows indicated he would no longer cooperate with investigators, claiming the committee is disrespecting Donald Trump’s claims of executive privilege over certain records. A group of senators held a press conference this morning to voice their criticism of the overhaul of the military justice system included in the House-passed version of the National Defense Authorization Act. Democratic Senator Kirsten Gillibrand, who has been pushing for an overhaul for years, argued the House’s proposal would not deliver justice for sexual assault survivors in the military. Republican Senator Joni Ernst, a military veteran and a sexual assault survivor, said she was “disappointed” in the efforts to change Gillibrand’s original proposal and called for a standalone vote on that measure. Under Gillibrand’s bill, the prosecution of serious crimes, including sexual assault, would be entirely removed from the chain of command. Under the House-passed approval, military commanders would still conduct the trials. “As someone who’s been a prosecutor, it makes no sense,” Democratic Senator Richard Blumenthal said of the House proposal. The House-passed version of the defense bill includes an overhaul of the military justice system aimed at combating sexual assault against service members. The final version of the bill calls for the appointment of special prosecutors outside the chain of command to handle the prosecution of sexual assault, murder and kidnapping, among other crimes. However, the new system would still allow military commanders to conduct the trials and choose jury members, a provision that sparked fierce criticism from advocates. Democratic Senator Kirsten Gillibrand, who has pushed for an overhaul of the military justice system for years, argued the proposal was grossly insufficient and pledged to keep fighting for further change. “As sexual assault survivor advocates warned would happen for months, House and Senate Armed Services leadership have gutted our bipartisan military justice reforms behind closed doors, doing a disservice to our service members and our democracy,” Gillibrand said in a statement. “This bill represents a major setback on behalf of service members, women and survivors in particular. However, we will not stop seeking true military justice reforms for our brave service members and I will continue to call for an up or down floor vote.” Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. The House passed a $768bn defense bill last night, in a vote of 363-70, with 169 Democrats and 194 Republicans backing the compromise measure. The National Defense Authorization Act includes a 2.7% pay raise for troops, an overhaul of the military justice system aimed at combating sexual assault and a $25bn bump in spending over what Joe Biden had requested. Some progressives, who had hoped to curb military spending now that Democrats control both chambers of Congress and the White House, complained about the higher price tag of the bill. “It is astounding how quickly Congress moves weapons but we can’t ensure housing, care, and justice for our veterans, nor invest in robust jobs programs for districts like mine,” congressman Jamaal Bowman said. But Democratic leaders defended the final version of the bill, arguing it will help ensure America’s military readiness in a rapidly changing world. “The House, under the leadership of Chairman Adam Smith, has passed a strong, bipartisan defense bill that will keep America safe, defend our servicemembers and their families and advance our nation’s leadership in the world,” House speaker Nancy Pelosi said. “As the House sends this legislation to the Senate, we will continue to deliver results for the people.” The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.Just how much coal-fired power will Australia have left running in 2030? It has become a sensitive question for the country’s major political parties ahead of next year’s election. Both parties have recently released data that suggests under their leadership the country’s shift towards a clean electricity grid would accelerate dramatically over the next nine years. But both claim there will not be an accelerated closure of Australia’s ageing coal plants that currently provide the bulk of the power. It is an implausible argument given the scale of the shift under way. Over the past year about 31% of electricity in the national electricity market (covering the five eastern states and the ACT) has come from renewable energy. The proportion has doubled in just four years, but coal still dominates, providing 63% of electricity. Gas-fired power contributes 6%. The Morrison government has not touted the figure, but official federal data suggests the proportion of renewable energy will hit 69% by 2030 if we continue on our current course. Anthony Albanese says a Labor government would build on this by introducing a $20bn “re-wiring the nation” policy to connect solar and wind farms and batteries in renewable energy zones to the grid sooner than planned. Modelling of the ALP plan by the research firm RepuTex suggests that by 2030 the grid would run on 82% renewable electricity, leaving less than 20% coming from coal and gas combined. In terms of greenhouse gas emissions, the Coalition expects a 55% cut from electricity generation by 2030 compared with 2005 levels on the current path. Labor’s modelling implies a 74% cut from electricity over the same timeframe under its plan. But in both cases the emissions reduction from the electricity sector is much bigger than that planned across the economy. Labor has set a 43% target – a notable improvement, but still less than what scientists say is necessary for Australia to play its part in living up to the Glasgow climate pact – while the Coalition has not increased the 26%-28% goal it set under Tony Abbott more than six years ago. Chris Bowen, Labor’s climate change and energy shadow minister, has been emphatic that the ALP plan would not lead to coal-fired power plants shutting earlier than scheduled. How does this add up? It’s not entirely clear. The Australian Energy Market Operator lists 23GW of coal-fired capacity currently connected to the national market. Just four plants – Liddell and Vales Point in New South Wales, Yallourn in Victoria and Callide B in Queensland – are scheduled to close before 2030. They would cut the total coal capacity of the grid by about 24% compared with today. But we know that other coal-fired plants are under financial strain. There is now so much cheap solar energy in the middle of the day that coal is barely needed at times. Kerry Schott, the former head of the Energy Security Board, earlier this year said coal companies were “going broke” and plants were likely to shut four or five years earlier than expected. Officials in the federal energy department appear to agree. The official projections suggest the country (including Western Australia, which has its own grid) will have 14GW of coal capacity in 2030 under the Coalition – about a further 5GW reduction on what is formally scheduled to close by then. A new analysis by the Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis, a clean-energy focused thinktank, expresses this another way – it says there will be a more than 40% cut in coal power capacity between now and 2030 under the Coalition, based on its own documents. It assumes Labor’s policy would lead to further closures. The ALP rejects this. Bowen’s argument is that Australia will need more electricity by 2030 as the country “electrifies everything” – industry starts to switch away from using fossil fuels as a direct feedstock to running on renewable power and there is a greater uptake of electric vehicles. This is true. But the modelling released by Labor leaves out some details – for example, how much electricity use is expected to increase between now and 2030, and how often the coal-fired plants left connected to the grid would actually be operating. Johanna Bowyer, a lead research analyst with IEEFA, says even with a rise in demand for electricity it “doesn’t add up” to suggest there will not be more early coal closures. “If you’re at 82% renewables there is not much left for fossil fuel generators to actually generate,” she says. “The only way they could be online is if they were generating some other payment that essentially subsidises them to sit there.” That subsidy could come in the form of a “capacity mechanism” that both the Coalition and Labor have backed to ensure there is the necessary support in the system that can be called on when needed to back up variable solar and wind. The Coalition says the mechanism would be “technology neutral” and not focused on coal, specifically; Labor says it should encourage investment in renewable energy and was a bridge to clean “dispatchable” technologies such as pumped hydro, hydrogen and batteries. But that does not rule out both parties paying coal companies to keep a fleet of generators alive as backup, even if they are rarely, if ever, used. Experts say it is hard to see what else would keep so much coal in the system. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning It would not necessarily lead to higher emissions – coal turbines do not emit when not turned on – but both sides of politics could expect questions about whether paying coal bosses to keep their plants idle is the best use of taxpayers’ money. There are other important questions. When will MPs of all colours level with voters in coal communities that the economics of clean energy and the need to address the climate crisis will inevitably mean coal plants shutting, or effectively shutting, earlier than planned? And what will they do to help give them a future in a post-coal world? Ridd reports on reef ‘selective’ Peter Ridd, the former James Cook University professor who was sacked for breaches of the university’s code of conduct relating to public commentary that the university said denigrated a colleague, has continued his criticism of scientists and government agencies working on the health of the Great Barrier Reef. Ridd was given space in The Australian last Friday to argue an annual reef long-term monitoring survey by the Australian Institute of Marine Science (Aims) had found “spectacularly good results”, and that across the reef’s three regions there had “never been more coral since records began in the mid-1980s”. He accused Aims and others of ignoring this data, hoping nobody would notice and contriving a “spurious but apparently plausible reason that the good news is actually bad news” for the reef. Aims has responded, saying Ridd has been “very selective” in quoting from its report. A spokesperson for the institute agreed with Ridd on one point – that the latest results showed the reef could recover during periods when it was not disturbed by mass bleaching, cyclones or other disturbances, and that this was good news. But they said this had not yet lifted coral cover to record levels, and that Ridd consistently ignored a key point – that the scale, intensity and frequency of bleaching events had increased over the past decade, giving it less time to recover. Ridd emphasised that fragile, fast-growing corals had driven a recent increase in overall hard coral cover, but the spokesperson said he ignored that all types of corals were affected by the unprecedented three mass bleaching events in 2016, 2017 and 2020, and the time between major disturbances was now too short for other coral types to recover. They said Ridd continued to incorrectly reject the overwhelming scientific consensus that the climate crisis was the biggest threat to the reef, that oceans were warming and the reef would be increasingly susceptible to bleaching due to rising temperatures. On this, the report was clear, saying: “Periods of low disturbance, such as that seen in 2021, are becoming shorter, reducing the time for recovery. The recovery to date will be easily undone by the next severe tropical cyclone or widespread bleaching event.” The Aims spokesperson said there was an inherent contradiction in Ridd’s argument – he suggested both that Aims’ survey was proof of a permanent recovery in coral cover and that its data could not be trusted. “Unfortunately, he can’t have it both ways,” the spokesperson said.Chelsea striker Sam Kerr was booked after barging into a pitch invader and knocking him to the ground during the Blues’ Champions League clash with Juventus at Kingsmeadow. In the closing stages of the group stage game, the man entered the field and briefly held up play before he was sent sprawling as the Australia captain dropped her shoulder and ran into him. The boos that had greeted the invader instantly turned to cheers for Kerr, before the man took to his feet and made his way from the pitch with stewards in pursuit, to applause from the stands. The referee took a dim view of Kerr’s actions though, and produced a yellow card for the Matildas star. The man had wanted to take a selfie with Chelsea’s captain, Magda Eriksson, but the incident left Blues coach Emma Hayes somewhat bemused. “I don’t know why he didn’t wait to the end, he could have got a picture then,” Hayes said. “In all seriousness, we’ve got to think about player welfare and safety.” It capped a frustrating night for Chelsea, who failed to score for the first time this season as they were held to a goalless draw. Kerr’s intervention invoked memories of Andrew Symonds, the Australian cricketer, who spectacularly took out a streaker at the Gabba during an ODI against India in 2008. In the 1982 Ashes Test in Perth the Australian bowler Terry Alderman dislocated his shoulder after tackling one of a group of spectators who came onto the field.Anthony Albanese has called for the “grassroots mobilisation” of people of faith to tackle the climate crisis, appealing to a common “care for creation” across all religious groups. Speaking to the Labor faith leaders’ climate summit at the University of Western Sydney on Thursday, the ALP leader urged support for the party’s “sensible” climate policy, arguing the need to “look after this precious Earth for our sake and the sake of our future generations”. “We need to make action on climate change happen,” Albanese said. “And part of what today is about is getting that grassroots mobilisation from people of faith who understand the connection of the creation.” Highlighting Labor’s climate policy announced last week, which set an emissions reduction target of 43% by 2030 and a renewables target in the electricity market of 82%, Albanese said the plan to look after the planet “happens to be good economics as well”. “It’s an example of using government as a unifying force for good, and at its heart is the element contained within the teachings of so many faiths – that the environment cannot be separated from those who live in it, and that we have a responsibility to it,” he said. He pointed to tenets of environmentalism across the faiths, highlighting the “eco-friendly” prophet Muhammad for “recycling, planting trees and caring for the land”, the Hindu tradition where humanity is not separate to nature, and a sense of “stewardship” in Judaism’s creation stor. Albanese also quoted Pope Francis’s encyclical on ecology, Laudato Si, which warned of an “unprecedented destruction of ecosystems” and “serious consequences for all of us” if humanity failed to act on the climate emergency. “He speaks of the natural environment as a collective good, and he goes on to say a sense of deep communion with the rest of nature cannot be real if our hearts lack tenderness, compassion and concern for our fellow human beings,” Albanese said. “In the broad spectrum of faith there are so many lessons leading to a compelling truth – care for creation and thinking first about the most vulnerable in society are teachings and beliefs that unite every person in this room.” The faith summit comes as Labor seeks to shore up support among religious Australians before next year’s election amid debate within the two major about the religious discrimination bill introduced to parliament in 2021’s final sitting fortnight. Labor is yet to decide its final position on the bill but Albanese has indicated he is unlikely to support any provisions that could result in greater discrimination against other minority groups. Two parliamentary inquiries looking into the bill will run over summer and report back by 4 February. On Monday Labor’s deputy Senate leader, Kristina Keneally, told the Christian lobby group FamilyVoice that she believed religious schools should be free to require all staff to “live out and profess” school values. “What I know from my life and my experiences … it’s an ecosystem, it’s a community of faith and values,” she said, citing her experience as a former Catholic school teacher. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Whether it’s the sports coach that leads prayers before you go out on the basketball court, whether it’s the homeroom or classroom teacher who has to take children through the liturgy, whether it’s staying after school to help supervise sacramental preparation.” Keneally’s comments suggest she supports schools having a broader scope for discriminatory hiring practices, despite concerns from LGBTQ advocates that such provisions would override state laws with more limited religious exemptions to discrimination law. Under the proposed legislation, schools would be able to discriminate on the grounds of religion in their hiring practices, provided they published a public policy explaining their ethos. This goes beyond the laws passed in Victoria which limit the discrimination of hiring practices to positions where “religious belief is an inherent requirement of the job”.Myanmar soldiers rounded up and killed 11 people in a village, shooting and then setting them on fire, according to people in the area and local media reports. Photos and a video purporting to show charred corpses in Don Taw village in the Sagaing region of Myanmar’s north-west circulated on Tuesday while outrage spread on social media. The footage was said to have been taken shortly after the men were shot and burned, with some of the victims reportedly still alive when set alight. The area has seen fierce fighting between the junta’s forces and militia set up by opponents of military rule since the 1 February coup. Stephane Dujarric, a UN spokesman, expressed deep concern at the reports “of the horrific killing of 11 people” and strongly condemned such violence, saying “credible reports indicate that five children were among those people killed”. The material or claims over how the 11 died could not be independently verified. An account given to the Associated Press by a person who said he went to the scene generally matched descriptions of the incident carried by independent Myanmar media. A volunteer aid worker in the area, who asked not to be identified, told Reuters by telephone that troops had entered Don Taw village early on Tuesday and the victims were killed at around 11am. “The troops were just brutally killing anyone they could find,” the volunteer said, citing witness accounts. The volunteer has assisted people who have fled Don Taw and other nearby villages and said it was unclear if the victims were militia members or civilians. Another witness who spoke to the AP corroborated this account, saying about 50 troops marched into Don Taw village at about 11am on Tuesday, seizing anyone who did not manage to flee. “They arrested 11 innocent villagers,” said the witness, who described himself as a farmer and an activist, and asked to remain anonymous for his own safety. He added that the captured men were not members of the locally organised People’s Defence Force, which sometimes engages the army in combat. He said the captives had their hands tied behind them and were set on fire. Accounts in Myanmar media said the soldiers appeared to have acted in retaliation for an attack earlier that morning by People’s Defence Force members. Other witnesses cited in Myanmar media said the victims were members of a defence force, though the witness who spoke to the AP described them as members of a less formally organised village protection group. The alleged massacre in Don Taw was decried by Myanmar’s underground National Unity Government, which has established itself as the opposition to the military-installed government. “On the 7th of December in Sagaing region, sickening scenes reminiscent of the Islamic State terrorist group bore witness to the military’s escalation of their acts of terror,” said the organisation’s spokesperson, who uses the name Dr Sasa. “The sheer brutality, savagery, and cruelty of these acts shows a new depth of depravity, and proves that, despite the pretence of the relative detente seen over the last few months, the junta never had any intention of de-escalating their campaign of violence.” The junta has not commented on the allegations, which if confirmed would represent the latest atrocity in an increasingly bitter struggle since the military’s seizure of power in February and ousting of the elected government of Aung San Suu Kyi. The allegations follow Monday’s conviction of Aung San Suu Kyi on charges of incitement and violating coronavirus restrictions and sentencing to four years in prison, which was quickly cut in half. The court’s action was widely criticised as a further effort by the country’s military rulers to roll back the democratic gains of recent years. With Associated Press and ReutersCartoons urging New Caledonians to vote no to independence from France in this weekend’s referendum have been accused of “profound racism and ridicule towards Pacific Islanders, especially the [indigenous] Kanak people”, in a legal submission lodged with France’s highest judicial body. An urgent appeal has been lodged against the broadcast of the animations, which have been running on television in New Caledonia and online, with the Council of State in France. The cartoon clips are run by Le Voix du Non – a grouping of various anti-independence parties – with themes such as the future of passports, environment, education, health and money under an independent New Caledonia. They have been accused of portraying non-whites in a degrading and humiliating way, presenting them as having no mastery of French language and with accents “that signify their primitive and uncultivated state,” the 12-page legal appeal has alleged. The appeal from the pro-independence FLNKS, the non-aligned Lets Build party and an individual, Lueisi Waupanga, a member of the Polynesian community, to the Council of State follows unsuccessful calls to the Audiovisual High Council (CSA) to stop the broadcasts. The legal appeal is signed by four citizens of New Caledonia, including Professor Mathias Chauchat, Professor of Law at the University of New Caledonia. The appeal argues the animations contravene the CSA broadcasting rules, and are racist, degrading and humiliating. “Is this how you see us after 30 years?” said Waupang in the appeal. “Common growers of yams and manioc, incapable of thinking for ourselves, generally incapable?” The referral to the Council of State alleges the animations portray a hierarchy of races, with the mixed-race settlers (Caldoches), then Pacific Islanders and lastly the Kanak people. The non-Kanak authoritative character in the animations warns that independence will deplete services such as health, education and police and speaks French with a cultivated accent, whereas the pro-independence characters speak with distinctively childlike voices. Philippe Wakaine, a retired public servant, said the animations, which began airing on 29 November, are “truly degrading, the way in which Kanaks, longterm settlers (Caldoches) and Pacific Islanders are portrayed, especially through their accents. They are making fun of us.” In reply to the calls for cancellation of the animations, Les Voix Du Non campaign director, Christopher Gygés said that “no particular community was targeted”. He told France.tv in Noumea that the aim had been “to render complex matters simple through the use of colloquial language from all communities”. In response to questions from the Guardian, Le Voix Du Non sent an interview given by Gygés with Radio Rythme Bleu (RRB), in which Gygés said he was very surprised by the reaction. “We wanted to win those who might abstain, we wanted a serious message without taking ourselves too seriously. I note that the pro-independence people lack a sense of humour… what upsets them is really the message. To justify their non-participation in the poll they are finding enemies everywhere.” Asked about the controversy the cartoons caused, Gygés said he was “very surprised” and said there was “absolutely no racism.” “We didn’t go too far ... I worry about a society which doesn’t have a sense of humour.” This Sunday’s referendum was to have been the country’s third and final vote on independence, with support for independence increasing over the last few years. The lead-up to the vote has been fraught. France has refused calls from the FLNKS and Pasifika parties to postpone the referendum, due to the customary mourning responsibilities of Kanaks and Islanders, who suffered the majority of the 277 deaths and 10,700 Covid cases in the territory. FLNKS have urged people not to participate in the vote. The campaign against independence from France has been marked by racism in the past. When the pro-independence parties formed a governing coalition with centrist non-Kanaks in 1982 the city of Noumea was covered with anonymous leaflets announcing “Planet of the Apes”.After years of struggling with a punishing combination of emotional instability and over-work in high pressure jobs, I eventually got sick, dropped out and am finally on the road to recovery, with a new understanding of how to take better care of my mental health and the value of a healthy body. I’ve been appreciating simple pleasures, good old friends and the benefits of a quiet life, but it’s a particularly daunting time to start stepping back into the swim. Although I’m now aware of people and situations that aren’t good for me, I have become very self-protective – not helped by the pandemic. It’s very easy to decide it’s too crazy and unkind out there. I am concerned that by avoiding what feels too challenging or frightening I may settle into an unnecessarily restricted life, and limit opportunities to explore new experiences and people that could do a lot to restore my confidence. Do you have any suggestions? Eleanor says: Sometimes when I’m wondering whether I’m doing it right, where “it” is everything, life itself, I like to splash around in some water. Not laps; nothing that has a purpose. I like to think of Ivan Ivanovich swimming in the rain, “flapping his arms and sending waves back, swimming and diving, trying to reach the bottom. ‘Ah! How delicious!’ he shouted in his glee.” You’ve done a brave thing by realising you wanted life to change, and a braver one still by actually changing it. It’s natural to wonder now how you can best preserve your happiness after working so hard to find it. But it can be all too easy at that point to start treating recovery as a task in itself; the next in a long line of projects with an “or else” attached. I need to relax or else my health won’t improve. I need to stay peaceful or else the anxiety will come back. This kind of thinking stops us gleefully splashing; it keeps us on the banks wondering whether splashing is the best thing to do. I think your task of finding the best balance between “in here” and “out there” may be the same: it isn’t best solved by reasoning it through on this side of the decision, then implementing a solution. It’s best solved just by splashing. You don’t need a unified correct answer about how much interaction with the world is best for you; you just need to be guided today by what feels delicious. It can be hard to see that when you’ve been through a lot, because ordeals make us so sensitive to the possibility that they’ll repeat. They drain us of so much time, health, and energy, that we become fiercely protective of what little reserves we have left, scanning for any threat that may deplete us more. It becomes very hard to accept that there could be any such thing as ‘just splashing’ – any decision we don’t need to get exactly right – because everything starts to feel high-risk. But the goal isn’t to have a life in which nothing ever again deflates your energy and sense of peace. The goal is to know that when that happens, you will be OK. You could try something that scares you and wish you hadn’t; you could make a new connection and find it hurts you; for any way of venturing “out there” that may hurt, you will be OK. No single decision will catapult you to rock bottom again, and no single hurt can undo the happiness you’ve worked for. When you know that, decisions start to feel a little less high-risk. You don’t need to be guided by what’s “too” self-protective, or whether the world is “too” unkind. You can simply to lead with what feels right, now. You can start small, with a new connection, or a new hobby. Try to see it as a decision you’re making just for today, one that you can undo tomorrow. That’s all you have to do; feel your way forward a little bit at a time. *** Ask us a question Do you have a conflict, crossroads or dilemma you need help with? Eleanor Gordon-Smith will help you think through life’s questions and puzzles, big and small. Questions can be anonymous. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service hereThe Omicron variant of Covid-19 has now been reported in 57 countries and continues to spread rapidly in South Africa, the World Health Organization (WHO) says. But the latest epidemiological report from WHO says given the Delta variant remains dominant, particularly in Europe and the US, it is still too early to draw any conclusions about the global impact of Omicron. The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control has predicted that the Omicron variant could become the dominant variant in Europe within months. For now, though, the Delta variant continues to dominate cases, and more data is needed to determine Omicron’s infectiousness and severity, WHO says. “While there seems to be evidence that the Omicron variant may have a growth advantage over other circulating variants, it is unknown whether this will translate into increased transmissibility,” the WHO report said. Of 899,935 Covid-19 test samples sequenced and uploaded to the global Covid database in the last 60 days, 897,886 (99.8%) were confirmed to be Delta, while 713 (0.1%) were Omicron. The WHO report said South Africa reported 62,021 cases of the variant between 29 November and 5 December – an 111% rise from the previous week. The country also had an 82% increase in hospital admissions due to Covid-19 during the week to 4 December – 912 admissions compared with 502 the week prior. But it is not yet known how many of these cases were due to Omicron. Omicron seems to be spreading rapidly in South Africa despite high rates of past infection with Covid. Estimates suggest between 60% and 80% of the population have previously been infected. Vaccination rates are low, at about 35%. Data is still too limited to know with certainty whether Omicron changes the severity of the illness. As of 6 December, all 212 confirmed Omicron cases across 18 European Union countries were classed as asymptomatic or mild. But WHO said “even if the severity is equal or potentially even lower than for Delta variant, it is expected that hospitalisations will increase if more people become infected”. “Further information is needed to fully understand the clinical picture of those infected with the Omicron variant,” the report said. WHO said that preliminary data suggests the mutations in the Omicron variant may reduce the ability of natural immunity to protect against reinfection after infection with the virus. Omicron carries mutations which may reduce the ability of the antibodies resulting from natural immunity to protect against the virus, but further studies are needed to confirm its ability to reinfect previously confirmed cases or vaccinated people. The report concluded many questions about the Omicron variant remain unanswered, but that more information will emerge in the coming weeks. Pharmaceutical company Pfizer this week reported results from preliminary studies that suggested two doses of its Covid-19 vaccine have a significantly reduced ability to neutralise the Omicron variant, and that three doses may be needed. A small study from South Africa, which is not yet peer reviewed, also suggested that antibody neutralisation is reduced about 40-fold against Omicron compared to the original virus. Dr Deborah Cromer, a senior research fellow at the University of NSW’s Kirby Institute, said in the past day “a swathe of preliminary data has emerged showing the drop in immunity against the Omicron variant”. She said this data has come from studies looking at blood from people who have recovered from Covid-19 and/or have been vaccinated against the disease. “All studies show less immunity against Omicron than against the original virus strain, however the reported drops vary widely,” she said. “The estimates we have seen to date of people’s immunity against Omicron range from half to one-fortieth of the immunity present against the original strain. “Regardless of the number, it is clear that increased levels of immunity will be required to provide protection against Omicron, and therefore booster shots are now more important than ever to help achieve this.” The first known laboratory-confirmed case of Omicron was identified from a specimen collected on 9 November in South Africa, with the variant reported to WHO on 24 November.The crisis engulfing the government over the Downing Street Christmas party scandal has given the newspapers the chance to batter Boris Johnson with varying degrees of savagery. Amid widespread outrage at the video of No 10 staff joking about whether or not a party was held during last year’s tight lockdown, some normally supportive titles reflect that anger with very critical front pages on Thursday. The Mail combines Wednesday’s announcement of new Covid rules with the No 10 scandal: “One rule for them, new rules for the rest of us”, the splash headline reads. It carries a large picture of a tearful Allegra Stratton, the No 10 adviser who quit on Wednesday after featuring in the leaked video about a lockdown party that Downing Street had claimed never happened. The Sun also picks up on the public mood with an elaborate front page of Johnson mocked up as the Grinch. The headline says: “Do as I say... not as I Christmas do”. The Mirror headline reads “Plan B for us .. Plan ‘lie, lie, lie’ for him”, saying that the PM refused to answer questions about two other parties, as new Covid rules were introduced for the whole population. The Guardian splashes on “PM triggers Covid plan B as party scandal engulfs No 10”, reporting that Boris Johnson had rushed through new Covid restrictions amid fears over Omicron variant, as his government battled a “crisis of credibility” sparked by the Christmas party scandal. The Telegraph leads with the headline “Don’t go to work, but do go to parties”, referring to Johnson’s announcement about a Covid plan B rather than any ironic reference to the row over the alleged No 10 gathering. It does, however, have a smaller story on calls for the PM to quit if he misled MPs over the scandal. The Times splashes on “PM orders return to working from home”. The other story on the front, accompanied by a picture of Stratton making her painful resignation announcement, runs with the headline “Tories held raucous second party”. In Scotland, where Tory leader Douglas Ross has said Johnson should resign if he is shown to have lied, the Scotsman says “Scottish Tories line up to condemn Johnson”, and the Edinburgh Evening News splashes with the words of an ICU nurse: “While they were partying, I was caring for people who were dying”. The Record puts it more bluntly: “Party’s over … now get out”. The Express headline sticks to the slightly better bad news for the government: “PM: plan B best chance for ‘close to normal’ Xmas”. The Financial Times says “Johnson adopts plan B to check virus as anger festers over parties”. The depth of the scandal can perhaps be gauged by the usually politics-averse Daily Star joining in the bashing. “Cluebo” reads the headline with the subhead saying “Captain Cock-up: It was everybody else, in the No 10 drawing room, with wine and nibbles..”A toddler has died and his baby brother was left in a serious condition after undergoing circumcisions at a Perth clinic. Police say the death of the two-year-old is not being treated as suspicious. The boy’s brother underwent emergency surgery overnight, but has since been discharged from hospital. “The death of the two-year-old boy is being treated as non-suspicious and a report will be prepared for the coroner,” a police spokesperson said. “It can be confirmed the boy underwent a medical procedure at a registered medical centre prior to his death.” Circumcision is banned at Australian public hospitals unless it is required for medical reasons, although the surgery can be carried out at private clinics by a general practitioner. The two boys underwent the procedure at a private facility in Perth, according to 7 News. According to the report, the boys were rushed from the medical facility to the Armadale hospital emergency department on Tuesday night following procedures. The two-year-old was pronounced dead on arrival, while the infant was rushed to Perth Children’s hospital to undergo emergency surgery. He has since been discharged, a hospital spokeswoman confirmed. It is unclear whether the procedures were performed by the same practitioner, or what qualifications they had. In Australia, most circumcisions are performed by general practitioners. According to the Royal Australasian College of Physicians [RACP], most circumcisions are carried out for family, cultural or religious reasons. Very rarely is a circumcision done for medical reasons. Concern has previously been expressed by some RACP members that pain relief provided is not always adequate and that general practitioners may not be skilled enough to treat complications that arise or to manage pain, prompting calls to have the procedure only performed by a paediatric surgeon plus an anaesthetist. The RACP policy statement on male circumcision states, “After reviewing the currently available evidence, the RACP believes that the frequency of diseases modifiable by circumcision, the level of protection offered by circumcision and the complication rates of circumcision do not warrant routine infant circumcision in Australia and New Zealand.” The Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (Ahpra), which investigates health practitioners, was contacted for comment. A memorandum of understanding exists between WA police and Ahpra to better facilitate the sharing of information about practitioners. A spokesperson for Ahpra said: “Ahpra and the Medical Board of Australia are aware of media reports of this incident and extend our condolences to the family.” “We are precluded from discussing individual cases except what is available publicly. This includes disclosing whether a practitioner is the subject of a notification or is being investigated.”Swimming Australia has defended its response to allegations made by the Olympic swimmer Maddie Groves that she was sexually assaulted over five years by a man still involved in the sport. On Wednesday night Groves alleged on the ABC’s 7:30 Report she was sexually molested as a teenager over a five-year period. She said she was molested from the age of 13 to 18 by a man she refused to identify. “When I was underage, on multiple occasions I was actually molested by an adult male,” she told the ABC. “At the time I didn’t feel like there was anyone I could tell about that. Groves said that she has not made a formal complaint regarding the allegations to Swimming Australia or police “and there’s no one in swimming that I would trust disclosing that to now, either.” In a statement regarding the 7.30 program, Swimming Australia said “the report was the first Swimming Australia had been made aware of this matter. These allegations have been referred directly to the Queensland Police in accordance with Queensland’s legislative requirements.” Groves separately alleged inappropriate conduct by two other people involved in swimming, saying that one “manhandled her” when giving her instructions and that another touched her inappropriately on the arm and back when a teen swimmer. Swimming Australia said it took all Groves’s complaints seriously and took steps to address them. “Ms Groves requested and was granted a meeting with president Kieren Perkins and former CEO Alex Baumann and was offered every opportunity to raise her complaints and concerns,” a statement read. It said Groves raised her concerns at the meeting in relation to one person and that “these allegations were the subject of a three-month independent investigation conducted by Q Workplace Solutions.” The statement says Groves declined to be interviewed by an independent investigator, who found the complaint against the organisations was “unsubstantiated”. Swimming Australia said it was previously unaware of the allegations regarding the second person and “we are now cooperating with Sport Integrity Australia to ensure an appropriate, independent process is put in place for these new allegations.” In the ABC program, Groves said she had not made an official complaint about the man she alleged had molested her, but he still worked in swimming. “I don’t think I really want to report it to police,” she said. “It’s obviously a huge process emotionally … and then it doesn’t necessarily end up working out that well. “I’ve had a couple of other friends and people that I know in swimming that have been sexually abused and assaulted and they’ve been through that process. “It ends up being really disappointing … and things don’t really seem to change. It’s sort of swept under the rug. And I think if I made a complaint, I don’t really think anything would be any different to that.” Groves, who won two silver medals at the 2016 Rio Olympics, triggered controversy when withdrawing from Australia’s selection trials for this year’s Tokyo Olympics. In a series of social media posts, she referred to “misogynistic perverts” within swimming in Australia. Her claims prompted a wider investigation, which is ongoing, by Swimming Australia into alleged abuse in the sport. “Deciding not to compete at Olympic trials was … in a way like a cry for help that hopefully someone would listen and maybe do something about this huge issue in Australian sport,” she told the ABC. The 26-year-old, who recently returned to the pool at the International Swimming League in Europe, said she was speaking out in a bid for change. “It just really seems like there is this vicious cycle of using and abusing female athletes until they’re burnt out and broken,” she said. “I feel like if I didn’t speak out, if there’s not a proper investigation into the culture of this sport in Australia, that cycle is just going to continue forever.” AAP contributed to this reportAustralia’s Reserve Bank has flagged support for a retail form of digital currency, with governor Philip Lowe outlining ways that tokens, rather than regular dollars, might circulate more freely in the economy. In a speech on Thursday dubbed Payments: the future?, Lowe said the world of payments was becoming “more exciting and dynamic” by the year, with the shift away from traditional forms of payment towards digital varieties gathering pace. Consumers were increasingly familiar with digital wallets offered by tech giants such as Apple, Samsung and Google, providing access to existing bank and credit card accounts. Meanwhile, the value of ATM withdrawals over the past six months was about 30% lower than the comparable period three years ago, he said. “How far we go in this direction and what form these tokens might take are yet to be determined,” Lowe said. The Reserve Bank governor’s statements follow the release on Wednesday of a report looking at the wholesale options for a central bank digital currency (CBDC). Also on Wednesday, the federal Treasury released its report on transforming the payments system, noting more than 800,000 Australians have transacted in digital assets in the last three years. The number has risen 63% this year alone compared with 2020. Treasury will review plans for a CBDC and provide advice to the government after next year’s election, by the end of 2022. As with most central banks, the RBA is wary of promoting cryptocurrencies given their volatile nature, even with a market now valued in the trillions of dollars globally. Of three possibilities for a retail form of a CBCD, Lowe said he remained “sceptical that we will head in this direction [of cryptocurrencies] for general purpose payments,” Lowe said. “It is likely that the asset used for the settlement of most transactions in the economy will remain some form of secure fiat currency [such as the Australian dollar] with a stable value, rather than cryptocurrency with a volatile price.” “That is not to say there is no role for crypto assets,” he added. “They can help support innovation, especially where they are linked to smart contracts and used in decentralised finance (or DeFi) applications.” Other possibilities included tokens issued by, and backed by, the RBA, just as it issued and backed Australian dollar banknotes, Lowe said. “To date, though, we have not seen a strong public policy case to move in this direction, especially given Australia’s efficient, fast and convenient electronic payments system,” he said. “It is possible, however, that the public policy case could emerge quite quickly as technology evolves and consumer preferences change.” The third possibility was that an entity other than the central bank issues and backs the payment token in a form still denominated in Australian dollars, also dubbed an eAUD. These could be take the form of stablecoin, a type of cryptocurrency backed by a high-quality asset such as a bond that meets robust standards for safety and security. “So if privately issued stablecoins are ultimately the way things head, it will be crucial that they meet very high standards,” Lowe said, adding the RBA was working with domestic regulators and counterparts around the world to resolve the various issues. Ellie Rennie, a professor at RMIT University and a member of its Blockchain Innovation Hub, said the fact the RBA is publicly considering retail CBDCs was “really significant and interesting, whether that is issued by them or as a stablecoin”. “It’s acknowledging that this is in many respects a way for them to keep control of money, which otherwise if they don’t do this,it’s kind of getting away from them.” The circulation of private stablecoins, for instance, was already worth billions of dollars. Rennie said it was likely that the RBA won’t issue tokens itself, at least if the Bank of England’s stance is any guide. “In a western democracy [they think] it’s better done in the private sector, and that’s how our banking sectors have been set up,” she said. Rennie predicts it will be at least a couple of years before a system is in place for eAUDs to become common, with the necessary laws and regulations. “I think it’s a fair way off,” she said.Through the rains and steamy heat of November, day and night, Anupama S Chandran sat by the gates of the Kerala state secretariat. She refused to eat, drink or be moved. Her single demand was written on a placard: “Give me my baby.” The story of Chandran’s fight to get back her child, who was snatched from her by her own family days after he was born and put up for adoption without her knowledge, is one that has been greeted with both horror and a sad familiarity in India. In a society that remains split by the fault lines of caste, Chandran’s ordeal exposed the cruelties still inflicted upon women who dare to cross those lines. Chandran, the daughter of a local leader from the Communist party of India, was a 19-year-old student when she fell for Ajith Kumar. Each was involved in leftwing political activism. He was 10 years older and previously married, but it was a friendship that gradually grew closer until they realised they had fallen in love. ‘It completely broke me’ Kerala is widely considered one of India’s most progressive states. It has the country’s highest literacy rate, exceeding 96% – 92% for women – as well as its highest life expectancy and lowest child mortality rates. But caste, the ancient social hierarchy derived from Hindu scripture that is determined at birth, still remains potent, particularly when it comes to marriage. In 2020, a lower-caste man was murdered in the Palakkad district of Kerala for marrying a woman of a higher caste. Her father carried out the killing with an axe. It is a similar story across India; even as society shifts and modernises, just over 5% of marriages are cross-caste. Chandran had never given much thought to Kumar’s caste, and she presumed her family would not either. Kumar was a Dalit, the lowest caste, formerly referred to as “untouchables”, and she was from a powerful upper caste. “I always thought that my family members were communist and differences of caste, class and religion would not matter to them,” said Chandran. “But I was wrong. My parents were horrid, they would use very bad words for Ajith’s caste and they adamantly tried to separate me from him.” When they realised she was pregnant, she and Kumar were elated. They decided to name the baby Aiden, meaning “little fire”. Chandran said she always knew that having a baby out of wedlock with a divorced man from a lower caste would not be without difficulty. But she was not prepared for the nightmare that followed. For over seven months she hid her pregnancy from her family. But when she broke the news, they were horrified. “I was extremely saddened when my sister told me to abort my baby, saying it was just a ‘lump of flesh’,” she said. Chandran alleges that her parents then kept her a prisoner in the house, forbidding her from contacting Kumar or friends, and subjected her to physical and emotional abuse. She said they took her to a hospital in Mallapuram and tried to get her to terminate what they told her was an “illegitimate” pregnancy, but she refused. Days before her older sister was due to get married, Chandran said, she was taken by her family to a local hospital where, she alleges, she underwent a caesarean section against her will. On 19 October 2020, her child was born. The family have denied any interference in the pregnancy. Chandran was allowed three brief but treasured days with her son in hospital before they took him away, assuring her it was only so that he would be kept hidden at the house of a relative and that the presence of a baby born out of wedlock “did not cause a problem at my sister’s marriage”, she said. She added: “They even promised to return the baby to me after the wedding of my sister.” Standing at the roadside, her caesarean wound still sore, Chandran held on tightly to her son, refusing to let him go. But she alleges that her parents slapped her and wrenched the boy from her arms. Chandan continued to be held captive, and though she would sob and beg for news of her baby, she was given none. After she contacted Kumar, she says, the family called the police and then locked her in her grandparents’ house more than 124 miles away. “When I forcefully persisted in my queries about my son, my family members became very angry and told me I should commit suicide or they would get me admitted to a mental asylum,” she said. “That’s when they categorically told me for the first time that I was not going to get my son again.” She eventually escaped from the house and reached Kumar. The pair were desperate, with no idea where their son was. They began with the police, but Chandran found that “all they were concerned about was the feelings of my parents” and she says they refused to investigate. “The fact that my baby had been missing for so many months was not an issue for the police at all,” she said. “They were just worried about any problems my father [a prominent local politician] might face in coming to the police station.” Pleas and complaints to the state child welfare committee (CWC), the Kerala state police chief, senior CPM leaders and the chief minister’s office, were also fruitless, with politicians and police repeatedly telling her it was a matter for her family, she said. Chandran and Kumar allege that her father’s political connections meant no one would touch the case. One state minister told the media that Chandran’s parents “had done what any parents would do”. Eventually, Chandran’s father spoke to the police, confirming that the baby had been put up for adoption. Initially it seemed all was lost; the adoption paperwork had been completed, she was told, and the baby had been handed over to new parents. “It completely broke me. I lost all hopes of finding my son,” she said. ‘Every day is like a celebration’ Finally, Chandran began a hunger strike outside the child welfare committee office on 11 November. As a media firestorm began to build around her, and Kerala’s political opposition termed it “an honour crime executed collectively by the state machinery”, the police finally began to take action. Over the course of two weeks, a police case against her family was filed and the courts halted the adoption of the baby, whom, it emerged, had been sent to a foster family in a neighbouring state. After a DNA test proved Kumar and Chandran were the baby’s parents, on 24 November, more than 13 months after he was taken, the courts ordered that baby Aiden be returned to them. It was the first time Kumar had set eyes on his son. “Every day is like a celebration for us now. It feels very nice to touch and hold my son, to take him out and play with me. Now the baby has begun to recognise us,” he said. Chandran said she was “elated beyond words … I am still so excited whenever I look at him”. Chandran’s father, S Jayachandran, denied that relatives had abused her in any way or taken the baby against her will. Speaking to local media, he said: “The decision to hand over the baby was taken collectively even before the baby was born as we had no other option. Anupama also wanted to avoid the baby to get away from the embarrassment of giving birth to a baby out of wedlock.” The couple say that though they now have their baby again, their fight for justice is not over. They are pushing for legal action against Chandran’s family for kidnapping and wrongful confinement. She said: “I stopped loving [the family] even before I left their home. [For a year] they denied my baby his right to be looked after by his mother and have mother’s milk, and Ajith the right to be a father.” She added: “I am trying to forget those painful days. I am trying to forget the worst year of my life.”The storm blew the old elm trunk down, a 15ft-high totem with the crumbling faces of the long dead looking westwards from the wood. The tree may have been more than 200 years old when it fell victim to Dutch elm disease in the 1970s, but it still sent out a hedgeful of suckers for the future, and its disintegrating trunk stayed upright until now. Once a prominent tree, marking some forgotten boundary, it becomes another anonymous windthrow sinking into the earth. The duff that rotted from its heartwood is rich and peaty. To see if there is anything in it, I dig about with a stick into what would have been the core of the tree and a place that had not seen the light of day for centuries. There is a bone. A rib, from a lamb or fawn, perhaps. I pick it up. It feels well-preserved, and there is something uncanny about the way it appears. How did it get there? Was the rib the remains of a whole animal buried under the tree when it was planted, or was the bone dropped into the hollow trunk in more recent times? Does this speak of sacrifice or witchcraft? I see the lower jawbone of a small ungulate nearby that maybe a fox has unearthed, and assume that the remains are connected. However, I only feel some responsibility for what I have exhumed. Whatever the origin and purpose of the bone, it was meant to be secret, sealed under the tree, so I scrape out a hole, return the rib to the earth and cover it over. A few days later I am in Morrisons supermarket in Wellington and sense something fly past the corner of my eye. I wait. A wren flits into a display of poinsettias, their bright red bracts as camp as Christmas. The bird hops this way and that so it can see me with each eye. Wrens are birds of omen, bringers of news. I wonder what this one is saying. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryThe British Academy has awarded the historian David Olusoga the President’s Medal, its most prestigious accolade, for telling diverse stories from Britain’s past. Olusoga, a writer, broadcaster and film-maker, best known as the author of Black and British: A Forgotten History, is the 39th person to be given the President’s Medal, which is awarded annually in recognition of services to the humanities and the social sciences. Previous recipients of the accolade include the author Margaret Atwood, writer and historian William Dalrymple, primatologist Dame Jane Goodall, Wikipedia founder Jimmy Wales, and the author Dame Hilary Mantel. The medals were first awarded in 2010. Nominations are made by fellows of the British Academy. Olusoga, 51, is a professor of public history at the University of Manchester and received an OBE in the 2019 new year honours list for services to history and to community integration. He has presented acclaimed documentaries, such as the Bafta-winning Britain’s Forgotten Slave Owners, Black and British: A Forgotten History, and the current A House Through Time. Olusoga is also on the board of the Scott Trust, which owns Guardian Media Group. Olusoga received the award for his approaches to British and international history by unearthing and telling stories from Britain’s past to a wide audience. He has previously spoken about the rapid growth of hostility to his work and why black history is British history. On receiving the medal, Olusoga said: “It is an extraordinary and unexpected honour to be awarded the President’s Medal. “Throughout my career, whether writing history or bringing stories from the past to television, I have believed that history and the humanities must be made available to everyone and include everyone’s stories. “At a time when calls for inclusivity have never been louder, I’m thrilled to have my work so generously recognised by the British Academy.” Prof Julia Black, president of the British Academy, said: “Prof David Olusoga merits the British Academy’s highest accolade for his approach to championing inclusive approaches to British and international history by presenting diverse stories from Britain’s past and engaging a wide range of people on the important issue of how we understand our collective histories. “Across literature and television, his achievements are an inspiration to researchers in the humanities and social sciences looking to bring their research to a wider audience. “His remarkable impact shows that there is unquestionably a huge public appetite to learn the realities of Britain’s international past.”A lot of great stuff has been written about what the film Get Back has taught us about the Beatles. I wonder if I might chip in with what the film taught us about other stuff. First, how much less plastic and packaging there was back then. Sandwiches were brought in on actual plates and tea was drunk from actual cups. Today, within a short walk of that building at 3 Savile Row in the West End of London, I make it 19 branches of Pret a Manger, 14 Starbucks, four Sainsbury’s, three Marks &amp; Spencers and two Tescos. The making of that film about those rehearsals and that performance would today have generated skipfuls of bad stuff. Then there’s the clothes. The Beatles and a handful of techies are dressed like Austin Powers at his most laid-back; all the others are sober in suits. Now, most of us are lounging around in the sartorial centre ground. The absence of mobile phones. An obvious one this but, without small screens to stare at, how present they all have to be. Now they’d surely be engrossed in other stuff, playing each other bits and bobs to listen to, instead of just playing. And much of the sniping would be done by text, to each other and confidants elsewhere. Creative angst and energy would have leaked out of the room. The boring bits. In these stretches are to be found the true beauty of the film, a triumph for slow television. I presume it always takes long stretches of enervating struggle, with all its tedium and tetchiness, to make great art. But ordinary film and television rarely give time to this process, for, to be fair, obvious reasons. We never get to see it. In a lesser, shorter film, no time would have been wasted getting to that brilliant moment McCartney conjured up Get Back. It would still have been jaw-dropping, but without all the context we’d have missed out on the real magic. Adrian Chiles is a Guardian columnistA spell of unseasonably warm weather affected southern and western parts of the US and south-western Canada last week, with temperatures 15-20C above average in places. December temperature records were broken in multiple locations. Penticton in British Columbia had its highest ever December on the 1st as the temperature reached 22.5C. In the US, Montana, North Dakota, Washington and Wyoming all equalled or broke state temperature records for December. Not all the US states are seeing unseasonable warmth, however. The National Weather Service (NWS) issued a fairly rare blizzard warning last weekend for the summits of Big Island, Hawaii. It forecast up to 20cm (8in) of snow and winds gusting up to 125mph. The NWS has not issued a blizzard warning for that region since 2018. The same system that brought the snow also caused heavy rain at lower levels. Heavy rain was also problematic on the other side of the world. As Tropical Storm Jawad tracked north-west in the Bay of Bengal, more than 50,000 people were evacuated from the state of Andhra Pradesh in eastern India. Schools were closed, some public transport was cancelled, and offshore oil drilling was suspended. The storm later tracked north then north-east, weakening to a tropical depression in Bangladesh.A cross-party group of parliamentarians is calling on the government to end its use of controversial barracks accommodation for people seeking asylum, in a new report published on Thursday. The report also recommends the scrapping of government plans to expand barracks-style accommodation for up to 8,000 asylum seekers. It refers to accommodation, including Napier barracks in Kent, which is currently being used to house hundreds of asylum seekers, as “quasi-detention” due to visible security measures, surveillance, shared living quarters and isolation from the wider community. The report follows an inquiry by the all-party parliamentary group on immigration detention into the use of sites like Napier, which are identified as “fundamentally unsuitable” as asylum accommodation for survivors of torture, trafficking or other serious forms of violence. The APPG inquiry panel urges the government to ensure that people seeking asylum are housed in safe accommodation in the community that supports their wellbeing and recovery from trauma and allows them to build links with their community. In March this year, the Independent Chief Inspector of Borders and Immigration &amp; Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Prisons (HMIP) found two of the sites, Napier Barracks and Penally Camp, the latter of which has now closed, to be “impoverished, run-down and unsuitable for long-term accommodation”. Alison Thewliss, MP for Glasgow Central and chair of the APPG on immigration detention, said: “The report makes for sober reading. It has highlighted the myriad ways in which the Home Office is comprehensively failing some of the most vulnerable people in society. Those forced to stay in quasi-detention accommodation have included children, people who have survived torture or trafficking, and other at-risk groups. Our worst fears have been confirmed that this type of accommodation is not only inappropriate, but downright harmful.” One asylum seeker previously housed in barracks accommodation said: “It would be difficult to design a system that more perfectly delivers despair and deteriorating human health and mental capacity than these ‘asylum camps’. My initial reaction was shock as I was driven through the barbed wire-topped gates of an army camp and faced with a black metal firing target of a soldier. Between us we had fled torture, false imprisonment, war and civil conflict. We now found ourselves inside exactly the sort of institution many of us had already experienced in our home countries and which brought back terrible memories and stirred up traumas.” In August this year, the Home Office extended use of Napier barracks to 2025 – it was originally intended to be used only until September 2021. This decision is being challenged in the high court by a Kent resident. The court has granted permission for an expedited hearing into the case. Dan Carey of Deighton Pierce Glynn solicitors, who is bringing the high court challenge against the continuing use of the barracks, welcomed the court’s decision.“Government inspectors, health experts and many others have highlighted the harm caused to asylum seekers by housing them in military camp settings such as Napier Barracks. But there are also wider concerns about ‘othering’ asylum seekers in this way, and, for local people, about the use of this large site for this use over such a long period,” he said. A Home Office spokesperson said:“Military barracks sites were previously used to house military personnel. To suggest they are not good enough for asylum seekers is an insult. “Residents are not detained at Napier, they are provided with three meals a day and have their basic needs catered for. Our new Nationality and Borders Bill will create an immigration system that is fair but firm and fix our broken asylum system.”The debacle over the No 10 Christmas party threatens to undermine efforts to control the Covid pandemic at a time when the Omicron variant is fuelling fears of an imminent and major wave of disease, say scientists. A so-called Cummings effect last year led to “negative and lasting consequences” on public trust following the lockdown-busting trips made by Boris Johnson’s aide, Dominic Cummings, researchers found. Another apparent breach of Covid guidelines at Downing Street last December, and footage of Johnson’s aides joking about a party, risk deepening mistrust in ministers and exacerbating a sense of “us and them” just as the country faces further plan B restrictions to combat the virus, experts warned. “There is a real concern over Omicron. It could be completely out of control fairly quickly,” said Stephen Reicher, a professor of psychology at the University of St Andrews and a member of the Sage subgroup on behavioural science. “We need a communal response to keep ourselves safe, and for that we really need trust in government. “In the middle of a national crisis where we need to react quickly and need to know how to react, we need a government that can guide us; a government that we think of as ‘them’, and as dishonest, and as liars, is not the government we need right now.” The impact of any loss of trust may go far beyond the conflicting advice about Christmas parties, Reicher warned, potentially extending to areas such as the vaccination and booster programmes, which are already hampered by low trust in some communities. In a paper published in the Lancet called the Cummings Effect: politics, trust, and behaviours during the Covid-19 pandemic, Dr Daisy Fancourt described the breach of Covid rules by Cummings last May as having “negative and lasting consequences … for public trust and the risks to behaviours”. “While public adherence to Covid guidelines was falling before news emerged of Cummings’ drive to Barnard Castle, the decline worsened in England in the three weeks after, but not in Scotland or Wales,” said Fancourt, associate professor of psychobiology and epidemiology at UCL. “One thing I’m nervous about with reporting on the No 10 breaches is that it could damage public compliance behaviours when they are more important than ever … so the important thing for the public to remember is that the vast majority of people are playing their part, following the rules to protect themselves and others.” There is no simple equation between trust and adherence to Covid guidelines, Reicher points out. Some of those most angry with Cummings adhered more strictly to Covid rules in the aftermath because they wanted to demonstrate how different they were from government officials. But others – those who already wanted to break the rules – felt emboldened. “It gave them a warrant, an excuse to break the rules. It doesn’t necessarily change people’s minds, but it empowers people to act on what they believe,” he said. Prof Heidi Larson, director of the Vaccine Confidence Project at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, said the Christmas party reports were “a betrayal of trust”. “It’s not good for a public that is really tired, that’s exhausted and ready to see the end of this pandemic. A lot of people have really hung in there in a deep desire to get through it,” Larson said. “When you’ve been doing what’s felt like the right thing for getting on for two years, and it’s been a long haul, and then you see this, it’s a betrayal of trust … We need to distinguish between what’s happening at No 10 and what Chris Whitty and the scientific advice says. “That is really important. The chief medical officer’s guidance should not be implicated in this at all.”And Just Like That … 9pm, Sky Comedy “I will wear whatever I want and blow whomever I want as long as I can breathe and kneel.” Sadly, Sex and the City fans won’t be treated to such Samantha Jones zingers in this reboot, because she’s not in it. So, can the series survive without her, 17 years after it last broadcast? The rest of the gang are back to give it a shot: Carrie is now a pondering podcaster, Miranda continues to kick ass, and Charlotte … is still Charlotte. If those dire films are anything to go by, this will be no match for the original series – but, let’s be honest, who cares? So many of us navigated our most turbulent decades with these women, and we’re desperate to catch up with them. The 10-part series starts with a double bill. Hollie Richardson How to Make It on OnlyFans 10pm, Channel 4 OnlyFans: the new frontier of sex work or an exploitative fad? Alex Sim-Wise – a former glamour model, who makes £10,000 a month on the subscription-based site – set up a consultancy for people who decided in lockdown that they wanted to emulate her success. Here, we meet some of them as they navigate the reality of their new livelihoods. HR Tonight: Saving Money at Christmas – The Big Squeeze? 7.30pm, ITV “So this is Christmas, and we are so glum, furlough is over, and the gas bill’s no fun,” as John and Yoko didn’t sing. Throw in a scrapped universal credit uplift, and this Christmas doesn’t exactly seem as if it’s going to be the most wonderful time of the year for many. But help is at hand: here are some festive money-saving tips. Ali Catterall Nadiya’s Fast Flavours 8.30pm, BBC Two Sad news: it’s the penultimate episode in Nadiya Hussain’s therapeutic cooking series. But tonight’s menu is all about relaxed and ready-to-go recipes for chilled-out evenings, including a nutty Bombay burger (“an Indian meal in one bite”) and sticky BBQ sriracha chicken. Room for dessert? She’s also serving a banana thyme loaf and dreamy apple and custard pie. HR 24 Hours in A&amp;E 9pm, Channel 4 In the emergency room, elderly Iris is admitted with two severe leg fractures and staff fear she won’t survive. Plus, Elijah turns up with a finger that got caught in a kebab slicer, and Alison is rushed in with life-threatening sepsis. HR Unapologetic 11.05pm, Channel 4 Hosts Yinka Bokinni and Zeze Millz promise not to hold back, but they do a great job of letting everyone have their say in the debate. This week, the focus is on body image. Why are more Black women having surgery to tweak their looks? And can fashion ever come back from butt lifts, fillers and Kardashian-esque filters? Hannah Verdier Film choice The Manchurian Candidate (John Frankenheimer, 1962), 9pm, BBC Four John Frankenheimer’s 1962 film is one of the great American conspiracy thrillers, with real reds under the bed sweatily bent on disrupting the US democratic process. Frank Sinatra’s Marco and Laurence Harvey’s Shaw are GIs captured during the Korean war. After their release, Shaw’s heroism is exploited by his mother (Angela Lansbury) on behalf of her senator husband’s political ambitions. But Shaw has been brainwashed by the communists as a sleeper assassin, and Marco races against time to uncover his mission and stop him. Simon WardellIt is humanity’s great frustration, to gaze into the eyes of a dog, feel so very close to the creature, and yet have no clue what it’s thinking. It’s like the first question you ask of a recently born baby, with all that aching, loving urgency: is that a first smile? Or yet more wind? Except that it’s like that for ever. I can never know what my staffie is thinking. Does Romeo realise that what he just did was funny, and did he do it on purpose? Is he laughing on the inside? Can he smile? Can he feel anxious about the future? Can he remember life as a puppy? Does he still get the horn, even though I had his knackers off some years ago? And, greater than all these things: does he love me? I mean, really love me, the way I love him? To get some answers, I enlisted a group of experts, ranging from a zoologist to an evolutionary anthropologist, and channelled the spirit of Jaak Panksepp, who is commonly acknowledged as the grandfather of dog neuroscience. He died in 2017, leaving behind a body of experimental research and insight, including the theory that all mammal brains share seven primary emotional systems: fear, rage, lust, “seeking”, panic/grief, care and play. Most of my questions fall into these categories, apart from the age-old conundrum: why does my dog get so aroused by hi-vis lanyards? To which the answer is: it could be any reason at all. Play Do dogs understand human laughter? Do they make you laugh on purpose? “Dogs do seem to respond positively to our positive emotions, like laughter and smiling,” says Dr Brian Hare, an evolutionary anthropologist and author of The Genius of Dogs. But he is cautious about interpretation. “Whether they understand the reason behind the joke, that’s harder to say.” “Dogs have learned to like us laughing,” says Rob Alleyne, a behaviourist who appeared in the TV series Dog Borstal. “They’ll do something, then look at you to see if you’re amused, then repeat that.” I once asked the comedian Rob Beckett how he could remember his routine – he keeps almost no notes – and he said: “If 500 people laugh at something you said, you’re not going to forget that.” The same circuit of approbation, creating feelings of gratification, laying down a memory of how to elicit that response in the future, is occurring in a dog. It’s just not going to be wordplay – it’ll be something more slapstick. Can dogs laugh – and do they make each other laugh? One of the most famous strands of Panksepp’s research looks at laughter in non-human mammals (including a paper with the delicious title: 50-kHz Chirping (Laughter?) in Response to Conditioned and Unconditioned Tickle-induced Reward in Rats). Dogs, he found, can sound as if they’re laughing when they’re panting, but that’s because they are: when you analyse the pant with a sonograph, then map its burst of frequencies, then play those frequencies to other dogs, it reduces stress and increases tail wagging, play-bows (head down, butt in the air stance) play-face (you know your dog’s play-face) and pro-social behaviour in general. Can a dog smile? All dogs have an expression of pleasure or contentment, which you’ll recognise as you get to know a particular animal. However, owners of some breeds believe their dogs are more smiley than average and therefore happier. This is mistaken, Alleyne says. “Generally, dogs with broad faces – staffies, rottweilers – look like they’re grinning. The same expression on a German shepherd will look like it’s curling its lips back.” Care Does my dog love me? Many years ago there was a segment on Kilroy, the daytime TV show, called “I love my animal but does my animal love me?” Alleyne appeared on it and remembers: “The audience were ready with a gallows for me by the end. Because I don’t think any animal loves us. They do things that we interpret as love, but they don’t have the capacity, not the way we mean it. That’s why we can rehome them. I couldn’t remove you from your partner and say: ‘I’ve got a friend who’s a much better fit for you.’ Whereas, if I took Romeo and gave him to someone else, three months on, that’ll be his owner.” A sound point, but if Romeo died, three months on, I’d probably have a new dog. So what if we love each other the exact same amount? What if irreplaceability isn’t the measure, in interspecies relationships? If it’s not love, why does it feel so good? “You are definitely more than a food dispenser,” Hare says. “Parents and their babies have an oxytocin loop, where they can make each other feel good just by staring into each others’ eyes. Somehow, dogs have inserted themselves into this loop, so that when dogs and owners stare at each other, it increases the oxytocin in both the dog and the owner.” What on earth is a dog doing in my oxytocin loop? The modern understanding of canine domestication – scoped out to its full in Hare’s The Genius of Dogs, and the book he co-authored with Vanessa Woods, Survival of the Friendliest – is that selection for friendliness led to the evolution of a new cognition in dogs. They gained a social understanding of what humans meant and wanted, in their gestures and commands, and the benefit to dogs is plain: shelter, nutrition and whatnot. But the philosopher Donna Haraway argues, in Companion Species Manifesto: Dogs, People and Significant Otherness, that attuning ourselves to the desires of another species has a profound impact on our own cognition. This isn’t really about what’s going on in your dog’s head. It’s just interesting. Can my dog empathise? No expert alive can tell you that your dog doesn’t know when you’re sad. Alleyne, who, as you can see, is pretty hard-boiled, recalls: “I had a dog many years ago who would recognise when I was down. He would keep his head on my knee for an hour, saying: ‘I understand.’” They can also tell, sometimes, when you have cancer or, more recently, Covid, but that’s more about bio-detection than intimacy. One simple measure of empathy is yawning. “Contagious yawning is related to empathy scores in adults,” Hare explains. “And in one study, over 70% of dogs yawned when they saw someone yawning.” Fear, panic and grief Why do dogs get separation anxiety? Strictly speaking, most of them don’t, according to Petrina Firth, director of the company The Pet Coach and a specialist in the condition. She says she has only met one dog in her career with clinical separation anxiety – an over-attachment to one person. What people generally mean by the term in dogs – destructive behaviour, howling for hours, sometimes nipping ankles when the owner’s shoes are put on, lying down in front of the doorway – is “isolation distress”, generally laid down in puppyhood. Your dog doesn’t feel safe alone, and will do anything to avoid that amorphous feeling of peril. “They don’t come pre-programmed,” Firth explains. “When you go out to Marks &amp; Spencer, they don’t know you’ll be back in an hour. It takes quite a lot of training from when they’re a young puppy to teach them that being on their own is OK, nothing bad happens. Nothing amazing is going to happen, but nothing bad.” How do they know how long you’ve been gone? Do dogs have a sense of time? If you feed your dog at the same time every day, their digestive systems will become tailored to expect food at that time and, remarkably, it can be to-the-minute accurate. The same goes for cats. But a dog that can be left for 40 minutes, yet freak out after 45 – what’s that about? The current best theory is that your scent in the air recedes minutely over time. Whenever you’re trying to understand a smell-related behaviour, remember that humans can smell a spoon of sugar in a cup of tea, while a dog can smell a spoon of sugar in a swimming pool. What’s the difference between distress and anxiety? This is mainly developmental – a young dog will experience distress in the moment: “I’m on my own and I don’t like it.” As it gets older, Firth says, “it will start to worry that it’s going to have that horrible feeling – worry about worrying, which is essentially what anxiety is. And there are lots of cues in the environment, like humans finding keys, to set them off.” Can a dog remember negative events? Can it get PTSD? Adverse early experiences can certainly affect a dog’s later behaviour, though long-term memory is insufficiently understood for us to know whether they can remember them. Service dogs returning from war zones present symptoms very similar to trauma response in soldiers. Lust Does a neutered dog still crave sex? This feels like one of those things humans ought to understand before they do the snip. Yet apparently we don’t. “It’s a complex question, with no easy answer,” says zoologist Dr Naomi Harvey. “It may depend on the timing of neutering. Expression of reproductive behaviour requires gonadal hormones, and absence of these hormones during pubertal brain development can impair reproductive behaviour long-term.” You’d expect both sexes to have diminished drive if neutered before puberty, then – however, a study of free-roaming male dogs in Chile found that castrated dogs showed no reduction in sexual activity. Does humping always mean sexual arousal? No, says Harvey. “Humping is a fairly common displacement behaviour for dogs feeling conflicted, stressed or experiencing anticipation. It can’t be assumed to indicate lust.” Rage What’s the root cause of aggression? Dogs have the same limbic system as us, manifesting what used to be the two Fs and is now understood as four: under threat, they’ll go into fight, flight, fawn or freeze mode. (Humans have another pathway to violence, which is humiliation, but a dog cannot be humiliated. “They have the emotional complexity of a two- to three-year-old child,” Firth explains, “so they don’t feel guilt and they don’t feel shame.”) Attacks are rooted in fear, and “one of the reasons people are often bitten”, Alleyne says, is that they misinterpret signs of fear. “A dog that’s panting may just be hot or he may be stressed. A dog with ‘whale eye’ [where the whites are clearly showing] might be stressed or he might be looking at something in his periphery. You’ve got to be able to look at the overall picture. If he’s got whale eye, and he’s panting, and his tail is down, and his ears are back, then he goes from panting to lip-licking, you have to be able to put all those things together.” And keep your distance. Why do some dogs attack others for no apparent reason? Hare counsels, as Alleyne does, that you just have to read it right. “Some dogs are xenophobic, which means they don’t like strangers. So just meeting a strange dog could create enough fear to make it feel like it needs to protect itself. A lot of dog aggression is explainable if you have a good understanding of dogs’ natural history, body language and behaviour.” Alleyne’s explanation is more controversial: “Aggression is by a mile the most common problem I see, which it wasn’t 20 years ago. We’ve been bullied and badgered into socialising our dogs. They’ve become aggressive towards each other when we’ve never tried harder to socialise them. We haven’t thought about what socialising is: what we’re really doing is allowing them to be beaten up by other dogs when they’re too small to protect themselves. We call it one-trial learning: it only takes a single incident for a puppy to learn that other dogs are a threat.” Seeking Why do they quest? What are they looking for? Essentially, dogs want no more than the average New Zealander, as politicians put it: somewhere to live, something to do, someone to love, something to hope for – except without the hope, having no real concept of the future. But centuries of interaction with humans have given them intense, breed-specific desires. Take the dog of the moment, the cockapoo: “People don’t realise that the mixture is two working dogs,” says Firth. “So even if you’ve got the prettiest show cocker, and the prettiest show poodle, in their genes they’re meant to be out retrieving.” I’m not trying to shame cockapoo owners, by the way: I’ve always had staffies, and I’m constantly astonished and appalled to find that a dog bred to bring down a bull will, in the absence of one, make do with a labrador. We have taught them, over generations, these unshiftable urges. Now they’re here to teach us cause and effect, if only we would listen.You are walking up a staircase that winds up to the top of a tall square tower. It ascends one side, then the next, then the next – and then suddenly you are right back where you started. This is the kind of problem people who are trapped in the geometrically impossible, yet still strangely plausible, worlds of MC Escher have to deal with all the time. In his mind-boggling creations, dimensions collide and normality dissolves. Looking into his pictures is like standing on the very edge of a cliff – and being right down at the bottom at the same time. The Dutchman’s illusions have been famous and beloved since the 1950s, when spaced-out fans first started claiming to see hemp plants hidden in his art. And now we have Kaleidocycles, a Taschen book about the artist featuring paper puzzle kits that allow you to actually build his paradoxical structures at home, unlikely as that may seem. The tome has just been reissued in time for Christmas and the 50th anniversary of his death next year. His work does seem perfect for the festive season, given it’s all fun and games. Or at least that’s how it seems, initially. Escher’s visionary flair did not just confine itself to art: he also intruded into the world of science. His profound yet impossible perspectives seem to prophesy the greatest tricks of virtual reality. Yet Maurits Cornelis Escher – born in Leeuwarden, a city north of Amsterdam, in 1898 – showed absolutely no aptitude for any academic subject at school. His father was a hydraulic engineer – an important job in a country with so much land reclaimed from the sea. Although he despaired of his son, he supported young Maurits in his studies at art college in Haarlem, and in his travels around southern Europe, where he spent years developing his style. In the 1920s, Piet Mondrian and the De Stijl movement were taking Dutch art into pure abstraction. Escher, meanwhile, was in Italy – using traditional printmaking skills to depict timeless cities on picturesque hilltops. These designs would become the building blocks of his deceiving universe. A thickly inked engraving of St Peter’s that he made in 1935 takes a spectacular, god’s-eye view of the Vatican basilica’s vast interior from up inside the dome. We see tiny people on the floor far below, as columns plummet down towards them in rushing, scary perspective. In this powerful engraving, you can clearly see the roots of Escher’s art. The work reveals his love of perspective, the method of depicting deep space and distance invented in Renaissance Italy. To the likes of Leonardo da Vinci, perspective was not just art but science. He filled his notebooks with sketches of buildings and landscapes, fascinated by this mathematical technique. Earlier this year, a film called Escher: Journey into Infinity looked afresh at this artist, examining how he gained cult status in the US counterculture, with bootleg versions of his work appearing on T-shirts. As well as exploring his influences, which range from densely packed Italian hilltop towns to the music of Bach, we found out that Mick Jagger once wrote to Escher, asking him to create an album cover. Not only did the artist decline, he told the Rolling Stone off for addressing him by his first name. A flat surface is just a flat surface. As soon as you depict something on it that seems to have depth and solidity, you are constructing an illusion. In Escher’s most mature and unsettling works, he takes that to extremes to orchestrate multi-dimensional crashes of alternate realities. In his 1953 picture Relativity, everything is drawn in strict perspective. The only trouble is there are three points of view looking towards three vanishing points (the point where lines that would be parallel in reality meet on the page). The artist called these “different worlds” and in one of them, a waiter walks down an upside-down staircase to serve al fresco diners, whose table is vertical. In another, lovers stroll in a garden in defiance of gravity. Only a flight of stairs that rises from the bottom of the picture is “the right way up”. Yet rotate the square image on its side and everything changes. A different world now becomes the real one. Escher’s dive into the beauty of maths and science started when his eyes were opened by an art even older than that of the Renaissance. When he visited the Alhambra, the medieval Islamic palace that sprawls along a clifftop overlooking Granada in southern Spain, he was carried away on a magic carpet of inspiration. Its rooms were lined with brightly coloured tiles arranged in complex patterns, fitted together in lattices of mind-boggling symmetry, all inspired by Arab science. Mathematics calls this tessellation: the complete covering of a surface by interlocking shapes without any gaps. It is the glory of Andalusian Islamic art. Escher was transfixed. He also felt challenged – as if he was looking on the work of rivals. He started drawing his own tessellated surfaces, but with a difference. While the Alhambra is full of abstract shapes, Escher set out to tessellate figurative images. Birds, fish, lizards, angels, devils – he fits together these repeated forms in hallucinatory flows that transform from one thing into another. Fish swim with wide open mouths under the sea while birds glide above: then you see the gaps between the birds are fish shaped, and vice versa. They meet at the sea’s surface in a dazzling metamorphosis. Europe was heading into shadow as Escher saw the artistic light. Horrified at the thought of his sons being brought up under fascist ideology, he moved his family from Italy to Switzerland. They then moved to Belgium but, after his mother died and the country was seized by the Nazis, they returned to the Netherlands to be closer to family and to settle her inheritance. Escher despised the Nazis and refused to ever visit Germany. So it is surely not a coincidence that he started revealing gaps in reality the very moment the world was being sucked into a black hole. In his 1938 print Day and Night, two flights of swans, black and white, tessellate as they fly in opposite directions across the border between day and night. Look longer and you realise the nocturnal and daylit landscapes are mirror images of the same European vista. Escher depicts an eerie symmetry between light and dark in the year of the Munich agreement, with the continent on a knife edge between war and peace. In 1944, now back home in the Nazi-occupied Netherlands, it would fall to Escher to get into the home of his beloved Jewish art teacher Samuel Jessurun de Mesquita – to save as much art as he could. “The Mesquita family,” he would later write, “had been hauled out of bed and taken away. It must now be regarded as practically certain that S Jessurun de Mesquita, his wife and their son Jaap all perished in a German camp.” Escher’s fantastic tessellations brought the maths of the Alhambra head to head with modern physics. Roger Penrose, who won the 2020 Nobel Prize for his pioneering work on black holes, encountered Escher’s art in the 1950s while at a conference in Amsterdam. He went home and tried drawing Escher-like conundrums, publishing a paper that unveiled two “impossible” objects: a staircase that loops on itself without going up, and a solid triangular structure that looks real yet is connected in a totally absurd way, with its three corners all seeming to push outward while actually being on the same plane. When Escher saw these Escheresque objects, he responded with his own fantastic interpretations of the infinite staircase and the Penrose triangle. His 1960 print Ascending and Descending depicts cowled figures marching up and down a staircase atop a palace that just takes them back to where they started. In 1961’s Waterfall, he gives the same seductive depth and detail to a vision of a waterfall working a mill. After hitting the mill wheel, water flows along a flat, zig-zagging channel until – impossibly – it falls again. Escher explained it was based on the Penrose triangle. So, in the 1960s, this Dutch graphic artist who had failed at school was in dialogue with the most advanced mathematics around. Another print shows angels and devils interlocking on a sphere-like surface, getting smaller as they approach the edges of the globe. While striking, it looks almost straightforwardly Escheresque – yet in his book Cycles of Time, Penrose uses this work to explain the non-Euclidean “hyperbolic” geometry behind a new theory of the cosmos. In the pantheon of art-and-science crossovers, this is an extraordinary achievement. Art is another way of thinking about the universe. It can illustrate mathematical phenomena that few could follow any other way. Escher took two artistic traditions, Islamic abstraction and Renaissance perspective, and fused them. The result is a multiverse of delights with no correct way up or down. Escher proved that looking can be a magical kind of thinking. • MC Escher Kaleidocycles is out now from Taschen, £50.On 20 November 1984, in the southern German city of Freiburg, two film-makers faced each other in court for the first day of a trial that was to last nearly two and a half years. The plaintiff, Leni Riefenstahl, had been Hitler’s favourite film-maker. Now 82, she showed up to court in a sheepskin coat over a beige suit, her blond hair set in a large neat perm framing a tanned face. The defendant was a striking, dark-haired 32-year-old documentary maker. Her name was Nina Gladitz, and the outcome of the trial would shape the rest of her life. During the Nazi era, Riefenstahl had been the regime’s most skilled propagandist, directing films that continue to be both reviled for their glorification of the Third Reich and considered landmarks of early cinema for their innovations and technical mastery. Once the second world war was over, Riefenstahl sought to distance herself from the regime she had served, portraying herself as an apolitical naif whose only motivation was making the most beautiful art possible. “I don’t know what I should apologise for,” she once said. “All my films won the top prize.” Riefenstahl was taking Gladitz to court over claims made in Gladitz’s television documentary Time of Darkness and Silence, which had aired in 1982. In the film, members of a family of Sinti – a Romani people living mainly in Germany and Austria – had accused Riefenstahl of taking them out of Maxglan, a Nazi concentration camp near Salzburg, in September 1940, and forcing them to work as extras in her feature film Tiefland (Lowlands). Riefenstahl would later claim that all of the Romani extras – 53 Roma and Sinti from Maxglan, and a further 78 from a camp in eastern Berlin – had survived the war. In fact, almost 100 of them are known or believed to have been gassed in Auschwitz, just a small fraction of the 220,000 to 500,000 Romani people murdered in the Holocaust. Some of the survivors insisted that Riefenstahl had promised to save them. One, Josef Reinhardt, was 13 when he was drafted as an extra. He was the trial’s key witness, and sat beside Gladitz in the courtroom every day. Riefenstahl denied that she had visited the camp to handpick the extras, denied failing to pay them and denied having promised and subsequently failed to save them from Auschwitz. She claimed that, while making the film, she had not known of the existence of the gas chambers, nor of the fate of the Roma and Sinti. When Gladitz’s documentary was played in court on the opening day of the trial, Riefenstahl repeatedly interrupted the screening with cries of “Lies! Lies!” and “Nothing but a lie!” As her shouts echoed round the darkened courtroom, the judge, Günther Oswald, told her: “Madam, I have no other choice than to watch the film.” While there is no doubt that Riefenstahl’s account of her own life is far from reliable, it has been hard to establish precisely what she knew about the horrors perpetrated during the Third Reich. She was the regime’s leading film propagandist for almost its entire duration, and her films included Triumph of the Will, about the Nuremberg rally, and Olympia, a record of the 1936 Berlin Olympic Games. But, though she was a close friend of Adolf Hitler and other high-ranking Nazis, such as the fanatical antisemite Julius Streicher, Riefenstahl fiercely denied any awareness of the slaughter that took place in concentration camps. Jürgen Trimborn, author of a highly critical biography published in 2002, declared that there was “no evidence that, due to her proximity to the regime, Riefenstahl knew more than others did about the mass annihilation of the Jews. But it is obvious that, like most Germans, she knew enough to be sure that it was better not to know even more.” (Gladitz would later judge this analysis as far too generous.) During the trial, Riefenstahl produced correspondence from one of the extras that appeared to support her account of her good relationship with them while filming Tiefland. It was accepted that they had habitually referred to her as “Tante Leni”, or Auntie Leni. “Even if you don’t want to believe it, the Gypsies – the adults as well as the children – were our darlings,” Riefenstahl said. But the court also heard that during the day the extras were watched by two policemen, and at night they were locked up in sheds and cellars. A contract discovered by Gladitz in archives in Salzburg showed an agreement between Riefenstahl and the SS camp guard that measures would be taken against any attempts at escape. When the trial finally reached its conclusion, in March 1987, Gladitz won on three out of four points. The judge ruled that Riefenstahl had indeed visited the Maxglan camp to choose the extras, and that they had not been paid for their work. He also overturned Riefenstahl’s description of Maxglan as a “relief and welfare camp”, stating that by definition it was a concentration camp. But Josef Reinhardt’s assertion that Riefenstahl had promised to save him and his family from deportation to Auschwitz, or that she knew what would happen to the Roma and Sinti once there, could not be proven, Judge Oswald said. And so he ordered the removal of the scene in Gladitz’s documentary in which Reinhardt recalled Riefenstahl’s promise. For Gladitz, this was a disaster. “There are certain edits I am not prepared to tolerate,” she told the court. Her refusal to remove the scene meant that WDR, the broadcaster of the documentary, consigned the film to the archives, where it has remained under lock and key ever since. In the years that followed, commissions for new films dried up, and Gladitz’s financial situation, already strained from being unable to work during the trial, worsened. “In the TV world I had become persona non grata, because I had dared to out Riefenstahl as a perpetrator,” Gladitz told me many years later. Though some journalists framed the verdict of the trial as an ending, for Gladitz it was only a beginning. She would spend the next four decades consumed by Riefenstahl, devoting most of her waking hours to pursuing the truth about her as no one else, in her view, had adequately done. Her career, her friendships, her finances and her health would all be sacrificed in the attempt to find evidence that would finally, conclusively, condemn Riefenstahl. The result would be the publication, last year, of her magnum opus, the product of a life’s obsession, Leni Riefenstahl: Karriere einer Täterin (“Career of a Perpetrator”). “Some people are certainly going to accuse her – and I don’t think it can really be denied – that this is something of a personal vendetta,” her publisher told me. For Gladitz, though, this was irrelevant. “The most important thing is that Riefenstahl’s myth is dead,” she told me on the day the book was published. “In my mind’s eye, I see her grave glowing from within because she’s turning in it so fast.” * * * I first met Nina Gladitz in 2002, when she contacted me ahead of Riefenstahl’s 100th birthday. Gladitz was supporting a Roma and Sinti rights group in a new legal challenge against Riefenstahl, and she wanted me to cover her efforts for a British newspaper. She was insistent – then and in the years to come – that if I wrote about her work, it must be in what she deemed to be the right way. “This is not about me. I will not let you focus on me and ignore my research,” she would tell me, although our conversations invariably led back to her own life. The more time I spent with Gladitz, the more apparent it became that her fixation was as much to do with her own biography, and with laying some of her own ghosts to rest, as it was about Riefenstahl. The shadow of the Nazi era had hung over Gladitz’s childhood. Born in 1946, she grew up in Schwäbisch Gmünd in the south-western state of Baden-Württemberg, about 30 miles east of the state capital, Stuttgart. Her beautiful, uncaring mother was, Gladitz believed, mourning the loss of Hitler. “She fed me. But affection and love or the feeling of emotional security was totally lacking,” Gladitz recalled. “Her standard insult to me was: ‘You’re not my daughter, you must have fallen out of a Gypsy’s pram.’” When she was about five, Gladitz overheard her mother and an aunt talking about how many people, including children, had been murdered in the gas chambers. “I suddenly became convinced my mother must have been involved,” Gladitz once told me. “Even though I later realised this could not have been the case, it was logical for a five-year-old, on the basis of my own experiences, to easily imagine my unloving mother had been one of the perpetrators.” In Gladitz’s telling, her childhood was sheltered and isolated. Playmates were not allowed to visit the family’s house, which stood on the side of a hill. Her imagination was her escape, fuelled in part by the magical films her father would show to Gladitz and her siblings. In her early 20s, Gladitz moved to Munich to study at the University of Television and Film. It was there that she first came across Riefenstahl’s work, but she was more interested in the growing movement against nuclear power, and other leftwing causes, than she was in looking back to the Nazi era. Soon after graduation, she made an agitprop documentary about attempts to block a nuclear power plant located not far from where she grew up, which was named the Chicago film festival’s documentary of the year in 1974. Gladitz’s interest in Riefenstahl began in 1977, when an acquaintance sent her a letter that he thought might interest her. It had been written by Josef Reinhardt more than 20 years earlier, and Gladitz’s acquaintance had found it in the archive of the Association of Persecutees of the Nazi regime. Reinhardt had asked the association for financial help, explaining that he and members of his family had been picked from a prison camp by Riefenstahl and forced to work as extras on Tiefland in 1940 and 1941. He had included two small black-and-white photographs of poorly clad, barefoot children. In Riefenstahl’s oeuvre, Tiefland remains a largely forgotten work. Based on an opera by Eugen d’Albert, the bucolic romantic drama was filmed between 1940 and 1944, and cost 6m Reichsmarks to make – a staggering sum for the time. The funding was secured thanks to an intervention by Hitler, with the project classed as vital to the war effort, though the film was not released until well after the war. When Tiefland finally reached cinemas in 1954, it received a lukewarm response from filmgoers and critics, who dismissed it as wooden and schmaltzy. Almost all the closeups of the Sinti and Roma extras had been edited out. When Gladitz visited the national film archives in Koblenz a few weeks after reading Reinhardt’s letter, she was amazed to find that it had no documentation on Tiefland whatsoever. “I had been sure that one drawer after another would open itself to me with documents on how Tiefland was made,” she recalled. “I knew immediately that I would have to start this lonely search on my own.” Her life’s work had begun. * * * With remarkable speed, Gladitz managed to track down Reinhardt, who was living in the town of Offenburg in western Germany. A violin maker by profession, he was the nephew of the jazz great Django Reinhardt, and also of Schnuckenack Reinhardt, known as the violin virtuoso of Sinti music. At their first meeting, Reinhardt told his story over several hours. He and his family had fled Nazi Germany to Austria in the 30s. Following Germany’s annexation of Austria in 1938, he had hidden with his relatives in the mountain forest south of Salzburg. They were captured by local authorities in October 1939 and held in horse boxes before being taken to a holding point near Salzburg, which prisoners had themselves been forced to transform into a “concentration-style” camp, later known as Maxglan, with barbed-wire fencing and a watchtower. He had first seen Riefenstahl there in September 1940, accompanied by several SS officers. Riefenstahl had, he said, inspected an array of pre-selected prisoners, including his teenage self, and several family members. The group Riefenstahl selected was soon transported to the film set, which was in Krün, near the Bavarian town of Mittenwald, about 125 miles to the west. As soon as Reinhardt and the other extras arrived, they were put to work. Their food and accommodation were, Reinhardt recalled, “worse than in the camp”. They slept on bare boards in sheds, barns, animal stalls and cellars, which were locked up at night. They were under constant watch. The women and children had been separated from the men, the majority of whom were left in the camp in Salzburg. Filming continued for about 13 months, until November 1941, after which the extras were ordered to march to the nearest railway station. Reinhardt told Gladitz they had not been allowed to take any of the costumes they had worn on set, instead having to wear the rags they had arrived in the previous year. The children no longer fitted their clothes. “We had to go barefoot because we had all grown out of the shoes we’d had. It was bitterly cold,” Reinhardt remembered. For the rest of his life he could only wear soft shoes as a result of the frostbite he suffered. Gladitz knew almost immediately that she would make a documentary about Reinhardt’s story. In time she also began to grasp, as she said, “why no one had known about Riefenstahl’s abuse of her defenceless prisoners”. In 1949, Riefenstahl had successfully sued Helmut Kindler, a magazine publisher who had been involved in wartime resistance, for revealing her exploitation of the Sinti and Roma extras. From then on, Riefenstahl had pursued dozens of further legal battles against those who had written or said anything about her that she disliked. Gladitz was determined to speak to Riefenstahl for the documentary, and in 1981, she managed to track her down in Frankfurt. Their first encounter took place in a bookshop, where Gladitz posed as a film-maker called Anna Madou, hoping to make a film about great 20th-century artists. Using the same false identity, she wrote to Riefenstahl a few months later to remind her of their earlier meeting and to ask whether – given great interest in the project from, among others, the BBC and NBC – they could schedule an interview soon. She signed off: “Please forgive me once again for the tenacity with which I have already pursued you and be assured of my admiration and veneration for your great art!” For what she imagined would be the central scene in the documentary, Gladitz hoped to stage a meeting between Reinhardt and Riefenstahl. She envisaged Reinhardt greeting the film-maker warmly and starting a conversation, before eventually confronting her with the truth about her “extras”. “The idea came from Josef,” Gladitz told me. “He said he would go to her, as his favourite Gypsy, and say: ‘Tante Leni, it’s so great to see you again.’ I knew she would not have been able to resist him.” But the plan collapsed after Gladitz asked Riefenstahl, prior to the meeting with Reinhardt, what she calls a “throwaway question” – about how Riefenstahl had related to other women during the Third Reich, given her proximity to the overwhelmingly male inner circle of the Nazi regime. “It was as if I had put poison in her tea,” said Gladitz. “She turned away from me coldly, and I knew then that it was never going to work. It was such a stupid question. If I had known then that she had had several clandestine lesbian affairs, I would have known better than to ask that.” (“Frau Gladitz,” Riefenstahl would later write in her memoir, “clearly had the specific intention from the very start of producing a slanderous concoction about me.”) * * * Today, the only way to see Time of Darkness and Silence is to get hold of a bootleg. Not long ago, via a French film director, I managed to obtain a grainy DVD copy of a VHS recording of the original broadcast. Despite the poor quality of the bootleg, the film retains its power. Watching it almost 40 years after it first aired, one is struck by the intimacy of the encounter with Reinhardt and his relatives, as they sit on their sofa, smoking and drinking coffee and relating their awful experiences. There is no musical accompaniment, no frills, no schnick-schnack, as the Germans say. Instead, what we get are the plain facts of the hunger they felt during the filming, the nights spent locked together in a stall with a single bucket for a toilet. At one point, Gladitz returns with Reinhardt to the place where Tiefland was filmed, and to the site of the former Maxglan camp. There is no trace of the horrors that unfolded there, just empty fields. It is only through Reinhardt’s testimony that we rediscover the significance of these sites, as he recalls where the watchtower once stood, the location of the kitchen, the entrance, the places where he was told to put up the barbed wire. Time of Darkness and Silence aired in Germany on 6 September 1982. Reviews were sparse, but those that did appear recognised the film’s significance. Few Germans had ever heard Sinti and Roma talk about their experiences in the Holocaust, and the fact that Gladitz had persuaded them to talk so openly on camera was remarkable, wrote a reviewer in Die Zeit. It wasn’t until the following year that Riefenstahl watched the documentary. In June 1983, she wrote an angry letter to her lawyer, claiming that she was “stunned” by the film’s “monstrous aspersions”. She immediately set about suing Gladitz for defamation. Going into the trial, Gladitz knew that not everyone would take her side. Riefenstahl’s work had experienced a renaissance in the previous decade, with several feminists celebrating her for succeeding in such a patriarchal environment, and some film critics arguing that the beauty and ambition of her films should be appreciated separately from the context of their production. (Others disagreed: Susan Sontag saw Riefenstahl’s aesthetics as entirely inseparable from Nazi ideology, calling The Triumph of the Will “the most purely propagandistic film ever made”.) Even Gladitz’s mother, who attended court every day, seemed to side with the plaintiff. “That poor Leni Riefenstahl,” she said to her daughter one day, “what you’re putting her through.” Over the years, Gladitz’s childhood suspicions of her mother’s Nazi sympathies had not diminished. During the trial, these confrontations took on a new intensity. “I was so incredibly angry,” Gladitz told me. “I took her by her blouse and pushed her against the wall and said: ‘I’ll let you go when you tell me what you knew about the Nazis.’” The most her mother admitted was thinking “nothing good” would come of the Nazis’ deportation of the last Jews from Schwäbisch Gmünd, which she had witnessed. (Gladitz believed that her mother sensed this “quarrel with Riefenstahl also had something to do with her”. Others sensed it, too. “You are aware who the Riefenstahl in your life is, aren’t you?” a doctor friend asked, and urged her to find a psychoanalyst.) With her documentary banished to the archives, Gladitz decided to continue gathering more stories of those whom Riefenstahl had betrayed and exploited. She met Rosa Winter, who had been 17 when Riefenstahl chose her as an extra for Tiefland. Winter’s mother had to stay behind in Maxglan concentration camp. When Winter began to fear that her mother would be killed there, she escaped from the set and began walking back to the camp on foot. She was caught and taken to a police cell in Salzburg. According to Winter, Riefenstahl visited her and ordered her to get down on her knees and beg for forgiveness. When she refused, Riefenstahl ordered the girl to be imprisoned, and Winter endured five years of incarceration in Ravensbrück concentration camp. Gladitz was also haunted by the story of Willy Zielke, a talented film-maker who had filmed and edited the famous prologue of Riefenstahl’s film Olympia. Zielke was absent from the film’s premiere in 1938, which had been part of the celebrations for Hitler’s 49th birthday, and Riefenstahl had Zielke’s name removed from the credits. Gladitz discovered that at the time of the premiere, Zielke was in a psychiatric institution, having had a nervous breakdown. As she pored over Zielke’s unpublished memoirs and his medical records, Gladitz grew convinced that Riefenstahl was responsible for Zielke’s admission to the clinic. In 1942, Riefenstahl removed him from the institution by appointing herself his legal guardian. She insisted that he help her with the filming of Tiefland, and later, during the edit, forced him to sleep in an unheated room guarded by one of her assistants so that he wouldn’t escape, and gave him such paltry portions of food that he was close to starvation. Bringing these stories to light became Gladitz’s mission. She gathered more and more interviews and documents, each piece of research opening a door to the next. Finally, she started compiling it all into a work that she hoped would finally prove the extent of Riefenstahl’s crimes. Time of Darkness and Silence may languish indefinitely in the archives, but Gladitz hoped that her book would vindicate the documentary’s creation. * * * In late 2015, Gladitz contacted me again with some news: her book was finished. She had uncovered many new details about Riefenstahl’s life and crimes, she said, including previously untold stories of those whose lives she had destroyed. The manuscript was more than 1,000 pages long. A few days later, we met in a crowded cafe in Berlin. Dressed imposingly in a voluminous black velveteen dress coat, bulky necklace and black hat, Gladitz was what I would soon come to recognise as characteristically blunt. “I don’t see why I have to justify my motive,” she said, when I asked what had made her pursue the story of Riefenstahl for what was now more than three decades. “In retrospect it feels like the topic found me, rather than the other way round.” Gladitz explained her disgust at what she called “Riefenstahl’s renaissance in public life”, which she saw as tacit acceptance of the director’s lies and self-mythology. In 1998, for instance, Riefenstahl had been a guest of honour at Time magazine’s 75th anniversary banquet, where she had been given a standing ovation. In 2002, the year of her 100th birthday, in an interview with the leftwing Frankfurter Rundschau newspaper, Riefenstahl had declared that she had seen all of the Tiefland extras after the war and “none of them came to any harm”. The newspaper did not attempt to contradict her. Our meeting lasted several hours. Afterwards, I realised that in more than 25 years as a journalist, I had never met anyone so consumed by a single subject, or so indignant about the fact that hers was such a lonely pursuit. Since the trial with Riefenstahl, Gladitz had made other films, most of which championed underdog heroes. But in all the conversations I would go on to have with her, Gladitz barely mentioned these projects. She only wanted to talk about Riefenstahl, and how others had failed to pursue various lines of inquiry because of their ignorance and negligence. After that second meeting, Gladitz became a constant presence in my life. We usually met in the same Berlin cafe in Charlottenburg, and as she smoked roll-ups and nibbled on pastries, often the only food she would eat that day, she would keep me abreast of the latest developments and share with me her theories – details of Riefenstahl’s secret lesbian affairs, or her lie that a knee injury, rather than simple lack of talent, had ended her dancing career. Our phone calls usually lasted an hour or more, as she itemised the new letters, documents, court records and diaries she had uncovered, here in a French archive, there in a Polish one. I filled notebook after notebook during these meetings, struggling to keep up as she swept through her years of research, each new find reinforcing with greater intensity what she had known all along. Sometimes it felt as if Gladitz saw me as a journalist, a useful contact who could bring her research to a wider audience; sometimes, I was closer to a friend, or at least a confidante to a lonely woman who could not tolerate most people, and whom most people found intolerable. (I did too, at times.) The discussions sometimes spilled over into evening email exchanges. Once she sent me Riefenstahl’s description of her ecstatic feelings on first encountering Hitler: “It seemed as if the Earth’s surface were spreading out in front of me, like a hemisphere that suddenly splits apart in the middle, spewing out an enormous jet of water, so powerful that it touched the sky and shook the Earth.” “It is – well what is it?” Gladitz asked me. “Either childbirth or an orgasm,” I emailed back. “Bingo,” she replied. “She is quite obviously describing an orgasm.” Every new fact further underlined the depths of Riefenstahl’s deviousness, her devotion to the führer. After Gladitz had a heart attack in 2016, I visited her in hospital in Charlottenburg, where I found Riefenstahl documents lining the windowsill. A few weeks later, I attended her 70th birthday party at a tavern in Berlin, where all the guests – historians, archivists, editors – seemed connected to her work on Riefenstahl. There she held court, tapping her ringed fingers on the table, entertaining the guests with Riefenstahl anecdotes until well after midnight. * * * In the five years after she completed it, Gladitz’s book was rejected by about 30 publishers. To her, this was further proof that they were all “too afraid to release a critical book about the sacred Leni Riefenstahl”. Recent critical biographies of Riefenstahl, such as Trimborn’s, had not, in Gladitz’s opinion, gone far enough. When the literary agent Lianne Kolf received Gladitz’s manuscript in 2019, she recognised it as one of the best finds of her long career. “I thought: ‘Finally someone who is telling the truth about Riefenstahl, who she really was and what she really did,’” Kolf told me. She decided to represent Gladitz, but was also frank that the reason the book had struggled to find a publisher was “not so much because of the topic, but simply because the text was so unwieldy”. In the end, as Gladitz admitted to me, she had been forced to pay for an editor to pull the text into a manageable shape. Eventually, in early 2020, the Zurich-based publishing house Orell Füssli took on the manuscript. Stephan Meyer, its nonfiction publishing director, told me that communication with Gladitz had not always been easy. “Her attempts to steer the reception of the book are not likely to help its success,” he said, shortly before it came out. One of Gladitz’s demands was that she would only be interviewed by people who could prove they had read the entire book. When we spoke on the day of the book’s publication, 23 October 2020, Gladitz was elated. “I have finally managed to shatter the Riefenstahl monument, with all 675g of my book, a paper hammer,” she told me over the phone. No one, she insisted, will be able to write another word on Riefenstahl without referring to her book. “Even my mother would be forced to take me seriously.” By then, Gladitz had gone back to live in Schwäbisch Gmünd. Her movements were restricted by the pandemic and her own failing health. There was no publication party. “I don’t need a red carpet, and no one needs to tickle my tummy,” she said. Instead, she had celebrated with a latte macchiato, which an old friend, a former admirer from her teenage years, had delivered to her one-bedroom apartment. She was sleeping on a sofa bed, surrounded by mountains of Riefenstahl material packed into large plastic boxes. In the weeks after Gladitz’s book came out, it received considerable coverage. The French-German cultural TV channel Arte produced a documentary, which stated that Gladitz proves “the extent to which, unknown until now, the cultural ambassador of the Third Reich was entangled in the crimes of the Nazis”. The German magazine Der Spiegel ran a long article about the book’s gestation. The Frankfurter Allgemeine was more sceptical, saying that the book sometimes “borders on obsession” and will be “more a point of departure” for future Riefenstahl scholars than “representing a conclusive position”. (Among the points it queried was Gladitz’s claim that Riefenstahl had an affair with the Black American athlete Jesse Owens, hero of the 1936 Olympics. “But everyone knows that’s true!” Gladitz protested, when I asked her about it.) Gladitz was furious at much of the coverage, even those articles that were largely positive. Indeed, before the book was published, Gladitz had complained to me about a leading historian of the Nazi era, who had written a laudatory postscript for the book, which included the gentle concession that “historians may perhaps find some of her interpretations hard to follow, or not give them the importance the author does”. Gladitz judged this analysis a “declaration of intellectual bankruptcy” and the postscript was scrapped shortly before publication. It was replaced by an eloquent 12-page appreciation from Albrecht Götz von Olenhusen, professor of law at the University of Düsseldorf, who represented Gladitz in the 80s trial, and whom she had long regarded as her most constant and loyal supporter. One of the moments in the discarded postscript that had most infuriated Gladitz was the historian’s reference to a popular nickname for Riefenstahl during the Third Reich: Reichsgletscherspalte or “glacial crevasse of the Reich” – a nod to her mountaineering prowess and her sexual promiscuity. “That is just not on,” Gladitz told me. “It’s totally lacking in respect.” She sounded almost sympathetic towards Riefenstahl. It was an odd moment, her words perhaps indicating less respect than recognition. Over the years, Gladitz had spoken to me about the repeated abuse she had suffered from men, including from a violent ex-husband, and about being sexually harassed as a girl while walking home from school. Gladitz wanted Riefenstahl to be known for her crimes and condemned for her complicity, her lies and her cruelty. Sceptical though she was about those who viewed the director “through feminist eyes”, she bridled at seeing Riefenstahl belittled because of her sex, an experience she knew only too well. * * * Sometimes Gladitz’s short temper, and frustration that her work was not getting the respect it deserved, were directed at me. She felt annoyed, betrayed even, when I asked, after publication, if I could still draw on two previous manuscripts I had read, both much longer than the published version. She replied that if there were elements of those manuscripts I found interesting, why had I not intervened to stop her editor cutting them? It had not, of course, been in my power to do so, but I felt guilty nonetheless. I often felt guilty around Gladitz – at not doing enough to help her, and at my inability to find her research as riveting as she did, even as I filled page after page with details of her work. By the time the book appeared, I had been in constant contact with her for five years. Occasionally, I felt my obsession with Gladitz had started to mirror her obsession with Riefenstahl, as the piece I had been planning to write grew and grew, year after year, and my office was taken over by mounds of related books, documents and newspaper articles. A few days after the publication of her book, I went to visit Gladitz in Schwäbisch Gmünd for the weekend. On the Saturday, we returned to her childhood home. Despite the house’s calm elegance, despite the brilliant sunshine and the peaceful woodland setting, Gladitz shuddered as we approached. When we reached the house, she would not get out of the car, sitting firmly in the passenger seat, enveloped in her trademark black gauzy dress and a knitted headband. In her deep husky voice, she dismissed my suggestion that we take a photograph of her in front of the house. A very silly idea, she said. Gladitz was notably more decrepit than when I had seen her last, and dependent on a walking frame. She was sick and exhausted, and her eyesight had deteriorated. In an email she had sent to friends and supporters when her book came out, she had invited them to “celebrate with me, the birth of my ‘baby’ after nearly 50 years of pregnancy”. Attached was a picture of the thirtysomething she had been at the time of the trial in 1984, captioned “BEFORE”, next to one of a large brown bear slumped on its stomach, captioned “AFTER”. Below she had written: “Book writing is not helpful for beauty contests.” For all her frailty, it was clear that Gladitz felt the years of struggle had been worth it. She was buoyed up by the recent sale of the film rights to her book, to a company that hoped to make a series for Netflix. Gladitz said she was planning to act as the project’s adviser and that she wanted Judi Dench to play the older Riefenstahl. On the last evening of my visit, we sat down on the sofa to watch Tiefland. Gladitz wanted to explain her reading of the film, which sees in it a deeply antisemitic message. “This is a real privilege that I’m letting you watch it with me,” she said, pulling tobacco from a battered tin and rolling the cigarettes that she would chain smoke as the film played. We had not been watching long before she flared up with impatience at my questions, at my inability to recognise as clearly as she did the film’s symbolism. She explained to me how the final scene, in which the main characters walk off together into paradise, is the perfect representation of the Germany Hitler had dreamed of. “The last words Hitler spoke to Riefenstahl when she visited him in March 1944 were ‘Germany will rise again far more beautiful than it was before’,” Gladitz told me. At one point, I asked her how she felt at being viewed as someone whose life has been taken hostage by Leni Riefenstahl. “I’ve never seen myself as a victim,” she said. She had numerous ongoing conflicts with historians and editors, and there were still legal battles she intended to fight, including with the broadcaster of Time of Darkness and Silence, to recover lost earnings and to have the film brought out of the archive. Now that her book was published, and given her struggles with her health, I asked whether it might be time to allow herself a more peaceful life. “Only weak people give in,” she told me. The next morning she refused to meet me for breakfast. “You think I’ve just been dawdling for the past 40 years? That is just the verdict of a trampeltier [a clumsy oaf],” she yelled at me down the phone. “Well I say thank God I had the guts to fight her.” * * * On my seven-hour train journey back to Berlin, my head rang with her stories, recollections, jokes and insults. From then on our communication was scant – I knew she was still angry with me – and consisted mostly of businesslike emails via her agent. Gladitz’s health continued to worsen, and in early April 2021, she had heart surgery. From her hospital bed, she discussed the TV adaptation of her book with its producer, Ulrich Limmer. The series, which has the working title Leni, will be the first major biopic of Riefenstahl. On 22 April, I received the news I had been expecting for some time. When it arrived, in an email from her niece, it was still a shock. Gladitz had died a few days earlier. Her body had been discovered by a health visitor calling at her flat. She had apparently died peacefully in her sleep. Her ashes were buried under a tree on 12 May at a cemetery in Schwäbisch Gmünd. It was a cloudy day and the group of mourners was small, partly owing to Covid restrictions. Most were family members or old schoolfriends, many of whom Gladitz had not seen for 60 years or more. Gladitz’s niece said her aunt had “sought the closeness” of her relatives in her final days. “That gives us some solace, even if her loss pains us,” she wrote. In the weeks after her death, a smattering of articles about Gladitz appeared in the German press. In an obituary in Die Welt, the film critic Hanns-Georg Rodek praised her determination and the depth of her research. “She did not tolerate ignorance,” he wrote. “She demanded loyalty.” Rodek is one of a group of journalists urging the broadcaster WDR to rescue Time of Darkness and Silence from the vaults. When I met Rodek for coffee recently, it turned out that his relationship with Gladitz had not been dissimilar to mine. He had known her in the final few years of her life, after she contacted him with a request that he publish her work. We shared our experiences of Gladitz – how easily she had taken offence at a stray remark, or when she felt her work wasn’t being given the dignity it deserved. “I’m glad to hear it wasn’t just me,” he said with a faint smirk. There was a strange kind of camaraderie that came from having known this singular woman. Her fury, often hard to bear, was her fuel. For most people, “pursuing the truth” or “confronting the past” are just platitudes or abstractions. For Gladitz, nothing was more important. Every lie or error that Riefenstahl had introduced into the public record, no matter how tiny, was an abomination to her. Attempts to rehabilitate Riefenstahl, by ignoring or failing to properly investigate her crimes, were the sign of a moral rot that needed to be cut out. “Take it to its logical conclusion and one day people might think Hitler was a second-rate landscape painter,” she once told me, her voice filled with anger. During the years she spent consumed by her book, fearing that it would never find a publisher, this is what kept her going. “I have achieved my life’s purpose,” she told me the last time I saw her. “I am my book.” • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, listen to our podcasts here and sign up to the long read weekly email here.Here is the experience of watching comic Tim Robinson’s sketch show I Think You Should Leave: a breathless giggling fit, uncontrollable laughter and not quite being able to remember what you originally found so funny. After watching one of its skits, you were primed to laugh at anything and everything – often at the most inappropriate moments. Landing on Netflix in 2019, Robinson’s first season was six episodes, running at around 15 minutes each. They were packed with so much absurdist humour that they had viewers coming back for rewatches to decipher the unfurling gags. The character “focus group man” even became a wildly popular meme, turning an eightysomething actor into the subject of endless gifs, thanks to a habit of relentlessly shouting absurd comments such as “Stinky!” across the reasonable suggestions of his fellow attendee Paul. When the second season of I Think You Should Leave premiered in July this year, it took this spiralling premise to an apex of giggle-inducing, bite-size television. Here, Robinson’s surreal world reached peak form. There are segments such as the Corncob TV Coffin Flop sketch – a reality TV satire, where a television exec sings the praises of his show that films corpses falling out of coffins at funerals. Even though one in five corpses is inexplicably naked. “I say we don’t need the family’s permission! We’re allowed to show them nude because they ain’t got no soul!” There’s the awful hat guy. He unwittingly becomes the subject of an insider trading trial, when the prosecutor reads out a text message exchange full of gossip from colleagues about his attempt to use terrible headgear to appear cool. “I swear to fucking God, he tried to roll the hat down his arm like Fred Astaire, but the back flap got trapped around Rick’s wheelchair,” reads the prosecutor. Cue the camera panning to hat guy, sat in the courtroom stalls, face turning red as he adjusts a grey fedora with safari flaps hanging down the back. Then there’s the diner friend, a weirdly touching skit where a dad appeals to a stranger (a spectacularly stony-faced Bob Odenkirk) in a restaurant to back up a lie to his child about the ice-cream store being closed. He gets dragged into a fantastical backstory by the stranger, forced to agree with ever-more ludicrous statements such as: “I own every kind of classic car. And I’m rich. And I don’t live in a hotel.” Just like that snowballing white lie, in its second season Robinson and his co-stars pulled at the threads of their gags almost to the point of unravelling the very sense of them – and left viewers astounded at their capacity to create hilarity from increasingly outrageous situations. There are meme generators dedicated to the show. There are Twitter accounts in its honour. Because, as many viewers found out in 2021, this is a show that made you want to keep the laughter going. Its sketches are so incredibly rewatchable that one viewing isn’t enough. Once you’ve seen them, you want to press play again and again – and again.Health experts have expressed fears over the impact tighter Covid restrictions in England could have on cancer patients as alarming new figures reveal that the number taking part in clinical trials plummeted by almost 60% during the pandemic. Almost 40,000 cancer patients in England were “robbed” of the chance to take part in life-saving trials during the first year of the coronavirus crisis, according to a report by the Institute of Cancer Research (ICR), which said Covid-19 had compounded longstanding issues of trial funding, regulation and access. Figures obtained from the National Institute for Health Research by the ICR show that the number of patients recruited on to clinical trials for cancer in England fell to 27,734 in 2020-21, down 59% from an average of 67,057 over the three years previously. The number of patients recruited for trials fell for almost every type of cancer analysed. Health experts said the relentless impact of Covid on the ability of doctors and scientists to run clinical trials was denying many thousands of cancer patients access to the latest treatment options and delaying the development of cutting-edge drugs. Nick James, professor of prostate and bladder cancer research at the ICR, said: “Clinical trials are the single best way to turn advances in science into patient benefits. But trial recruitment has plummeted during the pandemic, slowing the pipeline of new treatments and robbing people with cancer access to potentially life-saving medicines. “We need urgent investment in the Covid-19 recovery of clinical trials. We also need to learn the lessons from Covid-19. It’s clear that bureaucracy and regulatory barriers for clinical trials often do more harm than good, hindering our progress in developing the next gamechanging cancer treatments.” Asked about the possible impact of further Covid restrictions on cancer research and patients, James said that Plan B “may not be a bad thing” if it helped the NHS to continue treating cancer patients. However, he expressed concerns that a renewed “focus” on the virus may come at a cost to cancer patients and clinical trials. “Given at present Covid deaths are running way below cancer deaths, we just have to make sure we don’t focus on the wrong things to the detriment of a much wider group of people, by worsening outcomes for things that are actually much bigger killers than Covid.”Steven Spielberg’s West Side Story 2.0 is an ecstatic act of ancestor-worship. It’s a vividly dreamed, cunningly modified and visually staggering revival. No one but Spielberg could have pulled it off, creating a movie in which Leonard Bernstein’s score and Stephen Sondheim’s lyrics blaze out with fierce new clarity. Spielberg retains María’s narcissistic I Feel Pretty, transplanted from the bridal workshop to a fancy department store where she’s working as a cleaner. This was the number whose Cowardian skittishness Sondheim himself had second thoughts about. But its confection is entirely palatable. Spielberg has worked with screenwriter Tony Kushner to change the original book by Arthur Laurents, tilting the emphases and giving new stretches of unsubtitled Spanish dialogue, and keeping much of the visual idiom of Jerome Robbins’s stylised choreography. This new West Side Story isn’t updated historically yet neither is it a shot-for-shot remake. But daringly, maybe defiantly, it reproduces the original period ambience with stunning digital fabrications of late-50s New York whose authentic detail co-exists with an unashamed theatricality. On the big screen the effect is hyperreal, as if you have somehow hallucinated your way back more than 60 years – to both the musical stage for the Broadway opening night and also the city streets outside. We’re on the Upper West Side in 1958 where decaying tenements are being bulldozed for the fancy new Lincoln Center. Ansel Elgort plays Tony, a young white man and ex-Jets member whom this movie imagines to be just out of prison, where he was for an act of violence that has scared him away from gang warfare. Now he’s staying at Doc’s drugstore: or rather the widow of the late Doc is his landlady Valentina – marvellously played by Rita Moreno, who was Anita in the original 1961 version. Theirs was an Anglo-Latino love match, the future that Tony and María (played here by newcomer Rachel Zegler) should have had. Elgort and Zegler are a more real pair than Richard Beymer and Natalie Wood in the original but they have the same fundamental innocence and quaint pre-pop, pre-60s youth culture unworldliness. West Side Story is contrived, certainly, a hothouse flower of musical theatre, and Spielberg quite rightly does not try hiding any of its stage origins. His mastery of technique is thrilling; I gave my heart to this poignant American fairytale of doomed love.Oven chips, a Twix, a hot dog, sausages, mayonnaise, nuts, seeds, berries, sushi, pastries, chocolate mousse, pizza, chocolate chip cookies, a cream bun, a Müller Corner yoghurt. The lyrics on Dry Cleaning’s debut album are full of food but – some expensive mushrooms, a mixed salad and a “banging pasta bake” aside – it’s mostly the kind you pick at distractedly between meals, that doesn’t really satisfy you. That horrible false satisfaction – of eating for something to do; of being full and yet not – is what this album gets at in such a simple, original way. The idle consumption seems to symbolise a wider malaise, a culture given to listlessness and living hand-to-mouth. Dry Cleaning are voicing the banality of contemporary life, and the feeling of impotence it can induce, in a more cleanly articulated voice than any band I can think of. There are certainly plenty of other British artists talking tunefully about the everyday. Sleaford Mods have Dry Cleaning’s tendency to focus on bland details that take on gigantic and horrible meaning, but their contempt for it all is much more evident; Black Country, New Road have the four-piece’s tendency to non sequiturs and weird stories, but they’re much more romantic. Instead, the stream of consciousness from Dry Cleaning frontperson Florence Shaw is endlessly dammed and diverted until it’s lost any sense of where it was headed. There’s a nihilism to this album, a sense that even brief moments of meaning amount to very little. Shaw doomscrolls through her own life, never able to alight on anything for more than a moment: “Your haircut’s changed for charity / Can you imagine the rent?” On first listen she sounds bored and monotone, but is actually always at least idly interested in what she’s commenting on, and her voice has a meandering musicality that complicates any reading of her feelings. You can build out an entire narrative from the relieved-aggrieved way she says: “It was chucking it down when I stepped out / It’s not now.” Leafy, a ballad of sorts, has the most obvious emotional tenor – a beautiful, desperately awful portrait of depression. But the album is often breezy and funny, full of little situation comedies. The setting of the imaginatively catchy single Scratchcard Lanyard suddenly pivots to a church hall or community centre: “I’ve come here to make a ceramic shoe / And I’ve come to smash what you made / I’ve come to learn how to mingle / I’ve come to learn how to dance,” Shaw says, using truculence, violence and am-I-bothered airiness to mask a need for human connection that she is clearly embarrassed by, but not enough to ignore – all in four short lines. Her delivery is so particular that she requires unpretentious music. With fussier or less rhythmic backings, Shaw could perhaps sound self-important, her humour might get overlooked. The guitar-bass-drums trio sturdily ground her, cleaving to a kind of stoner-garage rock, though their backings are actually quite varied: Unsmart Lady’s riffs are burly and rocking, but More Big Birds has the melodic bass and liberal-arts funk of Spoon or the Sea and Cake, and guitarist Tom Dowse recalls Johnny Marr on the title track. With her staring, wondering face flanked by walls of hair, almost insulating her from her band, Shaw is startling to watch on stage, too, as she captures a generation’s internal monologue like never before: those bitchy, distracted, utterly unmindful thoughts that a consciousness poisoned by city life and digital media is powerless to stop. Yet there’s a profound poetry in how her observations hang together, a reminder that something can be built from the dumb flotsam of ordinary life. Perhaps it’s like the Holbein painting she references on Strong Feelings, which you have to regard at an angle to see a hidden human skull. Sometimes you have to look sidelong at life to try and make sense of it.The already infamous footage of aides to Boris Johnson caught on camera in Downing Street laughing about how to handle news of an illicit Christmas party at No 10 is not at heart a Westminster story. It is much, much bigger than that. Yes, it will be recounted by lobby journalists and illustrated with clips from prime minister’s questions, but this episode dwarfs the usual tittle-tattle and tales of Peppa Pig. This one goes to the heart of how this country is run, because it is a story about fairness. About them and us. About who can’t see their mum on her deathbed on a Covid ward and who enjoys an evening of cheese and wine, fun games and a secret Santa. The society that kids itself about its sense of fair play is also the most unequal country in western Europe, and the depth charge of this story lies in its revelation of just how unequal our lives are. It’s not a word you hear much from Westminster these days, inequality. For Keir Starmer’s team it possibly smacks too much of the Corbyn years, while Johnson prefers to trumpet about “levelling up”. Yet euphemisms and silences can’t cancel out its poisonous influence, and the pandemic that began with the government assuring us “we are all in this together” has been defined by inequality. Of long drives to Barnard Castle, while others are allowed only an hour’s walk. Of well-off managers on Zoom ordering their shopping to be delivered, even while carers are paid nothing when seriously ill. Some of these are tales of life or death, others of wealth or ruin, and each shows how inequality is inscribed into this country and our daily lives. The day before that briefing-room video was broadcast, I visited the most unequal city in the country. Not the capital, nor Manchester or Aberdeen but, according to research from the Centre for Cities thinktank, Cambridge, a tiny city with a population only half the size of a single London borough. Long before this coronavirus arrived, locals experienced a rather different kind of social distancing – one where your postcode and just a few miles meant the difference between living till you’re 87 or more, or dying at 78. And where, in Christmas 2019, a homeless woman gave premature birth to twins while sleeping outside Cambridge’s wealthiest college, Trinity. Since the Brexit vote, journalists have spent a lot of time touring the UK’s failures: those towns and cities that have struggled to get off the floor since their coalmines were closed or factories shut. But to visit Cambridge is to see something else entirely: how limited and partial post-industrial Britain’s successes are. There’s plenty of money washing about here, from the ancient colleges to the new WeWork complex just outside the train station and the Amazons and Apples setting up in the science parks springing up all around the city’s perimeter. This is the stuff that gets government ministers donning their hi-vis jackets, speechifying about dynamic startups and dreaming up an arc that loops west and joins it on to Milton Keynes and Oxford. Johnson inherited that scheme from David Cameron, and his department for levelling up has got further with it than any white paper for the “red wall”. But if Cambridge is the future of the UK, as Westminster would have it, then it is one in which inequality is even more deeply marked into society. The Centre for Cities points out that the least well-off 20% of local people receive only 2% of the city’s income. Drive 10 minutes out of Cambridge’s centre, past the tiny Victorian terrace houses that now sell for London prices, and you reach perhaps the most deprived ward in this city of riches: Abbey. The food hub operates on a Monday lunchtime, inside an old pre-school building that still has the pastel-coloured classroom walls. A queue starts forming an hour beforehand and the early rush is formidable. Working his way through the oranges and bananas and bread was Granville Grahame, a skinny 55-year-old who used to run a barber’s right by the Grafton shopping centre until a messy divorce knocked him off course. He lost his business, then his home, and had spent the months before lockdown bedding down in a car park right by his old shop. “Without this place, I’d have nothing to eat,” he said, swaddled in an old parka. “I’d be lucky to get one meal a day.” Next up was Kevin, a manual worker whose body was now breaking down. Both his shoulders had had to be operated on and he was leaning on a walking stick. Helping him with his bags while getting some stuff for herself was his daughter, Natalie. She works as a nursery nurse, until Christmas. Then she’s made redundant, and so far no one has called her in for an interview. Watching her was Nicky Shepard, head of the Abbey People charity that runs this hub, who said quietly that she noticed how many of the women coming for food worked in nurseries or as teaching assistants. At desks next to her were a couple of staffers from the local office of Citizens Advice and Cambridge Water, fielding a steady stream of people worried about their heating bills or their benefits. In one small room you had an ad hoc welfare state, providing food and support where both public and private sector had retreated. The county and city council have seen their core funding from central government cut to nothing. Outside, staff pointed out, the last local post office had shut, most of the pubs had gone, and if you wanted to sit down and have a coffee your best bet was the giant McDonald’s on the other side of the roundabout. It was just a couple of days after Rishi Sunak had leaked his plans to lower inheritance and income tax, but here they were dealing with the fallout from another of his cuts: the one in October that took £20 a week off universal credit. In the month since, the number of households reliant on the hub has jumped by more than 25%, while the number of fuel and supermarket vouchers given out has tripled. There’s a new kind of anxiety, too, noted Rachel Karniely, manager of the food hub. “More visitors ask for further support … or even just for someone to talk to.” People she supports now ring her “crying down the phone, expressing suicidal thoughts, because they’re scared they’re going to become homeless because they can’t pay the bills”. Just down the road was the city centre, with its swanky shops and cultural festivals, but no one I spoke to at the hub went there. “I don’t have any business with them, and they don’t have any business with me,” shrugged Natalie. “I might take the kids at Christmas.” It used to be said that the age-old divide was between town and gown, but over the past couple of years it has been overlaid by a newer form of inequality. A new, globalised Cambridge has been created, open to multinational firms that use their rootlessness to reduce their tax bills, and to investors from China and the Gulf states successfully lured in by executives at the university. That society has as much to do with Cambridge, Massachusetts, as the one in the Fens. Businesses and senior university managers and ministers have traded Cambridge’s fame for a form of money and success enjoyed by only a select few, even while this has forced up property prices, jammed roads and put extra pressure on schools and Addenbrooke’s hospital. Even academics at the university, who last week joined the national strike action, have not seen much of its rewards. One, a university lecturer called Edwin, told me how he had traded his Cambridge flat in the pandemic for a much cheaper place lent by a friend. But that meant that on the three or four nights a week he worked at the university, he spent the night in a sleeping bag in his office. No one else in his faculty knew his secret. Yet every week, he spent 60 hours on university business, supervising teenagers who had spent thousands of pounds for his teaching. And this is deemed a success story, in contrast to all the UK’s economic debris. I left Cambridge with an uneasy feeling I couldn’t pin down until I saw the prime minister’s then spokeswoman (now casualty) laughing about a “business meeting”, and then it struck me: these are the same socioeconomic injuries and sadnesses I heard before the Brexit vote under yet another government that laughs at those who are suffering. And this is before inflation peaks. I would not bet against politics getting even more combustible. Still, I hope they had a good party. Aditya Chakrabortty is a Guardian columnist Some names have been changed to protect the identities of people interviewed.The birth of a grandchild may be considered a priceless gift in itself, but for some grandparents it now comes with a new perk – an extra week off work. Saga, the travel and insurance company for the over-50s, is to give employees a week of paid leave to celebrate the birth of a grandchild. The company, which employs 2,500 staff, said it was introducing the policy in recognition that grandparents play an increasingly essential role in childcare while also building a work culture that appeals to the over-50s. “This is about helping new grandparents celebrate a special moment and play a role in growing families from day one,” said Jane Storm, the chief people officer at Saga. “It is also a symbol of how important older workers are to their companies and society. “Our customers are mostly over 50 and we want to have more colleagues here that reflect the community we serve. We also think this idea should be a key attraction for retention and recruitment.” As part of the policy the grandchildren of all Saga staff will have access to its onsite nursery at its headquarters in Folkestone, Kent. About 40% of grandparents aged over 50 provide regular childcare for their grandchildren, according to Age UK, and 71% of those between 50 and 64 are in work. The over-50s are also the fastest growing age demographic, with 28 million people expected to be in that bracket by 2030. “Embracing family-friendly working practices makes business sense,” said Justine Roberts, the founder of the online community Gransnet. “Employers who recognise the fact that their employees have relationships and responsibilities outside of work will reap the rewards of increased loyalty and staff wellbeing.” Saga is the latest company to introduce more flexible working policies for staff. In October, the online fashion store Asos introduced a range of policies to support employees who were “going through health-related life events”. These include taking leave at short notice, and paid leave for staff dealing with pregnancy loss, undergoing fertility treatment or experiencing the menopause. In 2019, Channel 4 launched its own menopause policy in an effort to normalise the “taboo” subject and in May this year the online bank Monzo said it would provide paid leave for employees affected by the loss of a pregnancy. Extending perks is also increasingly being viewed as a way to retain and attract staff in the face of the post-pandemic labour shortage and the empowerment of workers in a new culture where flexible working is now the norm. Catchy policies include “pawternity” – essentially paid time off for looking after a new pet. Companies ranging from Mars, the parent company of petfood brands Whiskas and Pedigree, to the brewer BrewDog are offering “puppy parental leave”. According to the insurer Petplan, one in 20 new pet owners in the UK have been offered time off work to look after them.New Zealand’s rainbow community will be allowed to change the sex recorded on their birth certificates without providing evidence of a medical procedure, after a bill to recognise the right for gender minorities to self-identify passed into law. “Today is a proud day in Aotearoa’s history,” internal affairs minister Jan Tinetti said. “Parliament has voted in favour of inclusivity and against discrimination.” While self-identification on birth certificates was introduced in 2018, applicants had been required to prove they had undergone medical treatment to align their sex and gender identity. The births, deaths marriages and relationship registration bill, which passed unanimously on Thursday, removes that requirement. “This law change will make a real difference for transgender, non-binary, takatāpui [LGBT] and intersex New Zealanders,” Tinetti said. She added that the law will support young people and give them “agency over their identity, which will promote their mental health and sense of wellbeing”. The country joins roughly 15 overseas jurisdictions that have made changing one’s sex on documents simpler, including several Latin American countries, and European countries such as Denmark and Spain. The Green party spokesperson for rainbow communities, Dr Elizabeth Kerekere, described it as a “world-leading piece of legislation” that will uphold rights to self-identify gender. But Dr Kerekere said she was disappointed the changes exclude refugees, asylum seekers and recent migrants. The law has sparked discussion and some hostility, including from Speak Up for Women, which formed in 2018 to oppose self-sex identification. The group was blocked from holding events at various venues, including the Christchurch city library, for being branded anti-transgender. Tinetti challenged some reactions to the bill. “There have been real people who have been hurt when they have been belittled, mocked and discriminated against. People who like any one of us just want to be accepted for who they are and be treated with dignity and respect.” “Trans misogyny is still misogyny so I stand strong in challenging this discrimination.” The National party’s spokesperson for women, Nicola Grigg, told parliament that while the opposition supported the law, it was important for a range of voices to be heard. “If we shut down the full expression of topics such as this, we won’t benefit from considering a full range of views as we debate complex policy and ideas and I do worry about the societal impacts of people feeling that their views are no longer able to be expressed.” The first comprehensive national survey of the health and wellbeing of trans and non-binary people was conducted in 2018. It reported that five out of six participants, or 83%, did not have the correct gender marker on their New Zealand birth certificate. In the 18 months before the provisions come into force, details will be worked out including consultation on who will be allowed to support applications for young people, ensuring sex markers on the birth certificate include non-binary and cultural options and determining what the requirements will be for anyone seeking to amend their sex more than once. New Zealanders born overseas will not yet be able to access self-identification, because the changes apply only to New Zealand birth certificates. The minister said work will be done to address this.Top story: Tory MPs mutinous over crisis of trust Good morning, I’m Warren Murray, and here we are again on the road to masks and home working. Boris Johnson has rushed in “plan B” Covid restrictions for England at the same time as his government is engulfed in a crisis of credibility sparked by the Christmas party scandal. As more alleged gatherings involving staff and the PM himself come under the spotlight, Mark Harper, a former Conservative chief whip, questioned why anyone should “do things that people working in No 10 Downing Street are not prepared to do”. Johnson’s own Tory MPs and ministers have been vocal in their fury over the whole affair. Prof Stephen Reicher, a member of the Sage scientists’ group advising the government, said Omicron “could be completely out of control fairly quickly. We need a communal response to keep ourselves safe, and for that we really need trust in government.” The former journalist Allegra Stratton has stepped down as a government spokesperson over the footage of her joking about a party at Downing Street. Senior journalists and former colleagues said she was being scapegoated for a party which, during the video, she said she had not even attended. Robert Peston, ITV’s political editor, said: “She is a model for many in modern politics … in that she has taken responsibility and quit without prevarication.” The resignation was also seen as further confirmation the rule-breaking party took place. Johnson apologised in the Commons, claiming to be “sickened” by the video, and asked Simon Case, the cabinet secretary, to investigate whether the event complied with Covid rules. * * * Pfizer ‘three-dose vaccine’ – Three doses of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine are likely to protect against infection with the Omicron variant but two doses may not, according to laboratory data that will increase pressure to speed up booster programmes. The tests used antibodies in blood samples and its findings suggest that, for Omicron, Pfizer/BioNTech should now be viewed as a “three-dose vaccine”. The makers said they would continue with plans to develop an updated Omicron-based vaccine by March 2022. Pfizer’s data is among the first to be released about Omicron immunity and has not been peer-reviewed. Separate preliminary results from Germany have found significant reductions in antibody potency for the Pfizer/BioNTech, Moderna and Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccines against Omicron. Vaccine makers now face the task of deciding whether a tweaked variant jab will be required and what form it should take. * * * Less than energetic – Ofgem, the energy regulator, is responsible for allowing the collapse of dozens of energy suppliers leading to spiralling household bills, according to Citizens Advice (CA). The charity says Ofgem failed to act against rule-breaking suppliers for almost 10 years, and households bear the brunt of its “catalogue of errors”. The loss of 26 suppliers and record high gas prices could mean household bills rising by an extra £94. CA says it gave repeated warnings about the precarious finances of small suppliers. Nils Pratley writes that CA’s damning report “adds to the impression that Ofgem, under political pressure to show it was promoting competition, was happy to welcome any Johnny-come-lately wishing to have a punt”. An Ofgem spokesperson said the regulator had accepted “the current system was not designed for this sort of extreme market event” and that the energy market needed “reform and quickly”. It plans to set out changes in the next few weeks. * * * British Journalism Awards – Guardian and Observer journalists have won four awards at the British Journalism Awards (BJA), including news provider of the year. Marina Hyde took home the prize for comment journalism, while Sirin Kale and Lucy Osborne won in the arts and entertainment journalism category. Stephanie Kirchgaessner won in technology journalism for her stories on the Pegasus project, while there were commendations for the Queen’s consent investigation and the Observer’s James Tapper in the health and life sciences journalism category. Aniefiok Ekpoudom won the Barbara Blake Hannah award for his work for the Guardian and Observer, while Rukhshana Media, the Afghan women’s media organisation, won the Marie Colvin award. Other top awards included ITV News’s Robert Moore winning journalist of the year for his reporting from the US Capitol riots, while the Sun won scoop of the year for revealing former health secretary Matt Hancock’s office affair in the midst of the pandemic. For a full list of the winners, click here. * * * ‘Unearned, unequal and untaxed’ – The £3tn windfall from soaring house prices in the past 20 years should be subject to a capital gains tax (CGT), raising £11bn a year so that poorer households can be spared paying more in tax, the Resolution Foundation has urged. The thinktank said the government should consider applying CGT to increases in the value of main residences in the UK as well as to sales of second homes, instead of increasing tax on income and profits. It said house prices had risen by 86% more than inflation in the past two decades and the gains had been “unearned, unequal and untaxed”. None of the main political parties has indicated it would be willing to take the risk of angering homeowners, but Labour has been exploring the possibility of wealth taxes on shareholders. * * * Grand gesture – Saga, the travel and insurance company for the over-50s, is to give employees a week of paid leave to celebrate the birth of a grandchild. The company, which employs 2,500 staff, said it was introducing the policy in recognition that grandparents play an increasingly essential role in childcare while also building a work culture that appeals to the over-50s. “This is about helping new grandparents celebrate a special moment and play a role in growing families from day one,” said Jane Storm, the chief people officer at Saga. “It is also a symbol of how important older workers are to their companies and society.” Today in Focus podcast: The abandoning of Afghanistan A whistleblower has accused the British government of abject failures in its efforts to manage the evacuation of people from Afghanistan as the Taliban took control in August. Emma Graham-Harrison returns to the country to find it facing a humanitarian crisis. Lunchtime read: Downfall of Hitler’s favourite film-maker Nina Gladitz dedicated her life to proving beyond doubt the complicity of Leni Riefenstahl, the Triumph of the Will director, with the horrors of Nazism. In the end, she did it – but at a cost. Sport England were left to rue a costly no-ball from Ben Stokes which saw David Warner survive being bowled out on day two of the first Ashes Test but led by Ollie Robinson the visitors began to stage a fightback at the the Gabba. Tottenham’s push to postpone their Europa Conference League tie at home against Rennes on Thursday night has been met with a furious response by the French club. The Olympic cyclist Mark Cavendish and his family have been left distressed after an attack by armed burglars that had them fearing for their lives. Barcelona crashed out of the Champions League after Bayern Munich’s Thomas Müller sparked another humiliating defeat for Xavi’s side. Ralf Rangnick fielded an experimental side but Mason Greenwood was the only one to come out with much credit in Manchester United’s 1-1 draw at home to Young Boys. Magomed Ozdoev scored in added time to deny Chelsea victory and top spot in their final Champions League group game, a 3-3 draw at Zenit St Petersburg. Joe Montemurro, the Juventus manager, scored a rare success in his battle with Chelsea counterpart Emma Hayes, as the Italian side earned a Women’s Champions League point at Kingsmeadow, where Sam Kerr was booked for shoving over a pitch invader. Sports fans will be required to show proof of a negative Covid test before attending live events in England, as part of a range of measures announced by the government to halt the spread of Covid. Tiger Woods will make his return to competitive golf next week at the PNC Championship alongside his 12-year-old son, Charlie. The Ryder Cup winner Thorbjørn Olesen wept in court and said he wants to focus on his golf after he was cleared of sexually assaulting a woman on a British Airways flight. John Mitchell has denied that he abruptly left his role as England’s defence coach after a falling out with Eddie Jones despite signing an extension to his contract just three months before he quit the role. And Norway’s Magnus Carlsen inched closer toward the fourth successful defence of his world championship, playing to a quiet 41-move draw with Russia’s Ian Nepomniachtchi in the 10th game of their showdown in Dubai. Business The RMT rail union is preparing to ballot its members on industrial action over rising concern about likely redundancies as train operating companies seek 10% savings. Such redundancies would mean “trains are coming to a halt”, the TSSA union said after it failed to get assurances over jobs. The FTSE looks like lifting 0.2% at the opening while the pound will fetch you $1.322 and €1.166. The papers We have a separate story on the front pages today, summarised as follows. The Guardian splashes on “PM triggers Covid plan B as party scandal engulfs No 10”. The Mail combines Wednesday’s announcement of new Covid rules with the No 10 scandal: “One rule for them, new rules for the rest of us”. It carries a large picture of a tearful Allegra Stratton. The Sun has Johnson mocked up as the Grinch – its headline, “Do as I say... not as I Christmas do”. The Mirror says “Plan B for us .. Plan ‘lie, lie, lie’ for him”. The Telegraph leads with the headline “Don’t go to work, but do go to parties”, referring to Johnson’s announcement about a Covid plan B rather than any ironic reference to the row over the alleged No 10 gathering. It does, however, have a smaller story on calls for the PM to quit if he misled MPs over the scandal. The Times splashes on “PM orders return to working from home”. Also on the front: “Tories held raucous second party”. The Express headline sticks to the slightly better bad news for the government: “PM: plan B best chance for ‘close to normal’ Xmas”. The Financial Times says “Johnson adopts plan B to check virus as anger festers over parties”. The Daily Star joins in the bashing. “Cluebo” reads the headline with the subhead saying “Captain Cock-up: It was everybody else, in the No 10 drawing room, with wine and nibbles”. In Scotland, where Tory leader Douglas Ross has said Johnson should resign if he is shown to have lied, the Scotsman says “Scottish Tories line up to condemn Johnson”, and the Edinburgh Evening News splashes with the words of an ICU nurse: “While they were partying, I was caring for people who were dying”. The Record puts it more bluntly: “Party’s over … now get out”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendOrganisations working with women in prisons around the world are not attracting the support they deserve, as even feminists shy away from helping people with “complicated” narratives, according to new research. Lawyer Sabrina Mahtani, founder of Women Beyond Walls (WBW), said many charities and NGOs around the world were doing vital work “supporting some of the most marginalised and overlooked women” in society. But their futures were insecure, partly because of insufficient funding from mainstream feminist groups as well as other organisations, she said. In a survey published by WBW, more than 60% of organisations working with women in prison said they were in a precarious financial situation, and more than a quarter said they may be unable to operate next year due to a lack of funds. More than 70% said they did not receive funding from women’s rights or feminist foundations. “Foundations that fund feminist organisations etc [sic] are not interested in incarceration issues,” said one organisation. Another added: “There is generally a negative perception about women in prison or prisoners that make it hard for society to support [them]. The question of crime is never an interest to most donors or corporate [funders] and many would choose not to associate themselves with prisons.” A third said: “In the broader women’s rights movement it is very difficult to embrace work in prisons and funders exclude such initiatives. They base their argument on the [small] number of women [in prison] versus the number of men.” Though there is a lack of precise data, Penal Reform International put the global female prison population at about 740,000 – not quite 7% of the global total. Mahtani, a Zambian-British lawyer, said: “These are some of the most marginalised women and, really, we shouldn’t be looking at numbers; we should be looking at who are the women who most need support and help and actually that’s a core tenet of feminist funding principles: […] fund those who are most [subjected to] gendered oppression.” Asked why donors, including those focused on women’s rights, were shying away from such organisations, Mahtani said: “I think it’s overlooked because we like to support women if they fit into the stereotype of what is ‘marketable’,” suggesting that groups were often working with women who did not fit into a neat profile of victimhood. “Maybe there’s a woman who has been subjected to domestic violence and one day she just snaps and she kills her husband in self-defence or as a reaction. That’s much more complicated, right? It’s more complicated to sell to your donors, to your board.” At the Generation Equality Forum in June, more than $40bn (£30bn) was pledged to support efforts to tackle gender inequality. But, the WBW survey noted, “any attention to incarcerated women was notably absent”. It has called for some of that funding to be used to support work with and for women and girls affected by the criminal justice system. “This is a really exciting opportunity now for donors and foundations who might have overlooked this issue to come and address it,” said Mahtani. “We have specific portfolios focusing on LGBT rights, for example, or reproductive health rights. Why can’t we have specific portfolios focusing on women’s incarceration?” The survey, Forgotten By Funders, features responses from 34 organisations in 24 countries, including Nigeria, South Africa, the UK, Australia and India. • In the UK, call the national domestic abuse helpline on 0808 2000 247, or visit Women’s Aid. In the US, the domestic violence hotline is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). Other international helplines may be found via www.befrienders.org.Labor and the Greens have recommended a judicial inquiry with the powers of a royal commission into media diversity, ownership and regulation. The majority report from the long-running Senate inquiry into media diversity found it was “clear that the current regulatory framework is not fit for purpose and significant changes are required”. “A judicial inquiry would have the capacity for a more comprehensive investigation, including compelling witnesses to give evidence, than can be undertaken by a parliamentary committee,” the report, which was tabled on Thursday, stated. “Such an inquiry would also be conducted at arm’s length of all politicians to allow an independent investigation into media regulation and ownership.” Greens senator Sarah Hanson-Young won support to set up the Senate inquiry a year ago following the popularity of Kevin Rudd’s petition for a royal commission into Murdoch media. The former Labor prime minister’s petition for a royal commission into the need for a strong and diverse media was supported by more than 500,000 people. The federal opposition’s media spokesperson, Michelle Rowland, told Sky News Australia on Thursday that Labor would not seek a judicial inquiry because it was not ALP policy.   “With all due respect to the Senate, it performs its functions and undertakes its inquiries and makes its recommendations as it sees fit,” she said. “But I can tell you clearly that this is not Labor party policy.” Rudd subsequently criticised Rowland on ABC TV by suggesting she was too “close” to Murdoch. The upper house committee was told media regulation was not effective and inconsistent governance arrangements and standards across platforms made it unworkable. TV is governed by the Australian Communications and Media Authority, a government agency, while print and digital news are overseen by the Australian Press Council, a self-regulated industry body. “Evidence to the committee testified to the inability of existing regulators to ensure that standards of fairness and accuracy are maintained, and to prevent the spread of misinformation,” the majority report from Labor and the Greens said. Hanson-Young said the report found the call for a judicial inquiry from the more than half a million Australians who signed the petition was warranted. “The majority of the committee which undertook this 13-month-long inquiry has recommended the establishment of a judicial inquiry with the powers and weight of a royal commission into the state of media diversity and dominance in Australia,” Hanson-Young said. “This is a move the parliament itself can make.” A judicial inquiry could be set up without the support of the government but for a bill to pass the House of Representatives, a member of the government would need to cross the floor. Hanson-Young said: “The evidence that the Murdoch media empire is indeed a dangerous monopoly was heard loud and clear. From climate-denialism to gendered, partisan attacks, and providing a platform for racism and for Covid disinformation, the impact of both concentration of media ownership and a failing regulatory system was obvious.” “Throughout the inquiry, we heard about the many Australian journalists that produce high-quality, in-depth reporting with integrity and professionalism. It is those hard-working journalists that are being let down by a broken regulatory system and corporate culture inside news organisations that allows poor behaviour to flourish,” the Greens senator said. Murdoch’s global chief executive, Robert Thomson, told the Senate inquiry the idea that Rupert Murdoch influenced Australian elections was a “myth” and far removed from the behaviour of “the real Rupert”. Thomson rejected a suggestion by Hanson-Young that the chairman and chief executive of News Corp had a hand in directing his newspaper editors on which party should win. “Senator, the philosophy is around ideas,” Thomson told the media diversity inquiry via video conference from New York. “I have to say there is Murdoch the myth ... and the real Rupert.” In earlier evidence, Sky News Australia denied broadcasting Covid misinformation, telling the hearing that YouTube’s removal of 23 of the broadcaster’s videos was “totalitarian” and lacking in transparency. The Sky News chief executive officer, Paul Whittaker, said it “now appears commonplace to discredit any debate on contentious issues as ‘misinformation’” and vigorously defended Sky’s right to present a range of views on treatments such as ivermectin. In a dissenting report, Liberal senator Andrew Bragg called the report a “shameless political stunt which should not be taken seriously”. “The committee has called for this inquiry two weeks after the Senate collapsed an inquiry into the ABC complaints process,” Bragg said. “The report recommends private media organisations should be subjected to the intrusions of a judicial inquiry. At the same time, the ABC should not be subjected to Senate scrutiny. That is absurd.” Bragg was behind the push for a complaints inquiry which was branded “political interference” by the ABC chair, Ita Buttrose, and voted down by Labor and the Greens in the Senate. Rudd, who is chair of the recently launched lobby group Australians for a Murdoch Royal Commission, said Thursday’s report vindicated the concerns of the people who signed the petition. “This wouldn’t have happened if it weren’t for the ordinary Australians doing what politicians haven’t had the courage for until now: organising together to stand up to Murdoch’s media empire,” Rudd said. “Australians know in their guts that it’s wrong for one man to wield so much political power, whether it’s a far-right American billionaire or anyone else. “These senators have spent more than a year sifting through the evidence for and against a royal commission. Their recommendations should be heeded. The political parties should be given time and space to digest and consider this report, free from interference by Murdoch’s aggressive lobbying campaigns.”Most of Australia’s east coast will be blanketed by rain and thunderstorms leading into the weekend, while the west can expect continuing dry, windy conditions that have already sparked bushfires. Senior meteorologist Jackson Browne said the nation was seeing a “mixed bag” of weather conditions coming into the weekend. “We’ve got three high-impact weather situations occurring: storms in southern Queensland and northern New South Wales, a low pressure system in eastern Victoria and southern New South Wales and fire in Western Australia,” he said. “La Nina will be with us for many months of this summer.” Browne said hot, dry and windy conditions would persist in the coming days for parts of southern Australia and would be “very conducive” to fire weather. “We have a slew of weather warnings for WA,” he said. “It’s reaching up to extreme fire danger in inland central WA, but there’s also ten districts with fire dangers in the south-west… there’s quite a lot of fire activity.” There were currently two emergency bushfire warnings in place in the Leeuwin-Naturaliste national park and in Yallingup, north of Margaret River. Firefighters were battling to contain the bushfires, with more than 1,100 hectares so far burned. The out-of-control Leeuwin-Naturaliste national park blaze started about 9.50am on Wednesday, was moving quickly in a north-westerly direction and had escalated due to a heavy fuel load, Emergency WA said. Along Quininup Road in Yallingup, a bushfire was spreading rapidly in a southerly direction. Browne said the heat would gradually ease in west and south-west WA with cooler westerly winds over the weekend but it would be a “short reprieve”. “Heat will build across northern WA and central Australia over the weekend, and with the reservoir of heat rebuilding, wherever it moves over next week will dictate more fire conditions,” he said. Browne said parts of South Australia, parts of WA and south-east Australia would face the worst conditions. In Perth, westerly winds blowing off the ocean would dial conditions back to their mid-twenties come Monday, and the city would miss out on most of the heat that builds next week, Browne said. But with a heat reservoir driving fire weather in from central Australia, the state was “not out of the woods yet”. In Queensland, a severe thunderstorm warning has been issued for southern parts of the state with a trough moving through the area and parts of northern New South Wales. Browne said storms would probably push into Brisbane late Thursday and may interrupt the first Ashes Test at the Gabba, but there would be a relaxation of conditions from Friday as the storms moved south to NSW. Parts of Queensland were hit with severe storms on Wednesday, causing flooding in the state’s south-east. A 75-year-old woman died after her car was submerged in flood waters in Pullenvale, West Brisbane. Emergency services responded to reports that a sedan had been swept off a street and into a nearby creek by moving flood waters. Deputy premier, Steven Miles, expressed his condolences to the woman’s loved ones. “Every Queensland life lost is tragic, and tragic for the family involved,” he said. “It won’t take a lot of rain to see flooding and we just say over and over again, if it’s flooded, forget it, It’s not worth it.” This was the third flood-related death in Queensland in a month. On Wednesday, the Bureau of Meteorology issued flood warnings for multiple catchments, including the Suttor River, Buloo River, Moonie River, Condamine and Balonne River, among others. In Central Queensland, Baralaba was expecting its biggest flood in a decade, with water levels along Dawson’s River expected to peak at 11.8m on Thursday, after 60mm of rainfall in 24 hours. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Condamine was experiencing its worst flood since 2013, after the Condamine River peaked at 12.25m on Tuesday. Browne said the severe weather would move to the south coast of NSW, with flash and riverine flooding totals expected between 70 and 100 mm as tropical moisture pushed in from the Coral Sea. Victoria’s Gippsland region and the NSW south coast would be facing a “double whammy” of low driving rain and moisture, with terrain acting as a sponge and squeezing every drop out of rain mass, Browne said. “It’s looking to be a dangerous situation there for the next 36 hours,” he said. “We will see a low affecting parts of the south coast and spread as far as Byron Bay, Gippsland and Bairnsdale. While the Gippsland catchment was partially saturated, unlike rivers in northern NSW and southern Queensland, it was not yet in flood. In NSW, parts of western Sydney, the Hunter, the Illawarra and Southern Tablelands, the Central West Slopes and Plains, and the south-west Slopes, have experienced heavy rain and damaging winds this week. Jackson said Sydney wouldn’t see rain begin to clear until Saturday. The city should expect showers and a chance of storms on Friday.Ightham Mote, Sevenoaks, Kent National Trust properties up and down the land put on a decent show for the festive period, but some feel particularly special under the twinkle of Christmas lights. Ightham Mote, a stunning 14th-century moated and half-timbered home, is one, where room after room captures that old-fashioned festive vibe. The Great Hall’s open fires, wood panelling and soaring ceilings are decorated in Victorian style, with garlands of pine and red ribbons, while the library has a 1950s New England theme in honour of the former owner, an American businessman. As in many National Trust properties, there’s a Percy the Park Keeper-themed trail in the grounds, mulled wine and gingerbread lattes in the cafe, and gifts to buy, from local gin and cider and sustainable washing products to secondhand books. Until 3 January, entry £10 per adult, £5 per child, nationaltrust.org.uk The Christmas House, Hastings, East Sussex Stepping through the door of this captivating 16th-century merchant’s house in Hastings Old Town is to venture through a portal back in time. Woodsmoke and sweet scents of cinnamon and spiced wine waft through the half-dark of the parlour, where taxidermy magpies and cobwebs add some witchy, elfin magic to the painstakingly recreated Tudor home. Somewhere between an immersive theatre set, a small museum and a stylish open house, the charmingly wonky home is usually used for private events and photoshoots, but it opens to the public a few times a year. In December it becomes The Christmas House, its creaking beams and rustic eastern European antiques decorated with blue fir, homemade gingerbread and Scandi-style decorations. A mini grove of Christmas trees soars up to the rafters in the kitchen, and visitors can buy a copy of the owner’s delightful Christmas book to read a magical Christmas fairytale, and take home some tempting seasonal recipes. A few streets away, the AG Hendy &amp; Co homeware store is a treasure trove of practical stocking fillers. Open 11, 12, 18, 19 and 23 December 11-5, entry fee on door £5 per adult, £3 per child. Special Christmas Eve event including Tudor spiced wine, £7 per adult, £3 per child, Aghendy.com Sir John Soane’s Museum, London Lights, candles, and a bit of action, in the form of lively readings and talks, form the ingredients of a Georgian Christmas event at this small museum, former home of the architect John Soane. Visitors will appreciate the intellectual alchemy with which he amassed antiquities, furniture, architectural models, statuary and sculptures, first displayed for the benefit of his students at the Royal Academy. While perusing, guests will be offered a festive gin and tonic and mince pies, to the tuneful warbling of a live choir. 17 December, four one-hour time slots available between 6-8pm, £25pp, soane.org Dennis Severs’ House, London Another magical London house museum is perhaps at its best at Christmas, draped in greenery, with presents dotted around a candlelit tree, and piles of red ribbons left as if someone had just finished their wrapping. Those who visit Dennis Severs’ Spitalfields house are led to imagine that a family of Huguenot weavers have just left the rooms as they enter them. Red velvet bedsheets are rumpled on the four-poster, washing is left strung on a line, fires crackle in the kitchen hearth. Revived to look as they might have done in 1724 when the house was built, the rooms encapsulate the atmosphere of a candlelit age, with the sounds and scents of Christmas adding to the effect, especially as tours are done in silence. Silent Night Christmas evenings Monday-Wednesday and Friday until 9 January, book ahead, £20, dennissevershouse.co.uk Treasurer’s House, York Garlands, lights, candles, fruits, gifts and flowers adorn this elaborate townhouse for the festive season, with a 20ft tree in the Great Hall and a trail of hidden fabric gingerbread people for little ones to spot as they tour 13 dark and ornate period rooms. Everything is left exactly as it was in 1930, when the property was donated to the National Trust by a wealthy gentleman owner who vowed to return and haunt the house if anything was changed. A visit is an enchanting diversion from York’s busy shopping streets and lies behind York Minster, whose bells add festive cheer to those admiring the Christmas trees in the treasurer’s garden, and which has its own series of festive events. Drop in Saturday-Wednesday until 19 December, entry £8 per adult, £4 per child, nationaltrust.org.uk The Charles Rennie Mackintosh House (78 Derngate), Northampton The only house in England designed by the famed architect Charles Rennie Mackintosh, 78 Derngate has been immaculately restored to articulate his interior style. It features a dazzling array of his signature leaded and stained glass, tiled fireplaces, wood panelling and striking furniture. The 19th-century red-brick terrace is the only place in the world where his mature style can be seen in its original setting, including a dramatic staircase with yellow and black geometric detail. The dining room is decorated as Mackintosh’s patrons, Mr and Mrs Bassett-Lowke, might have done so when they lived there between 1917 and 1926, with a candlelit tree and bunches of holly and ivy. In the tiled kitchen, mince pie ingredients are laid out among clove-studded oranges and dishes of chestnuts as if the couple have just finished their festive baking. Mackintosh-related presents can be bagged in the gift shop, as well as crafts from an exhibition by the Northamptonshire Guild of Designer Craftsmen, which runs until 19 December. Entry £8.50 per adult, £4 per child, 78derngate.org.uk Dinefwr, Carmarthenshire, Wales Artist Bettina Reeves’ gorgeous vintage-style textile animal decorations will hang from the tree in the front hall of Dinefwr’s Newton House, while local artist Lucy Donald’s chalk pen drawings decorate the windows, and foliage is brought in to create a magical effect. This grand house sits at the heart of an 18th-century deer park and national nature reserve, which is lovely for winter walking. There are festive activities every weekend until Christmas, such as carol singing and roast chestnuts, and Santa doing his thing in the grotto. On 11 December Lucy Donald hosts a workshop demonstrating how to bring some winter magic to your own windows. Entry £8 per adult, £4 per child, winter windows workshop £4pp, nationaltrust.org.uk Georgian House, Edinburgh This grand and beautifully restored Edinburgh New Town house on Charlotte Square was the height of luxury in its day, built by “starchitect” Robert Adam in the late 1700s. Elegant furniture, chandeliers and a fine collection of porcelain, paintings, silver and glass reflect the lavish lifestyle and tastes of the first owner, John Lamont, who did plenty of entertaining at this time of year, Edinburgh high society’s party season. Although these days the house is closed through winter, it will reopen, fabulously and festively decorated, for two special evening readings of Dickens’ A Christmas Carol. 18 and 19 December, £14 per adult £8 per child including a hot drink and a Victorian sweet treat (suitable for aged 10+), nts.org.uk Blackwell, Lake District Among the many gorgeous features of Blackwell, Cumbria’s famed Arts and Crafts house on the shore of Windermere, the huge inglenook fireplace of the Great Hall is likely to make visitors lose themselves in reverie, imagining a long winter evening tucked up with a book in one of the settles beside the flames. You’ll want to imagine yourself living there all the more at Christmas, when the scene is alive with festive greenery, and a pianist or a choir soundtracks the occasion. Festive snacks and fizz in the cafe, and a shop stocked with contemporary crafts, will help keep spirits bright. Open daily, music on 10, 17 and 24 December, tickets £9 per adult, lakelandarts.org.uk Moseley Old Hall, Staffordshire Given the history of Moseley Old Hall, an Elizabethan farmhouse that hid King Charles II from Cromwell’s troops after he fled from battle in 1651, you might expect the fireside Christmas storytelling sessions to revolve around 17th-century life and war … but no, it’s going to be Stick Man. Julia Donaldson’s children’s story will nevertheless be read by a man dressed up in britches and era-appropriate garb. As well exploring the house to see the priest hole in which the king hid, you can play board games in the parlour, taste 17th-century sweets and appreciate decorations galore – sticking it to Cromwell, who banned Christmas, once again. Storytelling on 11, 12, 18 and 19 December, £10 per child in addition to normal admission of £9.50 per adult, £4.50 per child. A Christmas crafts session to make decorations from natural materials on 11 December costs £50pp, nationaltrust.org.ukNearly 100 former British Council staff employed to teach British values and the English language remain in hiding in Afghanistan after having so far been refused the right to come to the UK by officials. Their plight has been taken up by Joseph Seaton, the former British Council Afghanistan English manager, and its deputy director, who has written to the most relevant cabinet members in a bid to gain their support. The staff applied to come to the UK under the government’s Afghan Relocations and Assistance Policy (Arap), set up earlier this year, but Seaton says their applications remain unprocessed and without response months after they were submitted. He acted as the British Council’s English manager in Kabul and was deputy director from 2016-2020. He told the Guardian: “These people are living in constant fear of their lives. They were contracted under a British government-funded scheme to teach English teachers British values of diversity, inclusion and equality, the values that … the Taliban oppose. They were always told they were employees of the British government.” In an email he sent to the prime minister soon after the fall of Kabul in September, he warned Boris Johnson: “Many of them have had the Taliban visit their homes, or the homes of their relatives, asking questions and making threats. Many of them have had to relocate, while others are living in hiding.” He added in the note, which was also circulated to other cabinet ministers: “The teachers worked in public-facing, highly visible roles. Many are females, and all were representing the British Council, and promoting the language, culture and values of the UK. They are now targets for persecution, and it is surely the responsibility of the UK government to ensure they are relocated to the UK as soon as possible. While I (and others) continue to urge them not to seek publicity or court the media, in case they become even more of a target, their plight must nevertheless be highlighted to those with the greatest power and influence.” He said other British Council staff – as many as 30 – that had been employed at the Kabul head office inside the British embassy had been relocated through June, July and August, but those working in the field outside the main office were excluded. He said they were on the same employment contract, and by dint of working in the outward-facing were role more exposed than those at head office. He said: “While they have been repeatedly told that the British Council, the Foreign Office and Ministry of Defence are doing all that they can to move their cases forward, there has been no progress regarding their cases in the last three months. As former BC staff, they are all eligible for Arap, yet all still await approval and relocation. “Each day that passes, the threat level increases, and yet no progress is made, and no explanations are put forward for the endless waiting and silence from Arap. They all urgently need their Arap applications approved, and their relocation process confirmed, formalised and scheduled.” One of the former British Council workers, speaking on condition of anonymity, said: “I have the Taliban all around where we live. We need to keep changing our identity and moving our house. We have no job, or income or prospect of escaping. “We were told not to publicise our case, but we have no option since no one listens to us or seems to care. What I did in teaching was very public on social media, so they will be looking for me. I do not understand why we were not put on the Arap scheme in the first place.” Seaton said he had never received any response beyond an acknowledgment from Downing Street, but after the intervention of the office of the Conservative MP Tom Tugendhat and the chair of the home affairs select committee, the Foreign Office minister Lord Ahmad sent what appeared to be a largely pro-forma letter setting out the Arap rules. Ahmad added: “Tracking down and providing support to individuals remains our top priority – in order to focus our efforts on supporting those in need, we have put significant additional resources into this. “The volume of cases we are dealing with remains very high and therefore the FCDO will not be providing individual updates, as it will reduce our ability to get on with the task of getting those in need to safety.”The Biden administration has moved to reverse the depredations endured by one of the more unusual targets of Donald Trump’s culture wars during his time as US president: the humble lightbulb. The US Department of Energy has put forward a new standard for the energy efficiency of lightbulbs that would essentially banish the era of older, incandescent technology in favor of LED lighting. The absence of lightbulb regulations helps worsen the climate crisis and wastes households money, according to the American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy. The group has found the use of wasteful incandescent lights is costing Americans nearly $300m a month in needless electricity bills and releasing 800,000 tons of carbon dioxide over the lifetimes of the inefficient bulbs sold each month. Trump, however, was not enamored by LED lights while he was in the White House. The twice-impeached president said that he looks “better under an incandescent light than these crazy lights that are beaming down”, complaining in 2019 that he “always looks orange” under LED lights. He claimed that if LEDs break they become “a hazardous waste site” and are “very dangerous with all of the gases”. Trump, who also used his position at the zenith of global power to voice outrage over toilets that he said required flushing “10 times, 15 times, as opposed to once”, vowed to bring back the older lightbulbs, with the White House declaring that the real estate developer and former Apprentice host was allowing Americans to “go ahead and decorate your house with whatever lights you want”. Trump’s Department of Energy followed this lead, blocking a rule that would have led to the phase-out of incandescent lightbulbs. The move, the administration said, would save consumers money and remove unnecessary government inference in the market. The Department of Energy has consistently found, however, that installing LED bulbs in light fixtures can save people hundreds of dollars over the lifetime of the bulbs. While LEDs have traditionally been more expensive than incandescents, which are based upon a technology popularised by Thomas Edison, their cost has dropped by nearly 90% over the past decade. Incandescent lightbulbs still make up about a third of all bulb sales in the US and the department of energy said the new standard, which will go through a period of public comment, will reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 222m metric tons over the next 30 years and save consumers nearly $3bn in annual net costs. The new standard will be implemented in staggered fashion after lobbying from manufacturers, however, which could lead to several years of further incandescent sales. “This progress is welcome news for consumers and for the planet, but the administration is not acting here with the urgency needed to address the climate crisis,” said Steven Nadel, executive director of the American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy. Andrew deLaski, executive director of the Appliance Standards Awareness Project, added: “It’s time to get this done. The manufacturers have already received a couple extra years beyond Congress’s deadline to sell bulbs that have a short lifespan and waste a lot of energy. Now they’re pushing for more. The department needs to remember that any extra time it takes and compliance flexibility it gives come at the expense of consumers and the climate.” • This article was amended on 11 December 2021. An earlier version said incandescent bulbs were “based on a technology devised by Thomas Edison”. While Edison played an important role in bringing such bulbs to the mass market, he did not invent the underlying technology.More than half of universities are not on track to meet their emissions targets, according to an analysis. The student network People and Planet has published its annual sustainability university league, which found that 46% of higher education institutions were on course to meet the target, up from a third in 2019. But the majority were still not on track to meet the target set for the 2020-21 academic year by the former funding agency the Higher Education Funding Council for England (Hefce) in 2010. The league table assessed 154 institutions based on 13 categories including environmental policy and strategy, ethical investment and banking, carbon management and carbon reduction. Manchester Metropolitan University topped the table with a total score of 86.3%, up from second place in 2019. The table was not published in 2020 due to the coronavirus pandemic. Manchester Metropolitan’s vice-chancellor, Prof Malcolm Press, said they were “absolutely delighted”, adding: “Sustainability forms an integral part of everything that we do, from our teaching and research, to the way that we build and use our campus. “We know the environment is one of the top concerns for people of all ages and this award demonstrates the pivotal role that sustainability plays in university life at Manchester Metropolitan.” Its initiatives include developing a carbon literacy programme for all staff and students and a toolkit used by dozens of universities globally, a student-led sustainable food network, electric vehicles on campus and a hydrogen fuel cell innovation centre. The report found it had cut carbon emissions by 61% since 2005. King’s College London was placed second with 79.5% and Nottingham Trent University was third with 78.8%. At the bottom of the table were the Courtauld Institute of Art with 2.4%, the University College of Osteopathy (UCO) with 2.3% and the University of Sunderland with 0.7% – all of which said they did not submit data to the Higher Education Statistics Agency (Hesa). The most dramatic change came from Durham, which jumped 66 places compared with 2019 – from 96th position to 30th. Other big changes came from Imperial College London, which jumped 64 places up to 66th, and Cardiff Metropolitan University, which rose 63 places to finish fifth, becoming the highest scoring Welsh university. The University of Oxford rose 20 places to 25th place, while the University of Cambridge dropped 15 places to finish 82nd. London Metropolitan University made the largest carbon emission reductions, with a cut of 80% since 2005-06. Universities performed best in the education for sustainable development category, which assesses how they integrate sustainability into teaching and learning. But they performed less well in ethical investment and banking, with an average mark of 31%, despite more than half of universities having committed to divest from fossil fuels. They also performed poorly in managing carbon, with an average mark of 30%. The research found 51% of universities had made no commitment to removing fossil fuels from their investment policies. However, 40% of universities had introduced full divestment policies and 9% had made a partial commitment. After changes to higher education by the government, under which the Office for Students (OfS) took oversight of the sector from Hefce, it is no longer mandatory for universities to provide data on carbon reduction and other sustainability issues to the Hesa. People and Planet called for the reporting of this data to be made mandatory once again and for regulatory leadership from the OfS. Jack Ruane, the manager of People and Planet’s university league, said although improvements had been made in carbon reduction, “it’s still not good overall” and he hoped the gains made during the pandemic would not be “squandered”. Reliable sustainability credentials were vital for universities to attract prospective students, he said. “Students are wise to greenwashing. If a university says they are sustainable but invests in fossil fuels, students are not going to believe the sustainability credentials that institution claims. So it’s very much already part of the decision-making of students.” As a home to students, social space and workplace, campuses had the potential to change the long-term habits of thousands, Ruane added. The OfS said climate change was a “crucial issue for us all” and universities had an important role in reducing emissions. “The OfS does not have explicit powers in relation to the collection of emissions data. However, we welcome the fact that universities are increasingly taking collective responsibility for responding to climate change,” an OfS spokesperson said. The Courtauld said it was “committed to sustainability and has been making progress” but as a small institution it did not have the resources to make the relevant documentation publicly available to be scored. The University College of Osteopathy said it was unable to submit estates management data this year, adding: “We do not believe this is an accurate reflection of our performance or our commitment to environmental and ethical issues.” Sunderland said its last place positioning did not reflect its “full commitment – and successful work – around sustainability” and said it did not choose to submit the most recent data to the Hesa estates management record. “Our environmental sustainability plan to 2025 is already delivering a lasting impact on the environment, including investment in a new fleet of electric vehicles, installation of air source heat pumps and an ongoing solar power project already implemented on City campus now being rolled out to our St Peter’s campus,” a spokesperson said.Just two years ago, Durham was ranked 96 in People and Planet’s university league. So bad was its score that it was rated “third class”. Since then, the Russell Group university has managed to improve its sustainability credentials dramatically, jumping to No 30 in this year’s rankings of 154 institutions. Simon Park, Durham’s senior manager for energy and sustainability, attributed its success to initiatives such as the introduction of a formal environmental management system, ethical investment and sustainable food policies. The university also created a “greenspace movement” – including an app where users gain points for logging positive activities which go towards vouchers and charity donations, and a festival – to encourage staff and students to contribute to sustainability. The university has also implemented a “green move out” scheme, encouraging students to donate unwanted items to charity at the end of the academic year. Students had responded positively to the changes, Park said, and a team of student environmental champions and leaders had played a central role in the university’s approach. He said Durham was not complacent, however, and had appointed the Carbon Trust to calculate a target based on 1.5C warming above pre-industrial levels. The university planned to create a carbon management plan to ensure it was met, he said. Durham was also working with the Carbon Trust to calculate its full carbon footprint and to identify problem areas to focus on. Park said Durham was developing a biodiversity strategy and last summer employed three student interns to assess energy use in its highest consuming buildings. Through Institute of Environment Management and Assessment membership the university planned to provide online training for staff and “environmental champions”, he said. Park said: “As a responsible university we’re working hard to minimise our environmental impact, while also undertaking research that supports the wider agenda. Students are key to achieving change, and we have a team of environmental champions and student leaders involved across the university. They’ve been really positive about the changes we’ve introduced, and we’re looking forward to sharing the good news about our latest People and Planet university guide ranking with them.”I am treasurer of a smallish charity, Akamba Aid Fund, which has supported impoverished communities in Kenya for the last 21 years. We’ve built wells, dams, health clinics and schools and fund health insurance for 100 families. We now face closure because HSBC has suddenly terminated our bank account. Problems started in 2020 when we were told there would need to be a safeguarding review. I spent the ensuing months providing the information required. Then I received a pro forma letter stating our account would be closed unless I provided further information. This happened several times. I was then informed that a technical error had delayed the review and £200 was paid to our account for the inconvenience. Eventually, last December, I received a letter confirming that the review had been concluded, but within two weeks another arrived requesting a meeting for a safeguarding review. I demanded to know what was still outstanding. The bank’s response was to close our account and issue us with a cheque for our balance. Since then all applications for an account with other banks have been declined. It would appear our connection with Kenya is the deciding factor. We’re therefore unable to cash the cheque and have had to cancel payments from sponsors. The trustees are having to pay bills out of their own money and the situation is desperate. RL, Yeovil, Somerset You are the second small charity with projects in Africa in two months to contact me after losing your banking facilities. In September I reported on an organisation that supports underprivileged medical students in Zimbabwe. It, too, lost its bank account when Lloyds claimed it had ignored several requests for information. As a result, people and projects in impoverished communities were left in limbo. Anti-money laundering rules require banks to log exhaustive details about business customers, and risk punitive fines if they fail to detect criminal conduct. However, it seems automated systems and human staff often work in ignorance of each other. HSBC says that your account was closed because you did not submit to a second safeguarding review. This is odd. The review in question was announced in a letter two weeks after you’d received confirmation your review had been concluded. Understandably, you assumed this was an error and say your repeated attempts to find out what new information was required merely triggered more generic letters. HSBC now tells me it will reopen your account – provided you agree to a safeguarding review! Since it’s been 12 months since your last one, that’s fair enough, although it may restart the merry-go-round. HSBC admitted your experience could have been more seamless. “We conduct regular ‘know your customer’ reviews as part of our efforts to prevent financial crime,” it says. “We allow several months to ensure customers have time to respond.” Charities or individuals who believe they have been treated unfairly by banks can appeal to the Financial Ombudsman Service which can enforce redress . Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsThe culture at a disability group home in Victoria was so bad that staff couldn’t stop residents being assaulted by other clients and violence had become “normal”, the disability royal commission has heard. The inquiry is this week examining allegations of violence, abuse, neglect and exploitation in disability services, focusing on two group homes run by the national disability insurance scheme provider Life Without Barriers. On Thursday, the mother of a former resident and Victoria’s office of the public advocate told the inquiry about the “high level” of violence in the home. Over the period in question, which spanned most of the past decade, the homes were under the remit of Victoria’s Department of Health and Human Services before being transferred to the NDIS. In one case, one of the five residents had “a chair broken over her head by another resident” and her finger broken as she tried to protect herself, the inquiry was told. The commission heard that an X-ray – which revealed the fracture – was only carried out four days after the alleged assault, while no concussion test was conducted. Rebecca*, in her 40s, who is autistic and lives with an intellectual disability, was a victim of violence at the home until she moved out in November 2019, her mother told the hearing. Catherine* said her daughter was a “gentle person with a small frame” who might scream if she was assaulted but would “not say ‘stop’ or ask someone to go away if they were bothering her”. In one incident, Rebecca was dragged along the carpet by another resident, causing burns, the inquiry heard. A report later found the support worker had heard Rebecca scream before discovering her on the floor with “a bruised and skinned knee and some of her hair pulled out”. “To my knowledge, [Life Without Barriers] did not contact a doctor to examine Rebecca,” Catherine said. “Over a week later, I took Rebecca to the doctor myself and the carpet burn on her knee had become infected. “I was told by someone from LWB that doctors were not contacted because Rebecca did not have an open wound, yet Rebecca developed a scab on her knee shortly after the incident. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Later, LWB acknowledged that not seeking medical attention for Rebecca was an oversight.” On several occasions Catherine said she found unexplained bruises on Rebecca’s body. “For example, one day when she came home from a visit she walked through the door and repeatedly said ‘ow’, and took off her top to show me some bruises,” she said. Catherine did not blame the home’s support workers, saying they appeared to be trying their best and were also fearful of some residents. Sometimes they would simply lock Rebecca in the staff room to protect her, the inquiry heard. Catherine also did not blame the residents had attacked her daughter. But she did question why the provider had replaced one resident, who had left after several violent incidents, with another person who could be aggressive. This was done without any consultation with families, Catherine said. “Again, I am not criticising the support workers, who did an amazing job in the circumstances, but the managers and those higher up in the organisation just did not seem to me to understand the gravity of the situation,” Catherine said. Catherine said she felt “conflict and even violence” had become “normal and had been accepted as a fact of life rather than being something that should be addressed in a concerted long-term and consultative manner”. Paul*, the father of another resident in his 40s, Robert*, said his son had been spared from the violence but that the situation was “traumatic”. “He started ripping his clothes, which is a sign that he’s very anxious,” he said. Sue Rewell, from the office of the public advocate, also said staff were not adequately supported by management. “I think that all staff that lived in the house had the best interests of the residents at heart, but they were not given the support, and sometimes they were not given techniques to deal with the resident-to-resident abuse,” she said. The chair of the commission, Ronald Sackville, said the case raised questions about the pay and conditions of support workers, “who have a very onerous job”. “It cannot be easy to operate in an environment such as the particular house that we are talking about,” he said. The Victorian home has since been taken over by another provider at the request of the families of the existing residents, including Robert’s father, Paul. Earlier this week, the inquiry heard about the alleged neglect of residents of group home in NSW, and claims about the provider’s response to the sexual assault of a resident that occurred outside the house. Life Without Barriers will give evidence next week. * Names are pseudonyms used by the commission for privacy reasons Crisis support services can be reached 24 hours a day: Lifeline 13 11 14; Suicide Call Back Service 1300 659 467; Kids helpline 1800 55 1800; MensLine Australia 1300 78 99 78; Beyond Blue 1300 22 4636Think of the end of a Shakespeare tragedy: the bodies cast across the stage, the impression – down to the last full rhyme – of a very bloody tidying up. But think again, and of course it isn’t tidy at all. And especially not for the families left behind. Learwife begins where King Lear ends. “The word has come that he is dead, now, and the girls. And that it is finished.” The speaker is his wife, who has been shut in a nunnery since Cordelia was a baby. No one has told her why she has been “unwritten”, as she puts it at one point: “Hacked out of the book.” She has not heard from her family for 15 years; the one line in which Shakespeare mentions her suggests that she’s dead. Now she must reconstruct for herself what happened, and the shape of her loss. Learwife is told entirely from her point of view. She is trapped in the convent, and we are trapped in her head; a cramped, often uncomfortable vantage point – but also a view as wide as memory, of marriage to two kings (Lear was the second), of children and politics and war and love. “The world is an O, and is outside and inside, and falling through itself” – that O recalling Shakespeare’s “wooden O”, of course, yet another world-containing enclosure, as well as King Lear’s famous nothings. JR Thorp, who has written short stories but is best known as a librettist of choral works and especially opera, uses these lendings sparingly. Certain phrases cannot but leap out, rather in the way they leap out when one goes back to Shakespeare, because they have so entered the language we might feel the man who coined them is writing cliches. In Thorp’s hands they are effective grace notes on other deliberate echoes of structure – love tests, mock courts, blindings – or subject: ungrateful children, grief. Learwife is the dark side of King Lear’s moon, a distaff tragedy about “a greater queen than he was king”, as Kent puts it at one point. Tough, often unlikable, she is the still centre of a penumbra of violence: “I am a woman who enjoys the drop of shock onto a face.” But she didn’t start that way, and at her own centre are memories of being a child bride to a man whose love of God shut her out, and then, when he died, an older bride to volatile Lear. In both instances she was required, as “the womb of the kingdom”, to produce a male heir, a task at which she has failed. As the novel proceeds, and her assertion that she will now take her rightful place in the world begins to crumble, so too do her certainties about who she is: “A life lived with two weights upon it, kings, has no true centre. So I am haphazard. So I swim in incomplete or incorrect emotion.” This novel is about the challenge of being female, and the unintended consequences of trimming girls to fit their circumscriptions. The narrator takes us from the hope of first motherhood (“When my daughters were born I reached for their bodies and said Yes. They would know me, my milk and smell, the line of my hip; I would dip into their lives arm-deep, up to the shoulder, like a woman picking reeds in a river”) to the reality of parenthood as a collision with discrete selves. “They left weeping. And I was victor” – which goes some way to filling the void of why Regan and Goneril might have acted as they did. The book is about grief, and the objects of that grief, but above all it is about power. How to gain power (as cut-throat a process in a nunnery needing an abbess as in a country needing a king), how to wield it, how to retain it. How to sit still and watch how “rank breathes in the room”, and then to play that rank like a lyre; how to “lay a stratagem like a parkland and watch riders blunder in the copses”. And then, eventually, and too late, to learn the cost of it, to everyone. “Lear, I am undone by the success of my own vocation.” “They were bad with language, my girls,” thinks Lear’s wife at one point. “Thought it was a servant when really it was power itself.” Thorp has no such problem. She has a virtuosic command. Again and again I wrote down lines and phrases for the pleasure of them. There are paragraphs that could have had a page to themselves, as near-lyric poems: “I am so flooded with self now, with happiness … I could become a web of flesh and green bone, for eel-nests and leeching fish. Little frogs could sing in my pelvis.” The risk, of course, is that this richness could capsize the craft of the novel, and sometimes, especially in the earlier parts, it threatens to do so. Abundance calls attention to itself, threatens to weigh the story down like a bough overburdened with blossom. A nosebleed doesn’t also have to be “a necklace of burgundy. Of royal vermilion” – not least because this can create a distance between reader and character. And there are tics of rhythm and of generalisation that could have been weeded out a fair bit. But in the second half plot and emotion rise to meet the language. I ended Learwife feeling utterly involved: moved and exhausted. • Learwife by JR Thorp is published by Canongate (£14.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Waves have taken the landscape John Afedzie knew so well. “The waters came closer in the last few months, but now they have destroyed parts of schools and homes. The waves have taken the whole of the village. One needs to use a boat to commute now because of the rising sea levels,” he says. Afedzie lives in Keta, one of Ghana’s coastal towns, where a month ago high tide brought seawater flooding into 1,027 houses, according to the government, leaving him among about 3,000 people made homeless overnight. Keta has been slowly eroded by rising sea levels and storms for years. But before dawn on 7 November, people woke to walls of seawater surging through their properties, flooding homes, schools, businesses and churches. That morning Keta, and neighbouring Fuveme and Salakope joined Vodza, Adzido, Abutiakope and Kedzikope – villages and towns that once dotted the west African country’s shore but have all but disappeared under water. “It started Saturday evening. We saw that the water was getting closer, but we didn’t know it would flood this place. By Sunday at dawn, the water was everywhere. All our things were affected by the flood,” says Janet Nubueke, from Keta. The people, she says, will continue to move away from the water as long as the sea continues to be a threat. They are asking the government to relocate them. With a coastline spanning about 340 miles (550km) of the Gulf of Guinea and a quarter of its population living on the coast, Ghana is being permanently altered by coastal erosion. The country’s economic powerhouse is along the coast, including 80% of its industry, oil and gas production, thermal and hydroelectric power generation, as well as agriculture and fishing. A study by Unesco found that 37% of Ghana’s coastal land had been badly hit by erosion and flooding between 2005 and 2017. Construction of a sea-defence wall began in 1999 under the administration of the late President Jerry Rawlings but was not completed because of a change in government and subsequent neglect by political leaders. Several studies suggest that sea-defence walls could play an essential role in mitigating the erosion of sandy soil along the coast and that stabilising the shoreline to prevent inhabited areas being flooded is feasible. But many people, still living in makeshift shelters and waiting to find new homes, have no confidence that the political will is there to complete the project. With climate crisis experts warning that extreme weather and natural disasters will only become more frequent, the people left in what remains of Keta are living from day to day, fearing the next storm or higher than usual tide. Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:There is, no one will be surprised to hear, a cussedness to David Warner. A stubbornness born from a deep well of confidence that goes undiluted by criticism, by the doubt of others, or even by the realities in front of him. In part, like many top athletes, it is fuelled by those doubts, a pushing back against them. For the most part though, with Warner, it seems to be innate, a refusal to accept as real the limits that others might. It was like this when Warner was picked for Australia’s T20 team having never even played first-class cricket for New South Wales. He couldn’t succeed, but he did. It was the same when he was a T20 player coming into Test cricket, a gamble that could never come off, except it did. Hundreds flowed. They were mostly short and fast, showing that he couldn’t bat long, except he started to do just that. Then, after his sandpaper ban and his 2019 Ashes disaster, there was no way he could succeed as much as before, but he did. A triple hundred, an Allan Border medal, the unlikely achieved with typical Warner ostentation. Coming into this southern season was more of the same. He had a poor couple of editions of the Indian Premier League. Got dropped by the franchise he was captaining. Hadn’t been touring for Australia. Had played two Tests in two years. Turned 35 years old. Failed in the T20 World Cup warm-ups. Maybe he was done? But no. He was David Warner. Player of the tournament by the time that World Cup was done, Australia winning the final. Then back home for an Ashes series, walking out to start the second day in bright sunshine after England had been knocked over under the first day’s cloud for 147. Warner batting through until after tea time, returning with 94 runs to his name and a swelling lead for his team. It’s not that Warner batted especially well in Brisbane. The point was that he didn’t, but succeeded anyway. It can seem that Warner has that particular power: like a daytime TV host telling you about The Secret, he wants what he wants so intensely that somehow it happens. And here it was, Warner bowled by Ben Stokes, nowhere near the ball, but getting no further than the non-striker’s end before being told that the bowler had overstepped. Four times before in Test cricket, Warner has been out to a no-ball, recalled to the crease, and gone on to make a century. For most of the day it looked like his self-applied providence was going to make this a fifth. He was dropped at slip, a standard chance to Rory Burns who over time has proved less catcher than colander. He left his crease and slipped flat on his face, only for Haseeb Hameed to hurl overarm rather than gently underarm and miss the throw from short leg. Warner was swimming for his crease, freestyle stroke to get a glove back in his ground, but washed up safe. He didn’t enjoy facing Mark Wood, tested for pace repeatedly, wafting the bat at nothing. In between times, he had his moments. A couple of forays on to the front foot to drive through the off-side. His signature shot of standing up as tall as he can manage to punch through point. Targeting Jack Leach with 31 runs from the spinner’s first three overs, Warner twice drop-kicking him over the fence down the ground. He was warming up for the series, out of tune, unconvincing, and he still made one of the match’s defining scores. The only thing that didn’t go Warner’s way was notching century number 25. He has waited a long time to pull out the Toyota jump, and would have enjoyed taking off. Instead he misread a slower ball from Ollie Robinson, spooning to cover, and couldn’t quite believe what he’d done. But then, by that stage, nor could England. By contrast with Warner, nothing went England’s way. The drops and the misfields, as per standard. Stokes diving for a boundary save and coming up sore, hobbling around the field and bowling a few overs innocuous compared to his first few. Burning DRS reviews on spurious calls. Marnus Labuschagne fluently ran up 74. Through the middle session, the body language slumped. Robinson stood with hands on hips, Wood scratched his forearms, Hameed at midwicket was a clothes horse drying a Test shirt. Joe Root spent the drinks break talking to Spidercam instead of his troops. The tide did turn after tea, as Warner’s exit brought wickets. But the deficit was still 196 by stumps, with Travis Head’s century bringing Australia to 343 for seven. Two of Australia’s key three bats had got themselves into the series, while Steve Smith, out for 12, obviously felt the situation was not dire enough to require his intervention. His teammates had it well in hand. Warner may have missed this hundred but he looks to have set himself up for the next.And with that, we’ll wrap up the blog today. Here’s everything that went down today: Deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce tested positive for Covid while in Washington. NSW recorded 420 new cases and one death. Victoria recorded 1,232 new cases and nine deaths. The ACT recorded four new cases. The Northern Territiory recorded three new cases. NSW also recorded eight new Omicron cases, while a backpacker hostel in Bondi is in lockdown for an outbreak. Victorian health authorities announced another two potential Omicron cases are under investigation, in addition to the two mentioned yesterday. Tasmania will introduce vaccine mandate for most public servants. Angus Taylor vowed to “keep our trucks running” amid a urea shortage. Former prime minister Kevin Rudd said he was ‘delighted’ by a recommendation for a media diversity inquiry by Labor and the Greens. Queensland hospitals are “stretched to breaking point” and not ready for Covid, the AMA said. Housing minister Michael Sukkar announced 4,600 more places in the First Home Loan Deposit Scheme A woman died in flood waters in Brisbane, after her car became submerged. The ACCC approved the $23.6bn takeover of Sydney airport by a consortium of super funds, despite industry concerns over concentration of ownership in the sector. A backpackers hostel in Bondi has been put in lockdown due to an outbreak of Covid-19. It’s still unclear how many cases there are there, nor how many people are staying there, but police have cordoned off the venue. It’s also not yet clear if the outbreak involves the Omicron variant. NSW Health confirmed the positive case at Noah’s Backpackers this afternoon, with a testing squad currently checking all visitors. This is the second time Noah’s Backpackers has been put into lockdown, after an outbreak happened in April 2020. In a statement, NSW Police said they had been asked to assist at the hostel: NSW Police has been requested to assist at a backpackers hostel at Bondi. Officers from Eastern Beaches Police Area Command are currently on site. Angus Taylor, federal minister for industry, energy and emissions reduction, has released a statement in an attempt to ease concern surrounding a shortage of urea. Urea is a key ingredient in diesel exhaust fluid and there are fears the global shortage – largely caused by an export ban by China – will disrupt supply chains. Taylor’s statement says there is enough AdBlue – diesel exhaust fluid – on hand to maintain five weeks of “business-as-usual demand”. It also says there are an additional two weeks of supply on the way. Taylor says there is “a coordinated whole-of-government effort to ensure reliable and ongoing supply of AdBlue in close cooperation with industry”. He says businesses and consumers should avoid buying unnecessary and unhelpful amounts, and to continue operating as normal: We are quickly and actively working to ensure supply chains of both refined urea and AdBlue are secure so that industry can have certainty on their operations. Global supply pressures, stemming from increased domestic use in China, have led to international issues in securing refined urea, which is key to producing AdBlue. This is exacerbated by the global shortage of natual gas, the essential ingredient used to make urea. I can assure Australians that the Government is working to ensure we do not face any shortages. We are pursuing a range of measures to address global pressures in the urea market. We will keep our trucks running and Australian motorists on the road. You can read more on the issue in the explainer from Peter Hannam at the link below: Switching over to Victoria, premier Daniel Andrews has urged Tennis Australia to review how medical exemptions are granted for tennis players arriving for the Australian Open. Tennis Australia have said that no exemptions have been granted, with players due to arrive from late December. All attendees, players and staff must be vaccinated to attend the Australian open next month, and Andrews called for Tennis Australia to examine its policies on medical exemptions: I think it is important that if Tennis Australia do move to a situation where they want to check the bona fides of any exemption – and I’m not talking about any individual – anyone who has an exemption, then that’s an appropriate safeguard. Everyone sitting on centre court will have to be double jabbed. Out of fairness to them, out of respect for so many Victorians, [with what] the vast majority of Victorians have done, we have to have confidence in these arrangements. Tennis Australia have a role in protecting the integrity of these arrangements. Former prime minister Kevin Rudd has backed a recommendation for an inquiry into media ownership diversity, in an appearance on the ABC’s Afternoon Briefing. In his typical style, Rudd both lashed News Corp for its approach to news, and said Australians are “fed up” with the level of media ownership: Most Australians have just been frankly fed up to the back teeth with the level of concentrated media ownership, Murdoch with 70% of the print media, and the reluctant bias in coverage, and simply too much power in the hands of one man. So what is really important about this Senate inquiry report is that the majority report has just come down and it recommends that a judicial inquiry with the powers of a royal commission be established. To do two things - to look at the future of media relation in the country, recommending that there be a single regulator, given that we now have converging technology platforms between print, between broadcasting, between electronic, and of course digital platforms and, thirdly, to look specifically at the excessive concentration of power in the hands of single monopolies. I see that as code language for Murdoch. So we are delighted with the outcome of the inquiry’s recommendations. The shadow minister for families and Indigenous Australians, Linda Burney, was on the ABC’s Afternoon Briefing discussing the huge number of Indigenous children not living with their parents. Host Patricia Karvelas mentioned that more than 20,000 Indigenous children don’t live with their parents, and that number is growing. Burney said she was “terribly afraid” of another potential stolen generation: I want people to imagine a room with 15 Aboriginal children in it. One of those children will be in care. And that is alarming. Like you’ve said, over the last decade there has been an increase year by year of that amount. What I am terribly afraid of, Patricia, is that if we don’t arrest this then we are going to be looking at another stolen generation. There are a myriad of issues that need addressing and I’m happy to go through them in you want. What the problem is, is that state and territory governments in the main have walked away from what’s called the child placement principle. I was very instrumental in putting that in place in NSW. It no longer exists. If children don’t go grow up around culture, if children don’t grow up knowing who that family is, particularly if they are Aboriginal and that link is broken, then it is a very, very serious situation. The other issues of course things like poverty, things like the point that you’ve made of placing children in kinship care. The carers are out there. But the Family Matters report makes it very, very clear that the control needs to be in Aboriginal hands. That funding arrangements need to be ... looked at, and most importantly, people, families and children need to be at the decision making table when things are being decided about those children. “Frustrated” Queensland doctors have developed their own plan to fix a hospital system they say is “stretched to breaking point”, as the state prepares for more Covid cases when border restrictions relax, AAP reports. Questions are being raised about capacity to handle surges in demand brought on by the reopening of borders to Covid-19 hotspots and the impending cyclone season. “Our public hospital system is stretched to breaking point and our staff are worn out,” the Australian Medical Association Queensland ‘Ramping Roundtable’ chair Kim Hansen said. There are not enough beds and there are not enough staff. It is as simple as that. The roundtable has released a “five-point action plan” it says will improve patient flow and address bed blockages in public hospitals. Among the demands are 1,500 additional beds, keeping hospitals operating at below 90% capacity to allow for surges, and supporting alternative ways for patients to enter hospitals instead of through emergency departments. Queensland deputy premier Steven Miles says work is already under way to address the issues raised. A key part of our COVID planning has been ensuring that we have additional capacity right through the system, from ED all the way to ICU. A bushfire is raging near Western Australian’s Margaret River, as firefighters also battle an out-of-control blaze in nearby Yallingup. An emergency warning has been issued for a vast section of the Leeuwin-Naturaliste national park in the shire of Augusta-Margaret River. The warning area has expanded significantly since the emergency alert was issued on Wednesday afternoon, with hot and windy weather expected to test containment lines. You can read more on the fires at the story below: So earlier today, epidemiologist Dr Mary-Louise McLaws from UNSW was on the ABC, discussing the Omicron variant of Covid and vaccine booster shots. McLaws said a third dose was “necessary” for any variant, and referenced data out of Israel: There is this sweet spot for the virus to get in and cause infection at around about 4.5 months, five months and definitely six months [after vaccination]. So I would concur that we absolutely do need boosters. Certainly Delta and now Omicron are going to change our immune system. We may still get asymptomatic or silent infection. It might be at a very low level and we have seen with Delta that ... those that have been vaccinated who acquire infection have a very high viral load but for a very short period of time because their immune system, because they have been vaccinated, rush out there and get rid of all of the virus particles. And we have an immediate response to the media diversity report, with a statement from Liberal senator Andrew Bragg dismissing its findings and calling it a “shameless political stunt”. He also says it is “embarrassing” to be pursuing a judicial inquiry into media diversity because News Corp, which he says the report is aimed at, owns newspapers “in a digital age”. I kid you not. Here’s a slice of the statement: The Report proposes a judicial inquiry with the powers of a Royal Commission into the concentration of media ownership. The report does not tell us why this inquiry would be necessary, or what it would achieve. The recommendations are aimed at one particular organisation which has a large exposure to newspapers. Assessing media concentration by looking at the ownership of newspapers in the digital age is a deeply embarrassing and totally inappropriate measurement. It would be like conducting an assessment on the prospects of Kodak film without considering digital cameras and iPhones. Calling for a Royal Commission without compelling reasons is lazy and irresponsible. The Inquiry has opted for intentions over results, performance over process, and opinion over substance. Labor and the Greens have recommended a judicial inquiry with the powers of a royal commission into media diversity, ownership and regulation. “It is clear that the current regulatory framework is not fit for purpose and significant changes are required,” the report into media diversity tabled in the senate on Thursday says. A judicial inquiry would have the capacity for a more comprehensive investigation, including compelling witnesses to give evidence, than can be undertaken by a parliamentary committee. Such an inquiry would also be conducted at arm’s length of all politicians to allow an independent investigation into media regulation and ownership. Meanwhile, the Ashes continue at the Gabba, and you can keep up with our liveblog at the link below: Sticking with Victoria for a moment, premier Daniel Andrews earlier today told reporters he will move to improve the triple-zero emergency call agency as soon as possible. The premier said he wouldn’t wait for a major review, which is under way, to present its findings into the troubled service, after The Age reported a case of a man who died after waiting 15 minutes to connect to an operator, and 25 minutes for an ambulance. If, in the course of their work, day-to-day and in the completion of the review, they thought there was something that could be done now and be impactful, I would be confident they would provide us with that advice, and they wouldn’t wait till the end of their review. It’s a review, yes, it’s got a deadline, but it’s a dynamic environment, and there’s arguably no more dynamic environment than [emergency services] call-taking. If there’s something next week or the week after or in a month’s time they think needs to happen, I’m absolutely certain the minister will know about that and will bring an urgency to that. Victorian health authorities have announced another two potential Omicron cases are under investigation. The two cases are in addition to the two announced yesterday, and were in the community while infectious. They are not linked to any international arrivals. Of the cases, one has been identified in the city of Casey, one in the city of Wyndham and two in the city of Brimbank. Rapid genomic sequencing is under way to determine if the cases do actually carry the new variant, which has not been confirmed in the community in Victoria yet. I thought we’d break up a day of news with some lovely photos of a two-week old pygmy hippo calf, who made her first appearance at Taronga zoo today: The premier also weighed in on the discussions around former NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian getting into federal politics. Berejiklian has not yet commented on the possibility of a tilt at the seat of Warringah, with conflicting rumours about the possibility she will return to public life. Perrottet did not address the rumours directly, but repeated his praise of the former premier: As I’ve said, she has been a great servant of the people of NSW. She’s navigated our state through very dark times and challenging times and I’ve had a great opportunity to serve very closely with her, in my previous role as treasurer. She’s one of the most resilient people I’ve ever met, she’s dedicated to the cause. She was passionate about the people of our state and I believe she’ll make a great contribution in whatever decision that she makes about her future job. Asked if she should end the speculation, Perrottet said it was her choice: That’s a matter for her and the decision that she makes. Obviously, the media have a significant interest in it. If the speculation is to end, maybe you could write less articles. Earlier today, NSW premier Dominic Perrottet stood by the state’s current road map, calling it a “proportionate response” ahead of further restrictions easing. The next changes to come, due on 15 December, will end density limits in all settings, with masks only required on public transport, at airports and unvaccinated indoor hospitality staff. Perrottet said the plan didn’t need to change, as concerns abide around the new Omicron variant: From time to time, if required, we will tailor those settings to the situation. It’s not set and forget, we’ll always adjust those settings where we think they’ll need to be amended. But at the moment, we are very confident with where we sit today. Let’s not continue to focus solely on the case numbers. I’ll say this every press conference until that stops. It is not simply about the case numbers, it is about the hospitalisations and the ICUs (intensive care admissions). That is what is most important here. We need to instil confidence, hope and optimism in our people. Gunner has also added that people travelling to the Northern Territory will need to get three tests to get into the territory. Travellers will need one test before arrival, and two after they arrive. Gunner explained the process for domestic arrivals, who will be able to enter the territory next week: They will need to present proof of vaccination and proof of a PCR taken in the previous three days. By the 23rd another Covid test. On the 26th that would need to get their third and final test done. I will make this clear, it does not matter if it is Christmas Day, Boxing Day or New Year’s Day. If you need to take a test then you need to get your test. This freedom comes with responsibility and that is to get a Covid test. The Northern Territory has recorded three new Covid cases overnight, including a household contact of three previous cases from Katherine. The other two cases include a woman in her 80s, a close contact of a case that arrived from London, and an arrival from Sydney. NT chief minister Michael Gunner announced that the government is scrapping red and green zones from 20 December, indicating it would be more important to know whether someone coming into NT was vaccinated or not. The Tasmanian government will introduce a Covid-19 vaccine mandate for most public servants. Premier Peter Gutwein announced the mandate today, which will cover ministerial and electorate office staff, with exceptions made for staff in the treasury and finance department who could “limit their intermingling” with the public. But “client-facing staff” will all need to get vaccinated. Public servants will need to provide evidence of vaccination by 15 December. Gutwein said around 97% of public servants were already vaccinated, with the new policy aimed at “hundreds, not thousands” of people yet to get the jab. I do want to be really clear about this. Non-compliance could lead to termination. Tasmania crossed the 88% double-dose mark recently, with borders due to reopen next Wednesday. Australian families separated by international border closures during the pandemic were frustrated by inconsistencies from government decision makers on travel exemptions, a national audit office report has found. The Department of Home Affairs also failed to give applicants specific reasons about why applications for travel exemptions were refused. Nor did the department have an adequate review process in place. An audit of Australia’s international travel restrictions between March 2020 and June 2021 found the department’s management of those restrictions during the COVID-19 pandemic had “been largely effective”. But it found decisions on exemptions made by home affairs officers were not consistent with the department’s own policies. A sample of 71 inward travel exemption cases finalised between August 2020 and March this year showed 12 decisions (17%) were not consistent with policy requirements. “Decisions about inward travel exemptions have not consistently been managed in accordance with policies and procedures,” the auditors found. Home affairs spent $2.85m on an online travel exemption portal for prospective arrivals to provide relevant documentation to support their case. Yet, the audit office found the decision-making framework still allowed officers “considerable discretion” when assessing applications. Home affairs accepted travel exemptions in “a small number of cases” were inconsistent with its own policies, but said findings must be considered against the more than 900,000 rapid exemptions that were made. The department will ensure applicants receive more detailed feedback if refused and will put mechanisms in place for applicants to seek a review. Good afternoon, Mostafa Rachwani with you this afternoon, and as always, a quick thanks to Justine Landis-Hanley for her expert blogging this morning. I’m going to hand the blog over to my amazing colleague, Mostafa Rachwani. The Australian government says it has been advised Barnaby Joyce’s positive Covid test has no implications for his government colleagues or staff at Parliament House. A spokesperson for Joyce has just now issued a brief statement with further details: “The deputy prime minister received a negative test when he arrived in London on Saturday and tested negative again in an additional test on Sunday. He received a positive test after arriving in Washington. The advice from the chief medical officer is that there are no implications for his colleagues or staff at Parliament House.” It is understood Joyce receive a negative PCR test in London on Saturday 4 December; a negative rapid antigen test in London on Sunday 5 December; and a positive PCR test in Washington on Wednesday 8 December. Albanese also questioned whether the Greens would want to continue with “destructive actions” like in 2009 when the party voted against the Rudd government’s carbon pollution reduction scheme. We will put that [new policy] before the parliament, but it won’t change our resolve and it won’t change what we do in government. Albanese said the prime minister was incapable of coming up with a serious critique of Labor’s policy, so he had “made up another one” by claiming Labor would change the policy post-election. Albanese said this “just shows how bankrupt he is” when it comes to serious policy critique. Albanese said he could not recall a policy put forward by Labor on a contestable area such as climate policy that had been so warmly embraced by the business community and the peak farmers federation. He added: The only way to end the climate wars is to elect a Labor government. The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, has declared that any attempt by the parliament to thwart an incoming Labor government’s attempt to legislate stronger climate policy “won’t change our resolve”. Labor has pledged to legislate an emissions reduction target of 43% by 2030 - attracting criticism from the Greens, which have said it is inadequate. Scott Morrison has attempted to paint this as merely an “opening bid” for post-election talks with the Greens and crossbenchers. Albanese backed his climate spokesperson, Chris Bowen, who said yesterday a Labor government would update Australia’s formal target - known as a nationally determined contribution (NDC) - even if it couldn’t get legislation through the parliament. (The current government has not legislated its existing target of a 26% to 28% cut on 2005 levels - in short, legislation is not necessary, but would help to provide certainty.) Albanese told reporters today: We’ve got a target of 43% by 2030 … we’ve set out exactly how it will occur, it’s been modelled … If after the election if we’re successful I would expect it would received the support of parliament, we’d have a mandate for it. Albanese said the truth was that parliamentary approval was not necessary to increase the NDC taken to the Conference of the Parties (Cop). He questioned whether the Liberal party would want to continue to “stand in the way of the business community’s” wish for certainty. Labor Leader Anthony Albanese appeared on Sky News this morning. Asked about Barnaby Joyce’s Covid diagnosis, Albanese said “I wish him a swift recovery.” Anthony Albanese also voiced support for the diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Winter Olympics that the government announced yesterday. (We should point out Labor gave bipartisan support to this move in a press release yesterday, but Albanese was asked at his press conference about it.) The Labor leader said he supported the government’s call not to send officials to the Games. Albanese cited concerns about China’s human rights record, particularly the treatment of Uyghur minority and the undermining of Hong Kong’s freedoms. Albanese said the US had led the diplomatic boycott and Australia had followed. He noted Canada had announced a similar move. Asked about Scott Morrison’s attempt to paint Albanese as weak on national security, the Labor leader said the prime minister would “come up with a range of scare campaigns”, adding: “Scott Morrison isn’t up to the job of running his own government at the moment.” Albanese said the Australian government needed to address climate change as a national security issue. The Australia Institute has joined calls for the NSW government to limit flood plain harvesting. TAI Research Director Rod Campbell said: “This is a big deal for the whole Murray Darling Basin and all of its rivers and people. It must not get lost in the end of year scramble. “Floodplain harvesting reform needs oversight from the highest levels of government as there are big implications for the state budget, employment, human health and more. “Without attention from the public, the Premier, Treasurer and other MPs, this huge reform could be derailed by the powerful agribusinesses that benefit from the status quo.” Nature Conservation Council Acting Chief Executive Jacqui Mumford said: “Floodplain harvesting works against the best principles of water sharing and the common good. “It is so harmful to the ecosystems we all depend on that it should be considered not just illegal but anti-social.” The environmental groups have also been backed by the Southern Riverina Irrigators. “This is important not just for us, but for all the rice mills, wine makers and other processors that we supply,”Chairman, Chris Brooks said. “The cotton grown with unregulated floodwater in the north, by contrast, is exported with almost no processing done in Australia.” Southern irrigators and a coalition of environmental groups are calling on the NSW government to limit flood plain harvesting – a practice which has been blamed for the reducing flows in the Murray Darling river system by as much as 20%. A NSW Upper House report on flood plain harvesting is due out next week and will explore in detail the impact of irrigators in the northern basin diverting flood waters into large storages using channels and levee banks, which is then manly used for cotton growing. Irrigators are currently able to do this for free and without a licence, but there is a proposal from the NSW government to issue licences based on historical take by irrigators. This has prompted a fierce debate on exactly how much should be permitted to be taken, its lawfulness and its impact on the environment and downstream flows. The practice has been blamed for contributing to the 2019-20 fish kills at Menindee which saw hundreds of thousands of fish die, and for reduced water availability for downstream irrigators. The groups want licensing of floodplain harvesting at “lawful, sustainable volumes” which they say would be a major environmental, social and economic reform for the NSW Murray Darling Basin. In particular they do not want the licensing to result in an increase in the sustainable diversion limit – water taken for agriculture – that was agreed under the Murray Darling Basin plan. Barnaby Joyce was also asked about George Christensen’s recent appearance on far-right US talk show InfoWars. Joyce said that he has spoken to Christensen “numerous times”. I absolutely 100% rebuke any association anybody makes to the Holocaust, which was such an atrocious time in the history of mankind – to anything, domestic policy, in regards to I don’t know, border security. That’s just wrong. And I have also said that, you know, I think that these platforms are really just utilising the fact that George likes to make comments and I don’t know who that’s helping. I have got a sense from the Labor party to be frank. Asked whether Christensen will refrain from making further comments, Joyce said “that’s a question you have got to bring up with George”, before quickly adding “or probably don’t bring up with George because then he will say something to you”. Deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce spoke to ABC News Mornings from Washington DC, where he has tested positive for Covid-19. He said that he probably won’t be home for Christmas. During his press conference in Geelong this morning, Scott Morrison was asked what he thought about the idea of a “giant ute on a pole” to be built as a tourist attraction in the area. Morrison seemed keen: I love utes. How good are utes? And how good would a big ute be? That’s what I would say. Look, I think that’s ... the iconic nature of Australian tourist attractions anywhere in the country. But he managed to pivot the conversation back to government policy. But what’s more important than big utes is real utes, is work at sites like this. And that’s what we are here to talk about today. I mean, you can have a big ute on a stick, what I want to see is tradies in utes on work sites building homes for first home buyers. And that’s what we are celebrating today. Now the Australian Electoral Commission has weighed in on where this big ute on a pole could be built. Albanese said that he has asked firefighter Trevor Ross to run against Liberal MP Melissa McIntosh for the seat of Lindsay at the federal election. Trevor Ross will stand up for the people of western Sydney and particularly the people of Saint Marys and Penrith, the people of this electorate of Lindsay. He is someone who has great experience. He has been a firefighter for 36 years. Trevor Ross is someone who holds a hose and the people of Lindsay need someone like Trevor who has experience, who has worked as a firefighter, who has stood up for the local community here in western Sydney, who is passionate about jobs and apprenticeships and skills, and making more opportunity for the generations of young people coming through here. Trevor is a proud member of his union. He is someone who has been active in the Labor party for a considerable period of time. Albanese is speaking about Labor’s “A Future Made in Australia” plan. Albanese says that the plan will “deliver 465,000 free Tafe places ... to make sure we train and skill up Australians for the jobs of today and as well as of tomorrow”. Oppositio leader Anthony Albanese is speaking to reporters in Sydney, The father of deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce’s partner will stand at the next election for Clive Palmer’s United Australia party, contesting MP Bob Katter’s seat of Kennedy. Our friends at AAP have the story. Peter Campion, the father of Vikki Campion, will contest the north Queensland seat of Kennedy at the 2022 election. Kennedy is currently held by maverick independent MP Bob Katter, who has represented the electorate since 1993. Mr Campion said he would campaign for reducing large levels of government debt and stopping net-zero emissions targets. ‘Net-zero means no jobs and no future for our community, and we have got to stop the Liberal-Labor alliance,’ he said in a statement. ‘I think all members of the community appreciate Mr Katter’s service to the people of Queensland and recognise that he is entitled to spend more time with his family.’ This brings the total number of Omicron cases in the state to 42. Morrison has been asked whether three Covid-19 vaccine doses will be required to be considered fully vaccinated against the virus. Morrison says “we will continue to listen to the medical advice on that”. We have already talked to Atagi about what the period should be between the interval between a second dose and a booster shot. They are the right people to be advising on these things, and for them, myself and the chief medical officer and the health minister to make determinations. Morrison has been asked why Australia hasn’t accelerated its Covid-19 booster program, given new evidence that three Pfizer doses are required to protect against the new Omicron varient. Well, first of all Australia is one of the first countries to introduce a whole of population booster program. And we did that before Omicron. And I think the events only show the wisdom of that decision, we have ample booster shots that are available ... I was in touch with the health minister, the secretary of health and chief medical officer and they will continue to keep that under close watch as to whether [the booster] can be brought forward with new information, and we would strongly support that and we are ready to go if that is what they would like to do. Morrison has been asked about Barnaby Joyce testing positive for Covid-19 in the United States. He said that Joyce was in the US and UK to talk about the Australian government’s proposal to hold social media companies liable as publishers for defamatory comments by anonymous users. I know Barnaby was really looking forward to what he was going to do over there. He has, together with myself and so many members of my team, so focused on this issue of keeping particularly young people and women safe online and he’s been a real champion of this cause ... I know he’s naturally disappointed he won’t be able to do that because of contracting Covid. But he tells me he’s feeling alright. Housing minister Michael Sukkar has announced that just over 4,600 additional places will be rolled over and made available this financial year under the government’s First Home Loan Deposit Scheme. So an additional 4,600 individuals or couples will be able to purchase their first home, either an established home or building a first home, with a deposit as little as 5%. That program, since we announced it at the election and put it in place at the beginning of last year, has seen some 60,000 Australians bid or building their first home with as little as 5%. Morrison continues to promote his government’s home owners policies, including the home builder program. He says that “we have tens of thousands of Australians taking this up.” We have seen $30billion worth of residential construction activity flow from these commitments. He adds that the First Home Loan Deposit Scheme, now known as the home guarantee scheme, is saving people an average of four years they would have spent saving that money. That’s four years of price increases they would have had to pay for that would have gone on top of their mortgage. And this is an extraordinary outcome. Morrison is speaking in Geelong about first home ownership. Morrison says that since “the last election we have put over 300,000 Australians into a home. 300,000. It’s an extraordinary achievement.” What we have done is we have taken first home owners each year, I made that commitment before the last election, from just under 100,000 a year, to this year [where] we are now at 177,00 a year. Prime minister Scott Morrison is speaking from Geelong, Victoria. Prime minister Scott Morrison is expected to speak to reporters from Victoria within the next half an hour. We will bring you updates as we get them. Miles also had a few words to say about Scott Morrison’s tweet this morning celebrating Qld hitting the 80% vaccination mark. Morrison wrote: “Well done to Queensland and the NT! Confirming you’ve officially hit 80% double dose vaccination, the target in our National Plan.” Queensland deputy premier Steven Miles addressed reporters this morning. While he celebrated no new cases of Covid-19 in the state, he warned that “it might be one of our last” double-doughnut days. Miles said that more people on the Gold Coast need to come forward and get vaccinated against the virus. Speaking of the sunshine state, Queensland has recorded no new locally-acquired Covid-19 cases. Queensland did confirm two cases of Omicron in people from overseas on Wednesday. Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has congratulated the state on hitting the 80% double-dose target for those aged 16 and older, noting it’s one of the few places in the world to do so before experiencing a major Covid-19 outbreak. The media diversity inquiry, which has examined Rupert Murdoch’s dominance of Australian media, will table its report in the senate today. The inquiry heard from global News Corp chief Robert Thomson, Sky News boss Paul Whittaker and former prime minister Kevin Rudd. Whittaker vigorously defended Sky’s right to present a range of views on treatments such as ivermectin at an appearance before the committee, which earlier heard from the company’s Australasian chief, Michael Miller. The Senate committee chair, Sarah Hanson-Young, called the inquiry to hear extensive evidence about how News Corp’s media dominance in Australia made it a powerful political player. It was sparked by the success of Rudd’s petition for a royal commission into Murdoch’s dominance which had more than half a million signatures. Michael Azrak, the Australian general manager with Moderna, also told ABC News Mornings that Moderna has been “in discussions with the commonwealth [government] for quite some time” about setting up a local manufacturing facility. They are progressing in a positive direction. I can’t say much more than that, more than to say that Moderna is very keen to be part of the ecosystem here. I think it is very important for Australia to have onshore manufacturing capabilities of an advanced platform like Moderna’s and the discussions are heading in a positive direction and hopefully we can have some readout on that in the not-too-distant future. He said that it would be “certainly achievable” to open a facility by the end of 2022. Michael Azrak, the Australian general manager with Moderna, spoke on ABC News Mornings today. He said that data was still emerging around the effectiveness of the Moderna Covid-19 vaccine and booster shot against the new Omicron variant. I’m hopeful [that the vaccines will be effective against Omicron] but I need to be guided by the data and we will just have to wait and see how the data plays out Yesterday, the Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration approved the Moderna booster shot for those over the age of 18. Pending Atagi’s recommendation, Azrak said that anyone who has the Pfizer or AstraZeneca vaccine will be able to get the Moderna booster. He said that, while there isn’t a “considerable amount of data, given that the booster rollout has just begun, they haven’t seen any increase in adverse reactions for people who have a Pfizer or AstraZeneca vaccine and a Moderna booster. Up to 160 alleged criminals are in police sights as officers prepare to launch a nationally coordinated strike against organised crime on Thursday, AAP reports. The second phase of Operation Ironside will target motorcycle gangs, Italian organised crime and drug distributors and the offensive is likely to continue for a number of months. Ironside was a three-year covert operation by the Australian Federal Police in partnership with the FBI which led to a law-enforcement controlled encrypted messaging service providing enough information to take down more than 300 alleged criminals. Investigators were able to use the app to discover that drugs would be attached to the hull of large ships or thrown overboard before they docked in Australia to then be recovered by criminal dive teams. Syndicates would also use garbage collection services to pick up drugs hidden in bins at ports around Australia. More than 700 search warrants have been executed under the operation with over 6.3 tonnes of illegal drugs, $52 million in suspected proceeds of crime and 139 weapons seized in Australia. Almost 1000 suspected criminals have been arrested around the world under the operation. The competition watchdog has approved the $23.6bn takeover of Sydney Airport by a consortium of super funds despite industry concerns over concentration of ownership in the sector. Australian Competition and Consumer Commission chair Rod Sims said some stakeholders raised concerns the takeover might increase the flow of information between airports that have common ownership, which will be many of the larger ones, giving airports more bargaining power against airlines. Sims said: We understand the stakeholder concerns, however, fundamentally the lack of competition between airports means that any such sharing of information between airports would not amount to a substantial lessening of competition, which is what the law requires before we can oppose a merger. He said the ACCC would continue to monitor airport use prices, which the regulator has consistently said are too high. The absence of constraint ultimately leads to consumers paying higher airport passenger charges than they otherwise would. We will continue to advocate for a regulatory regime that is effective, particularly as the aviation industry and the Australian economy recover from the Covid-19 pandemic. The buyer of the Sydney Airport, Sydney Aviation Alliance, is made up of Industry Funds Management, AustralianSUper, QSuper and Global Infrastructure Partners. Next week, the government is planning to ease border restrictions for a range of temporary visa holders. But for many, the changes will mean little, including those on bridging visas, who are not included in the eased restrictions. Another cohort is also facing seven more months stuck abroad. Many recent graduates on temporary 485 visas travelled overseas temporarily, only to find themselves locked out of returning due to the border restrictions. Their visas, which are short-term only, have now expired. The government is offering them the ability to apply for replacement visas, but not until July 2022. That means they cannot return for at least another seven months. Samantha Raut, who is trapped in Nepal after travelling for her brother’s wedding, is locked out of Australia but is still having to pay her rent, bills, and other expenses while earning a relatively low income in Nepal. The replacement visa costs another $1,680 on top of the $1,680 already spent on the original visa. She said: That’s actually not fair.We are financially broken, we are mentally broken, so many people are going through depression, anxiety attacks due to this issue. Barnaby Joyce was asked on Sky News this morning whether having coronavirus had changed his ideas on returning to Covid normal. He replied: I’m still of the same view – you know we can’t just shut the whole place down. The world’s got to move on. It’s not economically possible for any nation to go into permanent shutdown – you’ll go broke. Joyce added: We’ve got to work out how we keep people out of hospitals, that’s terribly important. He also said it was important that people get vaccinated – and then work out the best way to “get our lives back to as normal as we can”. I hope that in the future rather than being isolated this is like the flu if you get it you go home and you manage it yourself. With the diligence of people, like you get a flu shot every year, get a Covid vaccine every year. I mean that’s my dream – where the reality is I don’t know, but that is my dream. Laura Jayes asked whether it had changed his perspective at all. Joyce replied: Not yet – I’m not dying here, Laura. I’m feeling like I have a slight to mild flu, so no it hasn’t really changed my perspective. Maybe if you call me in a few days and hear me gasping for air I’ll have a different interview for you. A bushfire near the popular tourist destination of Margaret River in Western Australia has become more intense and people in the area have been told to evacuate, AAP reports. Emergency WA issued the threat warning late on Wednesday to residents in the Leeuwin-Naturaliste National Park region in the Shire of Augusta-Margaret River. “You are in danger and need to act immediately to survive. There is a threat to lives and homes,” the agency said in a message reissued on Thursday morning. “If the way is clear, leave now for a safer place.” Emergency WA said the fire was escalating due to a heavy fuel load on the park floor. The fire started near the intersection of Caves Road and Calgarup Road in Boranup, almost 300km south of Perth. The WA west coast is set for high temperatures and windy conditions on Thursday, with a forecast peak of 36 degrees Celsius for the Perth metropolitan area. The Department of Biodiversity, Conservation and Attractions is overseeing the firefighting operation, which is supported by local brigades and water-bombing aircraft. Barnaby Joyce is speaking to Sky News about his positive Covid-19 diagnosis. He is in isolation in Washington DC. He says he feels like he has flu. And he doesn’t know what variant he has. You’ve got the protocol to follow and I’m following it. Question: Has anyone else in the delegation tested positive? No, which is really good, I’d hate to think there are other people who are inconvenienced. Question: Any idea where you picked up Covid? Joyce says he doesn’t know. He says in the UK – where he was earlier in the week – it is crowded in places as people prepare for Christmas shopping. You wouldn’t think there’s a pandemic on in areas of the UK. Question: What is he going to do in isolation? The gist of his response is watch cricket, do some paperwork and read a book. Question: Has he changed his ideas on Covid-normal? I’m still of the view we can’t shut the whole place down. Deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce spoke to ABC New England North West this morning. He called from Washington DC, where he is isolating after testing positive for Covid-19 during a work trip. Joyce said: Very frustrated that I will be locked up in a room for 10 days, but that’s part of the process. We arrived here from England, I chose to get a test and tested positive and all my colleagues tested negative, the luck of the draw I suppose. He went on to say that he was not sure what strain of the virus he had, adding that he would have to ask the virus. The corporate regulator is wrapping up its investigations that came out of the 2018 banking royal commission with a lawsuit against ANZ over a $200m ripoff of more than 580,000 customers. In a new federal court case, the Australian Securities and Investments Commission alleges that between the mid 90s and September this year it failed to give benefits including interest rate discounts and fee waivers to customers who were entitled to them as part of a package deal. The bank has admitted to making false or misleading representations to customers that its systems were good enough to provide the benefits and has already paid $200m in remediation. ANZ’s conduct was the subject of a case study at the royal commission. ‘This matter marks the final investigation by ASIC arising from matters considered by the Financial Services Royal Commission,” Asic deputy chair Sarah Court said. A constant theme of those investigations has been the failure of large financial services entities to honour agreements with customers and to ensure proper processes and systems are in place to prevent widespread compliance failures. Asic will continue to take enforcement action in relation to misconduct of this nature. It comes after Asic yesterday launched criminal action against another finance industry player Avanteos, for charging fees to 500 dead people between 2016 and 2018. Avanteos, which at the time was a subsidiary of the Commonwealth Bank, has pleaded guilty. The issue of charging dead people was explored at the royal commission but not in relation to Avanteos. Deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce announced this morning that he has tested positive for Covid-19 while in Washington. In a statement, Joyce said he is experiencing mild symptoms and the “remaining members of the delegation have tested negative”. Malcolm Turnbull has given full-throated endorsement of climate-focused independents running at the next federal election, characterising the looming political contests in Liberal party heartland as a “very, very healthy development”. The former prime minister and federal Liberal party leader said on Wednesday night “clearly a lot of traditional Liberal party voters feel the party has moved way off to the right on a bunch of issues, in particular on climate, and they are frustrated by that”. Read the full story here: Australia’s fertility rate continues to plummet, with registered births dropping below 300,000 for the first time in 14 years. Figures released by the Australian Bureau of Statistics on Wednesday showed there were 294,369 registered births in 2020, a decrease of 3.7% from 2019. The previous year’s decline was 3%. Importantly, the total fertility rate fell to a record low 1.58 babies per woman, extending a decline from 2.02 in 2008. The rate rose from about 2.1 – the population replacement rate – in the early 1930s to a peak of 3.55 babies per woman in 1962. Read the full story from Guardian economics correspondent Peter Hannam here: A high profile doctor has announced she will be standing against treasurer Josh Frydenberg in the Melbourne seat of Kooyong, saying she “can’t stand” the government’s inaction on climate change. Prof Monique Ryan, the director of neurology at the Royal Children’s Hospital Melbourne, launched her independent campaign on Thursday. She will step down from her role at the hospital to run for office – a big step to secure what has previously been considered an unshakeably safe Liberal seat. In a statement, Ryan said: As a woman, a mother, and a doctor whose job it is to protect our children, I can’t stand it anymore. I can’t stand by, on the sidelines, while our local member votes with Barnaby Joyce against action on climate change. Every day I go to work and make difficult decisions to help Australian children. Is it too much to ask our government to do the same? Ryan is not the first high profile independent to challenge Frydenberg on climate change grounds. In 2019, Oliver Yates secured 8.98% of the vote while Greens candidate Julian Burnside secured 21.24% of the primary vote and 44% on preferences, ousting Labor in the two party preferred result. Frydenberg experienced an 8.24% drop in his primary vote last election, the result of votes going to Yates and Burnside. The Greens have preselected Melbourne lawyer and anti-nuclear activist Piers Mitchem for 2022. Deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce has announced he has tested positive for Covid-19 in the United States. Given concerns around growing Omicron case numbers in Australia, I want to point you to this article from Guardian science correspondent Hannah Devlin. Three doses of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine are likely to protect against infection with the Omicron variant but two doses may not, according to laboratory data that will increase pressure to speed up booster programs. Tests using antibodies in blood samples have given some of the first insights into how far Omicron escapes immunity, showing a stark drop-off in the predicted protection against infection or any type of disease for people who have had two doses. The findings suggest that, for Omicron, Pfizer/BioNTech should now be viewed as a “three-dose vaccine”. Read the full story here: Tennis Australia CEO Craig Tiley also told ABC News Breakfast this morning that 95% of the tennis community globally are now vaccinated, up from just 50% around six weeks ago. Documents show the Australian Open organisers have included Novak Djokovic on the men’s singles draw for next year, despite uncertainty around whether Djokovic is fully vaccinated against Covid-19. Tennis Australia CEO Craig Tiley has spoken to ABC News Breakfast this morning and made it clear that “no one can play the Australian Open unless they are vaccinated ... [or] if you receive a medically approved exemption from Australian authorities specifically against the very specific guidelines”. What was published yesterday was general entry list in a matter of course everyone goes on entry list, it is not a commitment list about who exactly is in the tournament, that comes in several weeks’ time when the actual list and draw gets finalised for the Australian Open. Tiley said an independent panel of medical specialists review applications for medical exemptions, and none have been granted as of this morning. There are really clear guidelines that someone would have to adhere to to get to which are very difficult to get across. Asked by ABC News Breakfast whether he is worried China will give a “frosty reception” to Australia’s athletes, given the diplomatic boycott, Matt Carroll said “there is no risk to our athletes whatsoever”. ... we had a meeting earlier this week, the organising committee are very focused on putting on the best games ever, as they always do but I’m sure they will, and we have been in conversation with the consul general here in Australia, and there is no risk to our athletes whatsoever, and most importantly they have a strong focus, we will look after them and bring them home safely. Carroll added that Australia may get its first curling team to a game. Australia Olympic Committee CEO Matt Carroll has spoken to ABC News Breakfast about Australia’s decision to join the diplomatic boycott of next year’s Winter Olympics in Beijing. Prime minister Scott Morrison yesterday confirmed Australian officials will not attend the 2022 games, joining the United States in a diplomatic boycott of the event. Morrison said a deterioration in the diplomatic relationship between Australia and China led to the decision, but said athletes will still attend. Carroll said he agreed with the prime minister’s decision. Asked how this will affect the athletes, Carroll said: There are two parts to that, we leave the diplomacy to the government, and the Olympic Games are on, the team is attending, the athletes have been preparing for four years. A woman has died after her car became submerged in floodwaters in west Brisbane, AAP reports. Emergency services received a report of a sedan being swept off a street and into a nearby creek in Pullenvale as a result of moving floodwaters about 4.40pm on Wednesday. The body of a 75-year-old Taringa woman, the sole occupant of the car, was recovered. Thunderstorms look set to elevate concerns over major flooding in central Queensland, the Western Downs and border towns which may not show signs of receding until at least the weekend. The town of Beaudesert south of Brisbane recorded more than 70mm of rain in the hour to 2pm on Wednesday, inundating roads and houses. Along central Queensland’s Dawson River, flood levels are expected to peak at Baralaba at 11.8 metres on Thursday after falls of up to 60mm in 24 hours in the area. It is the town’s biggest flood in 10 years. At nearby Theodore, floodwaters are at 11.54 metres but easing. Along the Western Downs’ Condamine River, major flooding is continuing between Loudoun Bridge and Cotswold including Ranges Bridge, Chinchilla Weir and the Condamine township. The river peaked at the Condamine township at 12.25 metres on Tuesday and remains at 12 metres, the biggest flood since 2013. Downstream, major flood levels are rising along the Balonne River with predicted peaks at Warkon, Surat, St George and Dirranbandi this weekend. Good morning! It’s Justine Landis-Hanley here to bring you the news blog today. Let’s dive straight in: Health experts are warning that the Omicron variant could become the dominant Covid-19 strain after Queensland and Victoria recorded their first cases of the virus. Both states recorded their first cases of Omicron in hotel quarantine. Urgent genomic testing is also under way on two suspected community cases on either side of Melbourne. New South Wales Health confirmed that 44 people who attended a pub trivia night in Petersham, Sydney’s inner west have tested positive for Covid-19. Five people who were at a boat party on the weekend have also caught the virus, and urgent testing is under way to determine if any of them have the Omicron variant. An emergency bushfire warning has been issued for a fire in Leeuwin Naturaliste National Park, in WA’s Augusta Margaret River Shire. More than 100 firefighters are working to contain the fire, and residents are being told the act immediate to survive.But just as I’m about to sign out, I notice this email from Rich Naylor, so let’s give the last word to him: “I agree with the previous pedants that it’s not tautology, but my memory of secondary school English says it’s not an oxymoron either. An oxymoron is the juxtaposition of two seemingly contradictory words; e.g. like the ‘terrible beauty’ in the famous Yeats poem - Easter 1916. There’s nothing necessarily contradictory about a delivery being ‘nondescript’ (which, according to Google means ‘lacking distinctive or interesting features or characteristics’). Off the top of my head I’m not sure what linguistic anomaly you’ve stumbled into - no doubt someone will know before the start of tomorrow’s play.” Join us then for more thrills and spills! And here’s a report of the day’s play: Aha, here’s Geoff Lemon on David Warner: “How on EARTH did England only complete 84 overs, even with the extra time?” wonders Vincent Schumacher. “Is that 10+ overs short? What a disgrace. The ICC clearly need to do more, as apparently the docking of WTC points isn’t enough. Fielder off the pitch on the next day for however many overs short you were?” That’d do me , and I’d make it the captain too. I guess we need some flexibility because stuff happens – Head getting hit, for example – but England’s effort today is a joke. England’s three main quicks all did well today – the problem is that Stokes hasn’t played in time, and you can’t do anything in a Test if you’re skittled for 147 on day one. “A warm one, Ollie Robinson tells Glenn McGrath. He said he feels ok and just went off for a “bit of maintenance”. He also says that on a different day, England would’ve taken more wickets and enjoyed the bounce, which is useful for a tall guy. Headingley, he reckons, is England’s nearest comparator, then goes onto say he thought he was going to get Warner every over, adding that he left some but played plenty more he could’ve left. I’m not sure I’d be revealing that, but either way, he bowled really well today. “You cannot talk about ducks without mentioning this song,” emails Rowan Sweeney. “Essential listening. I know Travis Head has just scored a Test-match ton, but has he ever got both contact lenses into an eight-year-old’s eyes, first go? I am now waving the box while accepting the acclaim of the crowd. “In further three-root-tooth news,” emails Colum Farrelly, “I can report I had one removed just yesterday. Apparently the stages of the procedure are graded as Boring, Interesting, Exciting, Swearing, which is a lot like cricket really. Despite my being only 65, the tooth fairy did not come.” I’m imagining it decorated with pictures of England’s cherubic yet beleagured captain. “I don’t know what’s worse from an English perspective,” says Brian Withington. “The state of the game or listening to the inane commentary from Warne et al about a declaration this evening?” I didn’t even bother reporting it, because it seemed so odd. Why would they not force the bowlers through more spells, while increasing the scoreboard pressure? David Warner tells us he got lucky getting dismissed off a no ball, but says he’s happy with his patience and how he left balls – though it’s Travis Head’s day. he also notes that England were relentless, and that’s true, they bolwed well until they tired, but Stokes getting hurt killed them, likewise the lack of a high-class spinner. 84th over: Australia 343-7 (Head 112, Starc 10) In bounds Wood again, and after Head twizzles him around the corner for three, he finds a bit of shape to whack Starc on the pad; there’s an appeal but it’s outside the line, and Starc inside-edges his next ball, but diving to his right, Buttler can’t hang on. That would’ve been a brilliant grab, it really would, though on the other hand that’s what he’s there for. Two further dots follow, and that is the end of the day. Despite an extra hour, England have managed just 84 overs, which is a total piece of nonsense, but Travis Heed won’t mind: he’s batted absolutely brilliantly, taking his team out of sight – they lead by 196 – in the grand style. “Can’t one of England’s crocked bowlers walk into a door frame en route to the treatment table?” wonders Gary Naylor. “There’s a handy concussion sub raring to go.” The mere thought of the fall-out is going to carry me through until tomorrow. 83rd over: Australia 340-7 (Head 109, Starc 10) Head has recovered, pulling Woakes’ first ball for two, then flicking his third into the on side for one. “Much-needed pedantry,” begins John Swan. “Allow me to be the 749th person to point out that that description of a ‘nondescript delivery’ (over 66) isn’t tautology, it’s an oxymoron. My pleasure. Also,could you fix the scorecard please? It says England were rolled for next to nothing and Australia are now miles ahead, which can’t be right, surely.” I can almost hear my mates in the surrounding desks crowing “Shaaaaaaame!” at me while waggling their hands. Meanwhile, my English-teacher old fella cringes in embarrassment. And heres’s Andrew Tatham: “You got me thinking when you described ‘nondescript’ as ‘tautology’ - isn’t it more an oxymoron, as it’s not saying what it is twice? I was holding off from this until you said ‘the OBO is nowt without pedantry’, so you only have yourself to blame. Thank you for the non-nondescript description of what’s going on at the Gabba.” Ha! Consider me telt! But do we have an answer to the question: is calling something nondescript oxymoron, given nondescript is a description? 82nd over: Australia 337-7 (Head 106, Starc 10) Goodness me, Wood unleashes an accidental beamah and it crunches into Travis’ head; a replay shows itflicked off the glove before ramming him punkt in the phizog. He goes down, but he’ll be OK, and when he gets up he’ll still be an Ashes ton to the good, but with a tale of bravery to accompany his runs. Wood rushes over the check he’s fine, and in the studio, Harmy notes that something like that can be as difficult for the bowler as the batter, who doesn’t want to let go of the ball for fear of hurting someone. Yup, the next delivery is a yorkah, then Head gets down the other end via single and Starc edges four through backward point, wide of Malan’s dive, beofre Wood raps the pad but outside the line. “Crispy duck is a popular delicacy here in Bali,” tweets Rob Wolf Petersen. “Losing a leg and getting deep fried is a pretty comprehensive way to depart, so I think the comparison’s apt. Delicious, too, albeit not for the duck.” 81st over: Australia 331-7 (Head 105, Starc 6) Woakes takes the second new ball and Head leaves his loosener, then steps down the ground to drive the four that raises a ton. He doesn’t run, but hollers, mouth wide open, then hollers again, all the work, worry, pain and rejection released in a single glorious moment of relief! What a moment and what a knock, off 85 balls too and taking his team out of sight, and he envelops Mitchell Starc in a monstrous hug. Well expletive batted young man, well expletive batted. Next ball, he takes a single to get down the other end and ponder his achievement, but three to Starc, drives through point, forces him to take strike again, and he forces through gully for three more. He’ll want to make it a daddy now, with the lead at 184. 80th over: Australia 320-7 (Head 97, Starc 3) Head takes two to extra, then misses a pull and Burns shells the catch; Root thinks it’s a drop, but looking at the replay, I think it was arm. Two singles follow, and the lead is a mighty 173. “For the rest of us cricket-playing nations,” emails Sandile Xaso on Johannesburg, “it’s hilarious to see both these sides (but especially England) downplay or diminish every other test series against higher class opponents at the altar of ‘the Ashes’. This isn’t a very high standard of cricket and I struggle to see how this is the pinnacle of anything but English insularity. Head giving us a good session to enjoy now though.” I agrree, these sides aren’t great, but sport is about needle, history and identity as well as quality – and didn’t England wallop South Africa, in South Africa, not that long ago? 79th over: Australia 317-7 (Head 94, Starc 3) Here comes Stokes again and Head cuts then Starc pulls, both for one, before Hesd takes on Hameed, who misses again – though this time, even with a hit the batter was home. The new meteroite is due the over after next; I guess Woakes will take it, and Wood will probably have to, though he looked wiped. 78th over: Australia 315-7 (Head 93, Starc 2) The sun has gone behind a cloud, but it doesn’t look like any rain will be forthcoming. Runs are though, a two and a three to Head, who looks set for a ton; at the end of the over, Robinson comes back on, which is good news for England because he looked hurt during his last over. “I had a tooth removed on Tuesday,” says Tom van der Gucht. “It was a bloody nightmare as they found it had three roots rather than the usual two (which is apparently a sign of having residual neanderthal DNA) and I took it as a sign that Root would lead England to win three Tests. Looks like its a sign that he’s only going to score three runs in this test - if we’re lucky.” Funnily enough, it was just last week that we read the story of Joseph in synagogue, so my dream interpretation skills are in sync, allowing me to reveal that if England had three Roots, they’d still lose. 77th over: Australia 308-7 (Head 87, Starc 1) Stokes continues his right-arm masochism, the over yielding a single to each batter. For those of you just waking up, or for anyone fancing a precis of the day’s play: - Robinson gets England away with an early wicket, dismissing Harris for 3. - Warner and Labuschagne dig in for half-centuries before the latter is caught and bowled for 74. - Warner lives a charmed life – Burns drops a catch and Hameed falters, among other near-wickets – before finally falling six runs short of a century. – Robinson dismisses Warner and Green in consecutive balls. - Australia’s lower order look to consolidate in the final hour of play. But he absolutely nails it! OK, he doesn’t, but Cummins glances a piece of leg-side nonsense around the corner, where Hameed takes a smart, low snaffle. England barely have the energy or inclination to celebrate. 76th over: Australia 306-6 (Head 86, Cummins 12) Root has no option but to hand himself the ball, like the gabbai volunteeering to leyn Mattot-Massei. Apologies, that’s so niche, even for me, that it requires an explanation: a gabbai runs synagogue services, and Mattot-Massei is the hardest Torah-reading in the book. “Ruthless from the Australian team,” says David Bertam. “Is there an alternative to Leach to block up an end?” Er, Bricks, mortar and cement? 75th over: Australia 289-6 (Head 82, Cummins 9) Absolutely finished, England return to Stokes, whose knee-knack has Warne describing him as ginger every other sentence. Tell you what though, his hairjob is a proper advertisement for the industry, and is, I hope, offering solance when Head lamps him down the ground for four, then top-edges four more over the top of slip. This is a matchwinning innings, and the lead is now a totally unmanageable 152. 74th over: Australia 289-6 (Head 73, Cummins 9) Oh dear, England have nothing left so Leach continues, and after Cummins adds two and one, Head twinkles down the track and absolutely schmeisses a straight six! Then, both improbably and probably, it gets better and worse, Head chancing one to Stokes, whose return leaps off the pitch, misses Buttler, and adds four buzzers for a five. That’s 15 off the over and the lead is 142, pretty useless for anyone English unless they’re trying to get from Bushey to Brent Cross. “Good Tyne and Weary gag,” emails my colleague Martin Farrer, “but Wood is from Ashington, which is in Northumberland, in case you want to head off pedants.” I wondered if I’d be pulled up on that one, but as we know, the OBO is nowt without pedantry. 73rd over: Australia 274-6 (Head 61, Cummins 6) Eeesh, Root brings Robinson on and his first ball is a tired ball. In comms, Warnie notes that he needs to bowl a bit quicker a bit more consistently, especially l`ate in the day – mid-130s and he’s a serious proposition, 120s and he can be seen off. Well, his loosener is 114 and he’s fighting to get himself into this – he looks in trouble, and does well to escape with just two scored off the over, Cummins flicking to square leg. “Other candidates for first ball dismissal in the Ashes,” emails Brian Withington: “Plum Duck Stuffed Duck Duck and Cover (for Cold War fans) Gabba The Duck (for the Star Wars brigade).” Talking of late in the day, let’s appreciate the most underrated band of the Britpop era. 72nd over: Australia 272-6 (Head 61, Cummins 4) Leach continues, and after a single to each batter Head heaves a long-hop around the corner and fielding in the shadows, Hameed doesn’t pick it up. The ball drops short, but if he’s running in he catches that, and to rub things in, a piece of leg-side filth yields four more; Leach is 1-80 off 10 and England are ragged now. How do they keep powder dry for the new globule without finding themselves 529 runs behind? I’m not certain what the rules are as regards profanity, so to ensure I don’t get the knock from T.H.E. Man, i shall say thaty Alistair Asquith nominates Expletive-a-duck which is probably my favourite so far. 71st over: Australia 262-6 (Head 52, Cummins 3) Head’s batted really well here, taking the game away from England, and when Wood overpitches, he clatters him for four through cover. I think Wood will disappear after this over – he’s looking pretty Tyne and Weary – but a single gives him four balls at Cummins. Can he dregdge something out of the deepest recesses of his soul? Well, there’s a boomp-ah and a pretty well-directed one too, forcing the batter to take cover, then one arrowed full into the stumps squares yerman up, and he edges into the ground. He’s given it everything, but you can’t get rolled for 147 and expect to compete, ctrl C, ctrl V. “A Muscovy Duck?” asks Rob Savage. “Pretty ugly duck the Muscovy.” 70th over: Australia 257-6 (Head 47, Cummins 3) England finally get Cummins on strike at the start of an over, and Root introduces Leach, so Cummins gets forward to his first ball then clouts his second for three over extra; clearly, they’ve planned to whack him out of the attack. And there are four more, Head advancing so Leach drops short, and the eventuating edge races to the fence; a single follows. “I would have thought a Roast Duck with Extra Stuffing,” says Sam of a first ball of an Ashes series dismissal. “A bit wordy, but I like its accuracy.” 69th over: Australia 249-6 (Head 42, Cummins 0) In comms, Brett Lee says that bowling short stuff is like bowling one and half balls in terms of effort, so Wood won’t want to pepper the batters at this point; well, he might now Head’s down low and flaying a fuller, wide one through point for four. That takes the lead up to 100, then Head guides his final delivery towards cover for two, and England are going to need something monstrous in their second innings to avoid defeat. It’s the way I tell em. 68th over: Australia 243-6 (Head 36, Cummins 0) I’m still trying to think of a phrase to describe a wicket with the first ball of an Ashes series; ultimate duck is descriptive, but I also like shredded duck and daffy duck. Anyroad, Root continues and Head takes two behind square on the off side, then just as England are hoping to get Wood an over at Cummins, he easily takes a single down the ground. 67th over: Australia 240-6 (Head 33, Cummins 0) Yup, England get Wood, who’s good for another burst and goes around to Head; I imagine this’ll be the last we see of him before the second new ball, which I hope he takes. Thing is, Australia could be another 30 in front by then, in which case it might also take the game away – but if it’s close there’ll be fireworks. And as I type that, Head leaps, plays and misses, wearing one on the back elbow, turns away the final delivery for a single, and calls to the dressing room for attention. That’s drinks, Australia’s lead 93. 66th over: Australia 239-6 (Head 32, Cummins 0) The lead is 89 as Root begins his second over, then Head, who’s nicely settled now, cuts his first delivery for three; they’re the only runs from the over. 65th over: Australia 236-6 (Head 29, Cummins 0) England do love to taunt us, do they not, making like they’re going to compete, but that’s a wicket maiden in the Gabba below. A nondescript ball from Woakes, if describing something as nondescript isn’t tautology, which Carey hauls around himself from off, picking out Pope at midwicket! 65th over: Australia 236-5 (Head 29, Carey 12) In a way, blogging through the night is the best way to sleep during an overseas Ashes, because it means you’re not lying in bed with headphones on, constantly waking up to disaster but feeling like you can’t legitimately have a kip during the day but excuse me while I interrupt myself! 64th over: Australia 236-5 (Head 29, Carey 12) Joe Root invites himself to daven bowl, wjich makes sense given two lefties at the wicket, but after his first five balls yield just a single to Carey, he overpitches and Head swings through the line, zetzing six down the ground. The lead is 89, and this partnerships is taking the game away from England, to the extent they didn’t take it away from themselves. Obviously the batting is the issue, but it’s also the case that only two of their bowlers are seriously threatening wickets. 63rd over: Australia 229-5 (Head 23, Carey 11) Woakes isn’t giving anything away but he’s not really threatening and England need wickets; the ball that’s pitched up a little more elicits a false stroke from Head, who fences a single after Carey pushes one, then Carey hauls over the top for three and this is getting away from England again. Ultimately, you can’t get rolled for 147 and expect to be involved in a Test match. You know what to do, people. 62nd over: Australia 224-5 (Head 22, Carey 7) Yet again, Stokes is going to flog himself for the cause, and he’s not quite right on his front foot so Head hauls him to the square-leg fence for four, then cuts him to point for four more. England can’t afford this – big overs or Head to settle – but they know that this is their time, so it makes sense to turn to their magic man. It’s not worked though, because when he serves one up on the hip, Head forces it off, an from deep backward square, Leach chugs around the fence, dives, saves the four, then throws the ball into himself and cedes the four. I daresay he’ll be hearing from the crowd at this juncture. 61st over: Australia 212-5 (Head 10, Carey 7) Woakes continues over the wicket, but with two lefties you wonder if at some point he might try around; I’d also like to see Wood and Robinson trying to slant them in and cramp the batters, because if they don’t try something now, this match will be gawn. Another maiden for Woakes. “Certainly us Aussies can be a parochial bunch, no denying that,” says Tom. “That said Ricky Ponting is just about the best commentator I’ve ever come across in any code. The hardest part about tuning into the cricket so far has been the utterly tone deaf soundtrack provided by the barmy army. If I have to hear you are my sunshine one more goddamn time...” Agree with all of that, though long-time readers will know that I do have a soft spot for the Barmy army singing Jerusalem, then applauding themselves. 60th over: Australia 212-5 (Head 10, Carey 7) Robinson charges in again and after three dots, Carey gets himself off the mark in Test cricket, a front-foot drive for four punishing a slightly overpitched delivery. And he adds three more next ball, knocking through mid off, before Head turns for through midwicket. Eleven off the over, taking Australia’s lead to 65. “Somethiing Flintoffian about the laddish swagger of Robinson,” says W McGonagall. “Looks like he lifts the side with character and performance. There is a callow and febrile belly to this Australian batting that hides behind a) its stars and b) the noisier discussion about England’s batting weaknesses.” Agreed in the second aspect – there’s not much batting in the middle order, though the tail isn’t bad. Otherwise, I’m not sure whether Robinson has Flintoff’s competitive charisma, or if he’s just really good. 59th over: Australia 201-5 (Head 6, Carey 0) It’s Woakes, who beats Head outside off and receives the rich reward of a nod; that’s one to tell the grandkids. In the field, Ben Stokes is making like he’s going to bowl, which has me wincing in my north London box-room, and that’s a maiden. This is terrific stuff, and it’s not too much to say that this Test – and in a way, perhaps even the series – might be set over the next hour or so. 58th over: Australia 201-5 (Head 6, Carey 0) Five slips and a gully for Robinson, so of course Head edges through the gap between them, and the ball scuttles away for four, then another edge – admittedly played with soft hands – drops short of Pope at five. This is intense, intensifying stuff now, every ball an event – this is why we’re here, people – and Head tries to leave instead guiding short of two. A single to midwicket follows, and Joe Root has a decision to make – does he trust a spinner, either Leach or himself, or does he toss Woakes the ball. 57th over: Australia 196-5 (Head 1, Carey 0) Obviously at least two of Starc, Cummins and Hazelwood will make fifties, but in the meantime, let’s bask in the fact that for an hour at least, we’ve got ourselves a series. In decades to come, we’ll look back on it with great fondness, which is more than can be said of the individual who’s run onto the park; where’s Sam Kerr when you need her? Maiden to Wood; how long can England keep him going? “The BBC doesn’t have international rights this time,” emails Yaseer Mahomed. “But Sydney Radio doesn’t have rights blocking on.” And in similar vein, Daniel says “In answer to Quinton’s question, you can download the SEN app to listen to the cricket from overseas, I’ve been using it today in Seoul. But get ready for some parochial Aussie commentary...” Is there any other kind? Anwyay, great stuff – thanks a lot. 56th over: Australia 196-5 (Head 1, Carey 0) A leg bye follows, then a dot, and that’s a double-wicket maiden, or is that a double-wicket-maiden, for Robinson. He is good at cricket. 56th over: Australia 195-5 (Head 1, Carey 0) Robinson’s hat-trick ball is full and straight, but Carey digs it out well. Still, he’d’ve took it. Are you trying to seduce me Mr Robinson?! Robinson is on a hatty, and this is a disaster for Cameron Green, who shoulders arms at a bail-trimmer and departs without having played a shot. It’s going to be a long night of the soul for him, but here comes the hat-trick ball.... Warner’s luck runs out but that’s brilliant from Robinson, fooling the batter with a slower one; Warner goes to smash him, is through the shot early, and finds Stokes at mid off, who dives forward and hangs on! That’s why he’s still out there, but more importantly, do we got ourselves a ball-game? Do we got ourselves a series?! 55th over: Australia 195-3 (Warner 95, Head 1) Warnie’s back on comms and tells us that during the interval, Ben Stokes was investigating whether or not he could bowl; he could not. That’s a shame, because England could seriously use his ability to plough through 824 uninterrupted overs while making something happen. As Warne also notes, he’s probably only still out there because he can’t bat tillas many overs as he was off for have elapsed - and I daresay England also want to retain one of their few safe pairs of hands. Meantime, Wood continues and beats Head’s cross-bat outside off, then Head nurdles a leg-side one off the square to get off the mark and Warner takes a single too. Off we go again, Australia leading by 46 with seven first-innings wickets intact. “How do I listen to live radio commentary in Hong Kong?” wonders Quentin Burrows. The link isn’t on the BBC site where it was during the English summer, so if someone can help our brother out, please do. Email! “Morning, Daniel” begins Ian, Copestake. “Thanks for seeing us through the dark hours. A pavement stomping would also at this point be like a birthday present.” American History X meets Withnail and I, what a mash-up that is. And while England are in Australia, enjoy an Australian in England by way of the brilliant Sam Kerr. Some reading for your break: an interview with John Morris, reflecting on the Tiger Moth escapade, English cricket’s famed sense of humour, and how the stuff peripheral to sport is as important as the sport itself. 54th over: Australia 193-3 (Warner 94, Head 0) The wicket came off the last ball of the over, so England don’t get to go at Head – though if this is the last one before tea, he’ll have 20 minutes to think about being on nought. Meantime, Warner looks to turn away to leg and instead edges four through backward point – this has been a phenomenally spawny knock. In comms, they want Robinson to come around, he doesn’t, and that is tea. Now then! Wood again goes wide, Smith gets on tippy-toes to leap eithout moving feet, lazily hanging out a bat, and he feathers behind! Wood earned that, though it was a curiously skittish innings from Smith, and might England somehow turn a kicking into a mere beating? 53rd over: Australia 189-2 (Warner 90, Smith 12) I guess with tea coming up in 10, these two can stick about for a burst afterwards ... er, if they want to, Wood skipping wide of the crease in his delivery stride and following-through as Smith clatters through mid off for four. 52nd over: Australia 185-2 (Warner 90, Smith 8) Yup, respite for Australia: Robinson replaces Leach, and his first delivery beats Warner outside off. In comms, they note that he’s a good bowler, able to make the ball go either way off the seam, but lacks the yorker that “Your Garners and your Ambroses” are able to deploy. Meantime, we see a shot of someone in the crowd dressed as a crusader. Lovely, lovely stuff. Maiden. “It appears that Smithy is going to trust being enveloped in Warner’s luck bubble,” says Yum. “Warner be like ‘don’t worry buddy, there’s plenty for both of us’.” They doing everything together, these. 51st over: Australia 185-2 (Warner 90, Smith 8) Smith pinches a single to Malan, who sprawls to stop and hurls at the non-striker’s; he’s got time too, so silly is the risk, but he misses by aeons. We then watch a replay of the review-yielding ball “I think that’s good, me” says Wood, and Buttler adds that he doesn’t think it’s high. It pitched outside off, so we don’t even get to see it missing on height and width. 51st over: Australia 183-2 (Warner 89, Smith 7) Wood hurtles in, wallops the back pad, there’s an appeal, a refusal, and England review! Looked hopeful to me, high and missing, but Wood liked it... 50th over: Australia 183-2 (Warner 89, Smith 7) Leach has a leg slip and an onside field, looking to bowl straight and stop Australia scoring while hoping for an error; good luck, old mate. And shonuff, Warner humps his second delivery to the square leg fence for a one-bounce four – clever clever, all part of the plan or something. I’m not sure why England don’t go at it now, because if Smith settles they’re absolutely jiggered, while there’s not loads of batting after this partnership. Meantime, Smith comes down and slices a hoik miles from his body but away from the fielders, and they run three. I wonder if we’ll see Robinson coming back for a burst. 49th over: Australia 175-2 (Warner 84, Smith 4) Root immediately replaces Woakes with Wood, who’s been England’s best bowler so far. His loosener is a short one, Warner leaping to play it down into the pitch, then after his second ball we see Burns’ ponytail poking out the back of his cap and I’m just not sure he’s earned that look. On the other hand, he has earned the chase he has to make when Warner eases a square drive for four and a single follows. 48th over: Australia 170-2 (Warner 79, Smith 4) Smith has a look at leach, playing him in circumspect manner ... for one ball, before advancing down the track before ball so much as leaves hand, inside-edging through midwicket for four. Leach has Australia on the ropes! He’s done well to hang in there because he’ll have known the plan was to hit him out of the attack, and he’ll have known why it was the plan too. Ahahahahahahaha! A touch of turn away and a little bit more bounce as Labuschagne steps away to cart Leach square, disrespect seeping through every pore of his very being – and picks out Wood at point! He will be spewing and rightly so. 48th over: Australia 166-1 (Warner 79, Labuschagne 74) “The pain is piled on England!” hollers the commentary box as Marnus advances and mows Leach over wide long-on for six; in the crowd, someone belly-flops over the row seeking the catch, but can’t quite get there. Leach is under big pressure now, but he buys them. At Harrods. 47th over: Australia 160-1 (Warner 79, Labuschagne 68) Warner drives down the ground for two and Stokes sets off in ginger pursuit; he’s not in great shape. Then Warner tries to remove his bat from one and instead bunts into the ground “He’s making 200,” says Warnie, who’s extremely taken with the luck yerman has enjoyed so far. Another brace follows, and that’s the 150 partnership. “Regarding all the ballyhoo about how many no-balls Stokes had already delivered until *that* one was singled out etc,” emails Sankaran Krishna. “Here is my take: if Dennis Lillee, Michael Holding, Richard Hadlee and Kapil Dev could take over a thousand test wickets between them while hardly ever bowling a no-ball in their careers, just stop bowling no-balls already. Just. stop. End of the matter.” I’m not sure it’s as simple as that: chancdes are we’re hotter on calling then now than then. But yeah, I look at it like I like at corners hitting the first man in football: if they were rewarded with corporal punishment, there’d be fewer of them. 46th over: Australia 156-1 (Warner 77, Labuschagne 68) Warner’s no mug, and won’t be confused by the Gilo variation: the one that goes straight on versus the one that doesn’t turn. So after a single to Labuschagne hands him the strike, he swats over square leg fo fo. Another single follows, and England are just so England. 45th over: Australia 150-1 (Warner 70, Labuschagne 67) Warner sends Woakes to long leg, where Crawley, on as sub, slides into a decent stop; they run two, and Australia take the lead. It’s the way I tell em. OK, hands up - it’s the way English cricket tells em. I see it as a Biggus Dickus situation: that simple gag that’s so perfect it’s hilarious every single time you see it. Four off the over, and I guess Australia declare about this time tomorrow, then have things done by tea on day four. 44th over: Australia 146-1 (Warner 67, Labuschagne 66) In comms, Alastair Cook watches a replay of that Burns dropped catch, noting that it’s exactly where you want it as a slipper, one side of the hip, also saying it’s the worst feeling in cricket. Unsaid in parentheses: if you’ve never been out – bowled around your legs! – first ball of an Ashes series. Yesterday, the great Rob Smyth and I were musing that if first ball of an innings is a golden duck and first ball of a match is a diamond duck, then perhaps first ball of a series is a platinum duck and first ball of an Ashes series is an ultimate duck. the Aussie scorecards of our youth featured a cartoon duck quacking, but on those occasions, it needs to also give the finger, or some kind of Nescafé handshake. Back in the middle, the batters are back on the milk, Labuschagne taking a two and one while Warner adds two singles off Leach. The partnership is 136. And that’s drinks. Let’s be real, England’s fielders could use a livener. 43rd over: Australia 141-1 (Warner 65, Labuschagne 63) Thanks Sam and hello, hello everyone. It’s good to be back, good to be back. It’s actually quite cunning of England to deliberately spurn wicket-taking opportunities, given SPD Smith is in next; always one step ahead. Meantime, Woakes beats Labuschagne with a wibble-seamer that nips away – it’s been a long afternoon, and it’s older wobble-brother has long since turned it in. Maiden. That’s me for the first half of the day, the excellent Daniel Harris will take over now. Been lots of fun, thanks for joining. 42nd over: Australia 141-1 (Warner 65, Labuschagne 63) Leach is back. Three sweepers on the leg side. How do Australia play it? Monster him or milk him? Warner then dances and drives him nicely, inside out, wide of mid off but it’s cut off. He gets one. Marnus is on strike. He dances at him too and belts it past Leach, but mid-off on the proverbial circle stops it. It’s a single. Warner then tries to reverse sweep Leach. Gerard Whateley describes it as “highly contemptuous batting”. He’s not far off. Leach escapes with two from the over. 41st over: Australia 139-1 (Warner 64, Labuschagne 62) Labuschagne is content to absorb Woakes, before Woakes is too straight and Marnus whips him through leg past midwicket for two. The next is even further to leg and Marnus clips him crisply, and uppishly, past a flying leg gully for four. Labuschagne grimaces at the risk, but he hit it well and takes the reward. 40th over: Australia 133-1 (Warner 64, Labuschagne 56) Robinson almost beats Labuschagne on the inside of his bat but Marnus gets there, closing his bat face and getting one in front of square. Finally Warner gets to the other end. And he takes advantage almost immediately, launching a drive through cover for four. It was all hands and flourish, sliced through the off side. He leaves the last ball of the over. 39th over: Australia 128-1 (Warner 60, Labuschagne 55) Woakes is back, relieving Wood. Warner has survived him, for now. Before the over starts there’s a ground invader, and about eight million security guards swarm the ground. The invader always seems faster. So Woakes continues the ‘no width’ theory to Warner, who is trying to squeeze him behind point early. Everything stays tight, Warner defends them all, and Woakes begins with a maiden. From Angus Reoch: “Hey Sam, Glad to have the comforting sound of cricket and trumpets here in my Canberra office... Not surprising we’ve been discussing Marxism given C. L. R. James’ influence on cricket commentary. All we need is a pithy tagline - Bowling the Bourgeoisie? Beyond a (Class) Boundary? Wonder what Adorno would make of all this... Yours in theory, Angus” 38th over: Australia 128-1 (Warner 60, Labuschagne 55) Robinson and Labuschagne continue in the battle for off-bail. It’s surprising Labuschagne hasn’t attempted to rotate the strike as much this session, perhaps due to Robinson’s accuracy. It carries on for the whole over again, and it’s another maiden. 37th over: Australia 128-1 (Warner 60, Labuschagne 55) Wood bounces Warner again, and Warner takes his eye off the ball. He is very rushed and is trying to pre-empt it. He’s leg side of the ball, and hopping. Here is where he’ll try and get off strike, and hope to survive Wood’s spell. Wood’s in at the ribs again - Warner jumps and defends behind point. This is a good spell for England - Robinson and Wood have bowled well together. Warner now gives himself some room and cuts from the stumps behind point for four. Canny stuff from the experienced opener. And then there’s a near run-out! Hameed is at short leg, Warner flicks out a yorker, he takes off, Hameed stops it, Warner attempts to dive back into his crease but can’t stretch enough! He lets go of the bat, he’s short of the crease, and it’s essentially a FREE SHOT at the stumps from 5 metres and Hameed misses! Warner crawls back and puts his hand over the crease. Hameed has his head in his hands. It all happened quickly, Hameed wouldn’t have known Warner couldn’t reach. Nevertheless, Warner survives again. Kieran Brady writes: “Watching in from New Zealand, as you can imagine I usually back england in the ashes. However it must be said from watching it live now the england first innings was very much below par even with the extra movement yesterday and a serious gulf in class between the two top orders is very noticeable. This is not a one game short term issue.” Not unreasonable analysis at this point. 36th over: Australia 123-1 (Warner 56, Labuschagne 55) A slower start to this session, in contrast to the last session’s quick finish. Robinson is probing Labuschagne’s off and fourth stump, and Marnus is so far equal to the task. Whereas Wood to Warner is a circus of fast balls and a flailing bat, this is a clinic in straight lines and off-bail precision. We’ve just seen another no-ball on replay, not called either. Robinson finishes with one that whizzes past off stump, and Labuschagne leaves it well. Sums up the battle. 35th over: Australia 123-1 (Warner 56, Labuschagne 55) Wood is angling in to Labuschagne, who trusts his judgment around off stump and is leaving on both line and length. Wood stays wide of the crease and just strays onto Marnus’ hip, and turns him around the corner for one. They’ve just struggled to sustain their pressure, England, though this is partly owing to both batters’ skill. Warner is on strike now and is hooking Wood right in front of his face, eyes down, not entirely comfortable. But it’s off the middle and it’s four. Wood is now full and Warner is beaten. He really looks a bit quick for Warner, who is living dangerously. 34th over: Australia 118-1 (Warner 52, Labuschagne 54) Robinson is on the money yet again, he really is due a reward soon. He’s angling it away from Warner who is trying to get forward but can’t. It’s another maiden for Robinson. He’s had some luck but looked busy throughout. He took down Leach and will now, as they say, want to “go big”. (Who wouldn’t want to go big?” 33rd over: Australia 115-1 (Warner 49, Labuschagne 54) It’s Wood here. Warner is flustered, as he has been throughout his time facing Wood. He waves the bat outside off at one mid way through the over. He’s playing from the crease, swaying, tucking, evading. It’s very quick for him. Nevertheless he bunts one through the off side for three to end the over, and brings up his fifty. 32nd over: Australia 115-1 (Warner 49, Labuschagne 54) Ollie Robinson has first crack - will be curious to see how he manages his third, fourth and fifth spells today. The accuracy is exceptional, so is the skill, but the pace is down. Labuschagne clips one wide of mid on for one, bringing Warner on strike. He beats Warner straight away. The movement doesn’t seem as violent as earlier this morning - but it was enough. Now Warner edges and he’s dropped at second slip by Rory Burns! It was a sitter! Mid-range, to his left, it cannoned into his wrist. Oh dear. That’s a killer, just after lunch. End of the over, an excellent one, but again unrewarded. Seems Ben Stokes is okay. England have confirmed to a few media outlets his left knee is fine and he’s good to go. We’re nearly underway here. A few queries about the weather. The Bureau of Meteorology is suggesting a shower or two with a possible storm. I’d imagine this would come through in the afternoon or evening, as tends to be the way in Brisbane. I thought they largely bowled well to Warner, who seemed up against it until Leach came on. Ed Cowan is right here. Labuschagne’s innings thus far has been an exercise in the construction of an innings. He defended skilfully to begin with, was patient, summed up the game situation, and has gradually applied pressure as he’s become accustomed to the wicket, and sensed the right moments to strike. He’s 51 not out and looking set. Australia’s session convincingly, though they rode their luck and survived good bowling in the first hour. Harris was removed by the impressive Robinson, who worked over Warner and Labuschagne in each of his spells. While Woakes seemed unable to settle on a length, his team-mates Wood and Robinson were lively and dangerous throughout, as as number of edges fell short or didn’t go to hand. Warner and Labuschagne remained busy and commendably rotated the strike throughout, never permitting a sustained period of bowling at one batsman, while managing to capitalise on the occasional overpitched delivery as England searched for swing. Stokes’ entrance brought immediate drama, as he twice found Warner’s edge before castling his stumps, only for Warner (and the rest of us) to learn that Stokes had overstepped. It soon emerged that Stokes had been consistently overstepping, and had not been pulled up. Given these processes and the technology had been arranged and settled on this some time ago, disappointing barely covers it. Stokes remained dangerous but a baking sun and growing familiarity saw Warner and Labuschagne settle in. One wayward Stokes over signalled a shift in momentum, and if that didn’t, the introduction of Leach completely altered the tone of the match. To that point the session may have been described as a willing armwrestle on a helpful pitch, however three Leach overs later and it appears we’re looking at something more akin to a procession. The blueprint of taking down the spinner was effected perfectly, as Warner and Labuschagne confidently deposited Leach into the seats and sightscreen on multiple occasions. He was hauled off, but the damage done. Stokes managed to hurt his leg trying to save a boundary, and all eyes will be on assessing its seriousness. it didn’t look good. The upshot is that an extended session has seen Australia establish a healthy partnership, the wicket is hardening, they have two set batsmen who average over fifty at home, Leach has been manhandled, and Ben Stokes may be injured. There will be howls for Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad. Perhaps they may have found the edge, perhaps not. To this scribe, the gap feels larger regardless. 31st over: Australia 113-1 (Warner 49, Labuschagne 53) Leach is taken out of the attack, Wood returns for the last over. Chris Rogers says “that’s not much of a vote of confidence in him”. Leach is 0/31 off 3, how does he come back? Huge win for Australia there. Meanwhile Wood is attacking Labuschagne with back of a length bowling in at the ribs. He still looks lively. Marnus takes a single to cover. There’s two to go, Warner on strike. He rips one past him from around the wicket, what a ball. Angling in. Straightening. Wood has had it over Warner this morning. The final ball is strange, Warner pre-empts a duck/sway but it’s full and Warner waves his bat at a square drive, middles it, and gets two for his trouble. That’s lunch. 30th over: Australia 110-1 (Warner 47, Labuschagne 52) Labuschagne cuts Woakes for four to bring up his fifty, and - I’m sorry England - there are concerns for Ben Stokes’ leg here. He looks like he’s struggling, and may have hurt his left knee trying to haul the ball in from the rope. He’s walking around, cameras are fixed on him. He’s grimacing and wincing. Let’s hope he’s okay. Warner defends the remainder of the over. There’s one left before lunch. He cuts Woakes for four and beats Warner to fifty. He defended with grit, and has cut loose upon Leach’s entrance. His 7th half century in Australia - he averages 74 here (courtesy of Adam Collins on SEN). 29th over: Australia 105-1 (Warner 47, Labuschagne 47) Leach is back and Marnus is slapping him again through the offside, chest on, room, and its through cover for three. Tremendous pressure on Leach. Warner on strike now. There are three men out on the on-side, possibly one on the off, too (I can’t quite see). Warner is down the track but can’t beat mid off. He then paddles him around the corner but it’s only one. If it wasn’t obvious, both bats are very much looking to attack Leach, sensing a weakness. Now Labuschagne hoists him over wide mid-on for six. He danced at it, got it easily, and he has a six of his own. The next is smashed back at Leach but he somehow gets something on it. No run. The next and Marnus pummels it to Stokes at mid off but he misfields - it was hit so hard - and he just hauls it in, in front of the rope. He’s limping. Could be a result of the ball striking him, soft-tissue. Left-knee. It’s a bit of a demolition here. Another huge over. 28th over: Australia 92-1 (Warner 46, Labuschagne 35) Australia asserting themselves in this extended session now. It’s hot, the shackles have broken, and there’s still a few overs until lunch. Oh no, third ball, Woakes is a little wide but it completely dies off the pitch, bounces in front of - and past - Buttler and scurries away for four byes. Woakes is back on a good line and length afterwards, a good leave from Warner. Buttler has completely missed it though - it cannons into his leg, strange. Warner tries to wallop the next through the off-side, loosely, but misses. It’s the end of the over. Feeling a little ominous for England. 27th over: Australia 88-1 (Warner 46, Labuschagne 35) First ball and Warner lofts Leach straight back over his head for six! The take down is on. It was a controlled shot, one step down the wicket, and hits the sight screen on the full. He misses out on the next one. The third, and it’s six again. This time over mid on. Down the deck, full flourish of the bat, into the stands. His fields are too aggressive - he needs some protection. Does Root change it? He has to. There’s a lull in play while the field is moved. Seems there is a funky short mid-on now. Warner then finds a single on the off-side. Labuschagne then opens up and slaps Leach past cover for four. Huge over for the Aussies. 26th over: Australia 71-1 (Warner 33, Labuschagne 31) Stokes is taken off, Woakes is back. It’s his third spell, and England will be itching for a wicket. The field seems to be opening up, both batsmen becoming further set. Woakes gets one to leap off a length, it screamed past his gloves and Buttler had to jump to take it well over his head. Once again, like clockwork, Warner gets off strike by tucking one to square leg. Becoming a little easier for the Aussies here. More on Gamsci from Colum: “Hi Sam, Was Gramsci an England fan? This quote seems to suggest he was: Pessimism of the spirit; optmism of yhe will. Nite nite from a damp and dreary Naples Colum Fordham” 25th over: Australia 69-1 (Warner 32, Labuschagne 30) It is indeed time for Jack Leach, who is on to replace Wood. Huge, huge moment here. I have a sense Australia will try and take Leach down, to bring more overs back into the legs of the quicks. Can Leach lock them in? There’s a slip and a leg slip, interestingly. Labuschagne nonchalantly drives to mid off a few yards back. No run. Marnus then finds one on the leg side, bringing Warner on strike. There’s three on the rope now, plus a short leg, leg slip and slip. Extremely in-out. Warner hammers it back at Leach - a bump ball - ouch! The next is a full toss, Warner can’t put it away. They want to hit him. They don’t, Warner defends. This is a big phase in the game. 24th over: Australia 68-1 (Warner 32, Labuschagne 29) Stokes is back and is too full, allowing Labuschagne to get forward and punch him through extra cover for three. It brings up the fifty partnership. Gloves are punched. Stokes is then too short and Warner is cutting in front of point, another three. It’s starting to build. Stokes goes too full now and Labuschagne carves him through extra cover for four. Ten from the over already. Unless he takes a wicket, this will surely be Stokes’ last. Three balls remain: how does he respond? With a sensational ball squaring Labuschagne up and beating his outside edge. Root retains three slips - he’s desperate for inroads. Labuschagne pulls the next in front of square but Leach partially cuts it off - there’s a single. Warner defends the last. Feels like Australia found some momentum that over. Wood’s bowled three overs in this spell. How does Root play it? Time for Leach? 23rd over: Australia 57-1 (Warner 29, Labuschagne 21) Warner is back hopping to Wood, he plays an unconvincing pull where he attempts to help it over the top. But again, Warner gets off strike next ball. Labuschagne defends one before receiving a half-volley on leg stump that Labuschagne picks off for three in front of square. Critical England make inroad before lunch here. Marnus is starting to look solid. Warner is boxing clever but still looks vulnerable. I’m a fraction late to this but it’s become clear that each of Stokes’ preceding balls leading to his overruled dismissal was a no-ball too. 22nd over: Australia 50-1 (Warner 26, Labuschagne 18) It’s Stokes, and two balls in Labuschagne is drawn into a paddle-pull and it falls just short of Ollie Pope, only just! It was agonisingly close. Next ball Labuschagne pulls with more authority over mid-wicket for three. Stokes then pins Warner in the ribs with one that seams back into him. They love cramping him up. Warner then clips Stokes crisply but it can’t get past forward square, so he stays on strike. Warner defends the final ball out to point and it’s the end of the over. 21st over: Australia 46-1 (Warner 25, Labuschagne 15) Feels like the heat has just come out of England’s bowling. Marnus and Warner a little more assured in leaving and defending - and picking up the odd boundary with over-pitched deliveries. Here Marnus manages Wood, who is angling in at him, short leg in play. Maiden. 20th over: Australia 46-1 (Warner 25, Labuschagne 15) England needs to stay patient here. They’re only a piece of luck or skill or two away from a strong position in the innings. Warner and Labuschagne have ridden their luck so far, but have done well to rotate the strike and avoid too much pressure building. Robinson’s in now and Warner is still leaving. Robinson then changes to come around the wicket - it’s too full, and Warner punches it right out of the middle through cover for four. It had been a frugal period as far as runs were concerned, but this temporarily relieves that. The last one is left, a good over for Warner and Australia. From Pete Salmon on Gramsci: “Hi again Sam Not sure about Gramsci at Fenners, but it seems he did give his opinion on the Hundred: “The old world is dying, and the new world struggles to be born: now is the time of monsters.” Cheers Pete” 19th over: Australia 42-1 (Warner 21, Labuschagne 15) Wood’s on now, he was lively last spell. He gets one to scream past Labuschagne’s bat second ball in, a beautiful leg-cutter. It’s up to 150km/hr already. The leg gully is back, though quite square. Wood then delivers one from very wide of the crease, jumping at the last minute. The final ball sneaks underneath Labuschagne’s bat, too quick, but well wide of the stumps. 152 km/hr. 18th over: Australia 42-1 (Warner 21, Labuschagne 15) It’s Robinson from the other end - he’s looked likely all morning. Sure enough, he curves one past Warner, hitting a sumptuous spot which catches Warner on the crease. We have pictures here of the Barmy Army in full song. Perhaps they sense something. The beers are probably good, too. A wicket does feel near, and they’ll need it as the sun continues to bake the pitch. Robinson hits the splice of Warner’s bat hard to end the over. A maiden. From Andrew: “Evening/morning Sam, from cold, dark South London, I agree with Robert from Paris, I’ve always loved watching the Ashes from the other side of the world, the blast of sunshine is cheering, whatever is going on in the cricket. I’m going to pick you up on your description of the Warner non-wicket as ‘clean bowled’. it clipped his pad and on to the top of the stumps, I would only say *clean* bowled if the ball is straight through onto the stumps without taking a deflection. It’s not been a bad session for England so far, but they need wickets soon.” Thank you, you’re completely right. I missed that - appreciate the pick-up. 17th over: Australia 42-1 (Warner 21, Labuschagne 15) Stokes continues and starts with a bouncer, which Labuschagne evades. The rest of the over is incongruously uneventful, as Labuschagne either leaves or defends with comfort Vis a vis Gramsci, Robert contributes: “Dear Sam, Bloody Gramsci again! I saw him make a quick 40 against Essex 2ndXI at Fenners back in the days of wine and roses but he had a mouth on him, lacked bottle against the short stuff and had a really weird collection of novelty rubber chickens. I dunno know why he keeps coming up, probably because he was always going out on the razz and bottling punters in rumbles over economic determinism. I’ve actually read old Tone so I’m allowed to be irritated that so few people seem to understand that the bloke was very clearly from Belfast. Robert W” 16th over: Australia 41-1 (Warner 21, Labuschagne 15) Robinson’s back, this will be the last one before drinks. He hits Marnus’ pad first up, but Australia’s number three is leaving on length so no danger. He’s then too straight which allows Labuschagne to tuck him behind square for one, which both bats have done well to counter the otherwise dangerous bowling. Robinson then gets another nick from Warner, it beats Malan at third slip to the left - bounces in front of him - and runs away for four. That’s drinks. England deserved another wicket there. They’ve challenged well. Edges haven’t found hands. They need something next hour. 15th over: Australia 36-1 (Warner 17, Labuschagne 14) It’s Stokes to Labuschagne now, and there’s nearly a run out as Marnus defends in front of Hameed at backward point - a direct hit would have been close. Warner keeps Stokes out for the remainder. He largely cramps him - which seems to be the plan - but Warner survives. There’s a half shout for one that strikes his pad on the last ball, but it pitched well outside leg. This, from Tom Mitchell: “Morning, As soon as that Stokes delivery was not out I went to bed, see you in the morning when they are 300-1 Thanks, Tom from Leeds” 14th over: Australia 34-1 (Warner 17, Labuschagne 13) Early in the over Woakes delivers a beautifully straightening outswinger, gets Marnus’s edge and it falls just short of Root at first slip. Labuschagne then half scoops/half pulls Woakes over midwicket for three. Not commanding but safe enough. England creating plenty of chances here, neither batter playing with security and organisation - there’s something happening every few balls. They’ll be eyeing drinks. Woakes is then back of a length to Warner who plays it off his toes, before defending the last back to the bowler. 13th over: Australia 31-1 (Warner 17, Labuschagne 10) Stokes is brought on. Wood gets a rest. He started well. Stokes’ first delivery elicits decent swing back into Warner, who manages to just access the ball in front of his pad to inside edge one. The next is edged just wide of Malan at third slip and runs away for four! A genuine edge - Warner only half-forward - he’s riding his luck a little. The next, as you’ve already read, bowls him but it’s a no-ball! Warner manages to survive the last few. An eventful over. Trite to say, but Stokes makes things happen. Warner looking shaky. FYI it’s an extended session which means drinks will be in another 17 minutes at 10.45am Brisbane-time. Stokes has Warner clean bowled but it’s a no-ball! Stokes has been all over Warner this over, edges both sides of the bat, and then castles him with a beauty before an enormous no-ball is revealed. Warner survives! 12th over: Australia 26-1 (Warner 13, Labuschagne 10) Woakes is full and Warner checks it back past him and picks up three. The conversation here is about whether Wood will be given a spell now. I’d keep him on for one more if Warner is on strike, but “short sharp bursts” seems to be the consensus. Meanwhile, Woakes continues to Marnus in a less explosive battle but a similarly even one. Labuschagne seems to have a better grasp of his off stump than he did twenty minutes ago, and he leaves well here. Woakes straightens his line (he has a midwicket) and Marnus defends again. Finally Labuschagne is given one to drive, and he obliges. it’s full outside off and he strokes it through cover for two. 11th over: Australia 21-1 (Warner 10, Labuschagne 8) Wood has Warner worried here. He’s back of a length, in at the ribs, and as soon as Warner has width, he’s slashing rashly and ineffectually. A third man is brought in for a top edge, but Warner manages to get himself off strike - something he’s done a few times this innings, showing great experience. It brings Labuschagne on strike, who defends to midwicket comfortably. Good tussle between Wood and Warner here. The former is causing him discomfort - Warner is wise to stay away. Pete writes in: “On Test Match Special they have been talking about Gramsci, Marxism and hegemonic masculinity... feels like a landgrab from OBO. If they get onto Adelaide, Ryan Sidebottom and Radiohead it might become actionable.” Look I’d venture no one particularly owns conversations on Gramsci, Marxism and hegemonic masculinity, but if the dear readers of the Guardian want to assert its own bona fides here, I’m ready to go! 10th over: Australia 20-1 (Warner 9, Labuschagne 8) Root reintroduces Woakes, which concludes a very good first spell from Robinson. Woakes is on the money immediately - I’d hazard a guess he’ll be attempting to stay tight on off-bail this spell, he searched just a little too much in his first spell from this vantage point (a 36 year old man on his computer). The over continues in much the same vein. Woakes is accurate, and Marnus is happy to defend on the front foot. Marnus considers an ill-judged run on the final delivery, indicating some nerves. Warner sends him back. Consecutive maidens. 9th over: Australia 20-1 (Warner 9, Labuschagne 8) Wood is in to Warner and he’s aggressively back foot punching one uppishly and it falls just short of Stokes at a shortish cover. It was a confident shot but the ball seemed to just stop in the wicket. There’s a leg gully for Warner here, too. On comms, Simon Katich posits that the plan is to “push Warner back”, presumably to catch him half-forward when one’s pitched up. Sure enough, the next one is a bumper, the first one of the day. Warner jumps then ducks. It’s 153km/hr and Warner’s reactions give authenticity to it. He’s hopping. Warner tries to find a single in front of point. He can’t. The next one is the full and wide one, Warner flashes! But misses. That’s the plan. High octane over. A lot of energy. 8th over: Australia 20-1 (Warner 9, Labuschagne 8) Warner gets off strike early with another scurried single, which brings the scoreless Labuschagne back on strike. Robinson squares him up and a safe, thickish outside edge runs away to the boundary between third slip and gully. Slo-mo’s show a bit of chat between Robinson and Marnus, no doubt a high-brow literary exchange. Robinson is then overpitching and Labuschagne pushes it back past him for four, just beating Stokes’ dive at the rope. Two boundaries in the over, but Robinson will be confident. Robert Wilson writes in: “Dear Sam. Speaking from the damp, dark chill of Paris, it’s nice to see a bit of sun today. Yesterday was a cruel disappointment. For us snowed-in, unwashed Europeans, the first session of an Aus Test is often a turbocharged blast of forgotten wellbeing - you can feel the vitamin D seeping through your eyeballs. Yesterday, Brisbane looked as tropical as Cardiff. So I’m glad it’s back to business and my nose is peeling under my woolly hat and earmuffs again. “I have a question. I love Woakes with a fair amount of hot, moist passion (and always have) but if you have a genuine quick in Wood, why wouldn’t you give him the new, hard nut? It’s weird - and not in a good way.” G’day Robert, cheers for the note. I think it’s a case of accuracy over speed. They feel Woakes is best deployed to find the edge, which is best achieved with the new ball. 7th over: Australia 11-1 (Warner 8, Labuschagne 0) Woakes is off, Wood is on. Positive from Root - thought Woakes struggled to find length so Wood gets his bow. He looks quick already. Warner nudges one in front of point for one. it brings Marnus on strike and Wood is back of a length, with a short leg in. Labuschagne is all jerky and jittery movements, which we’ve come to know. But you would be, Wood is bowling 150+ km/hr. 6th over: Australia 10-1 (Warner 7, Labuschagne 0) So Robinson gets Harris, and England are off and running. Marnus is in, he’s jumpy and leaving his first while exposing a fair few stumps. He’s forward to the next and the ball screws off his bat to gully. There’s a leg gully in for Marnus, which confirms a plan. The next one is left, and the final one whistles past the off stump, which some would call a “good leave”, perhaps kindly. A great over from Ollie Robinson. Robinson gets Harris! It’s on middle and off, Harris is half forward, and he lures him into an edge which is well taken by Malan going low and to his left at 3rd slip. Classic Robinson, and England are away. 5th over: Australia 10-0 (Warner 7, Harris 3) Woakes’ first ball is driven handsomely by Warner past mid-off for four. It’s rare for Warner to play a shot and hold the pose, but he did here. A half-volley, searching for swing, and dealt with. Woakes shortens his length for the next couple, and Warner sways out of the way. He’s still trying to find the right area here Woakes - a tough ask when Warner’s feet are moving well. The final one tucks him up and strikes the thigh pad. Less movement that over - a win for Warner. 4th over: Australia 6-0 (Warner 3, Harris 3) Robinson lumbers in; the first half of the over to Warner is either too straight or too wide and are defended comfortably. He then finds his range, challenging Warner in the appropriate corridor, but Warner is able to lean on one which enables a single to mid off. Harris, who changed his bat mid-over(?), is squared up on the last ball, but survives. 3rd over: Australia 5-0 (Warner 2, Harris 3) Woakes beats Warner with the first ball with one that swung away quite prodigiously, then follows up with one that comes back in. Warner defends the second well and even looks for a single. Woakes is then too straight and Warner nerdles him wide of mid-on to get off strike. Harris is on-strike - I’m not sure if this is new but he appears to have developed a little back-and-across hop-step trigger movement. It’s less prominent for the shuffle than it is for the jump. Whatever the case, he leaves the remaining few. There seems enough movement for an edge. Can England find it? 2nd over: Australia 4-0 (Warner 1, Harris 3) It’s Robinson at the other end and he’s beating Harris outside off immediately. Perfect length, perfect shape. Harris is inside the line of it but that’s exactly where Robinson will want to stay. The second is in the same spot - it takes the outside half of Harris’s blade, neither forward nor back. England have three slips and a gully, and Robinson beats Harris again. The Australian opener is playing down the line but this is encouraging for the Ashes debutant. The only gripe? it’s slow: high 120s at this point. It’s a maiden to finish, an excellent start for Robinson. 1st over: Australia 4-0 (Warner 1, Harris 3) First ball, Warner pushes it into a gap at cover and hares off, he’s home safe, Stokes shies at the stumps and it strikes Warner, but no harm done. So Warner’s busy early. It’s Harris next, and he’s on the back foot to Woakes who’s a fraction short, though the carry looks good. Woakes adjusts, pitches up, and Harris drives through cover for two. The final ball is overpitched and Harris pushes it to cover for another run. The players are out there. It looks sunny, excellent for batting, the Queensland-coloured seats are popping. I expect Australia to assess the pitch, and if true enough, to counterpunch. Woakes is at the top of his mark... An early start today, we’re underway in two minutes. Some messages coming in: Conor writes: “Hi Sam, felt a Christmas eve-like excitement last night and decided to pull an all-nighter with my assignments and BT sport open side by side. Booked a study space in the silent study room, and was practically bouncing in my seat for the first ball. No word of a lie that I let out an expletive that came from the depths of my soul. My whole life this last three months has been one big head tilt into the offside. My hopes, dreams, eudemonic wellbeing all came undone in the space of one leg stump half volley. “how good”. Not very.” I’m sorry brother. And Brendan via Twitter: “It may be a sunny warm morning perfect for batting, but England have 2 bowlers with a total of over 1100 test wickets, in their squad. That levels it up surely...oh wait.Robinson has to have a miracle innings today.” There’s a fair bit of consternation over the omissions of both Anderson and Broad. I was of the same view as Pat Cummins (why wouldn’t you be at this point?) that I expected they’d pick one. But I thought the selections were positive and proactive. We’ll soon find out if they were, and retroactively adjust our opinions accordingly. Prominent Australian broadcaster Gerard Whateley is grilling CA CEO Nick Hockley on-air before play for SEN Radio. Though he doesn’t elicit much. A crass summary as I see it: Where will the fifth Test be played? Still thinking about it. Did the Prime Minister’s intervention in favour of Hobart carry any weight? Yes it’s a prestigious Test, isn’t it? Are you happy with how CA handled the Tim Paine controversy? I respect Tim. Will you reconsider David Warner’s leadership ban? No one has raised it with us. And here’s Barney Ronay on Josh Hazlewood... While you wait (and contemplate the inherent fairness of cricketing conditions), here are a couple of typically excellent pieces following yesterday’s events. This was Geoff capturing the vibe inside the Gabba... More weather talk. It’s important to gather more than one source - here is our colleague Geoff Lemon on the ground in Brisbane. Hmm...looks friendly overhead. Good morning, afternoon, evening everyone, Wherever you land in the Ashes divide, yesterday was nothing short of visceral. A day of explosion and drama, unevenly distributed. After rolling England for 147 on a green one with cloud overhead, it feels much of Australia already senses a drubbing in the offing. Of course, this is how we do things here, building then riding the wave momentum – slightly confected – feeding the stereotype of a snarling Australian unit manhandling a feeble England outfit on a dangerous Gabba wicket. All of a sudden, the omission of Anderson and Broad is conflated with a poor batting display – all of it endemic of a touring party for whom “the wheels have fallen off”. And so on. All of this before England has had a chance to bowl. Ultimately, Australia assuredly exploited some favourable conditions yesterday, and England will have its chance today. The series is essentially two sessions old, and chest-out Australians are only ever a problem or two away from trouble. All eyes will be on Woakes and Robinson, the favoured seam-up metronomes who’ll be counted on to match the unerring lines, lengths and angles of Cummins and Starc. For all the noise and pageantry yesterday, it was the relentlessness of the skipper and former vice that wrought the damage. Should Woakes and Robinson be able to do similar, with catches held, England will wrestle their way back in. No doubt Australia will be brighter and bolder with the bat, so the margins already feel small. I’ve not done this round for a little while, so be gentle. Would love your thoughts, contributions and threats at sam.perry.freelance@theguardian.com, or on the Twitter machine @sjjperry. Going to grab some news on the weather, it appears … sunny.Last year, with little warning, a new Amazon delivery station brought the rumble of semi-trailer trucks and delivery vans to Chicago’s Gage Park neighborhood. The warehouse, located within 1,500 feet of five schools, is in a residential area where more than half the people within a mile have low incomes and nearly 90% are Hispanic. The neighborhood is one of hundreds across the US where Amazon’s dramatic expansion has set in motion huge commercial operations. Residents near the new warehouses say they face increased air pollution from trucks and vans, more dangerous streets for kids walking or biking and other quality-of-life issues such as clogged traffic and near-constant noise. Like Gage Park, the majority of these neighborhoods are home to a greater number of residents of color and people with low-incomes than the typical neighborhood in the same urban area, according to a Consumer Reports (CR) investigation. José Mendez, who has lived in Gage Park for 18 years, says his 5am commute now involves battling semis for space on a nearby residential street. His wife has called Amazon to complain, but the trucks still come past. Uriel Estrada, a college student who lives with his family a few blocks from the warehouse, says having Amazon in the neighborhood isn’t all bad – packages arrive much faster than before. Still, he says, the noise and traffic are distracting. “In my house, you can feel it shake because there’s a bunch of trucks passing by,” he says. To examine Amazon’s nationwide delivery network, CR combined commercially available information about the company’s warehouses with data from the Census Bureau and the Environmental Protection Agency. In partnership with the Guardian, CR also visited neighborhoods near Amazon warehouses in Chicago and the Los Angeles area. Here are key findings from the investigation: Amazon opens most of its warehouses in neighborhoods with a comparatively high number of people of color. Nationally, 69% of Amazon warehouses have more people of color living within a one mile radius than the median neighborhood in their metro areas. Some of these are communities where other industrial facilities already cause residents worry about poor air quality, excessive noise and traffic. The neighborhoods are poorer, too – 57% of Amazon warehouses are in communities with more low-income residents than typical for the metro area they’re in. It’s just the opposite for Whole Foods and other Amazon retail stores. These tend to be located in a city’s wealthier, whiter neighborhoods, away from the communities where Amazon runs its warehouses. Warehouse operators are not generally accountable for air pollution from the accompanying trucks and vans. Existing air quality monitoring networks are too spread out to pick up local emissions. Community activists are asking local, state and federal officials to step in and regulate pollution from warehouse-related traffic and to consider an area’s existing environmental hazards before allowing new warehouses to open there. Amazon opens many warehouses in areas zoned for industrial use, where land is cheap. A legacy of discriminatory policies at all levels of government means that many of the people living nearby are Black or Hispanic, researchers and local activists say. CR’s investigation shows that the neighborhoods where Amazon opens warehouses often have a greater proportion of people of color than 70% or more of the surrounding metro area’s neighborhoods. “Amazon is taking advantage of a national legacy of racist policies that have kept cities across the country segregated for generations and have resulted in disproportionate health and environmental impacts to communities of color,” said Quinta Warren, associate director for sustainability policy at Consumer Reports. Breathing in tiny particles from diesel and gasoline exhaust increases a person’s chance of getting asthma, developing cancer or having a heart attack, decades of studies have shown. Children and the elderly are particularly vulnerable. This type of pollution may also cause premature births and miscarriages. “Our communities are being sacrificed in the name of economic development,” says José Acosta-Córdova of Little Village Environmental Justice Organization in Chicago, one of several groups that have called for the city to pause approvals of new warehouses until there’s a plan to distribute them more evenly. Amazon’s Breakneck Expansion Covid-19 has been good for Amazon. Its worldwide sales topped $100bn in each of the last four fiscal quarters, repeatedly crossing a threshold that few companies ever reach. Meanwhile, the company embarked on a massive expansion, according to a database of Amazon facilities CR purchased from MWPVL International, a firm that helps companies plan warehousing and distribution networks. Between 2015 and 2019, Amazon opened about 75 new warehouses a year on average – ranging from the enormous warehouses Amazon calls “fulfillment centers” to the much smaller “delivery stations” that allow it to get packages to customers within days or even hours. But in 2020, Amazon opened nearly 300 new facilities – almost as many as in the previous four years combined. The rapid expansion continued in 2021 – though final numbers aren’t available – and is bringing Amazon warehouses to dozens of new cities, from Lubbock, Texas to Sioux Falls, SD and San Bruno, CA, to Ocala, FL. When Amazon moves in, residents are faced with traffic and pollution from trucks and vans, but may also benefit from an influx of new jobs, tax revenues from Amazon or investments the company makes in local economies. Amazon declined requests for interviews and did not provide detailed responses to CR’s questions. However, in an emailed statement, spokesperson Maria Boschetti said, “Amazon is committed to using its scale for good and being not only a good employer, but a good community partner in the towns and cities in which we operate as well.” Amazon, of course, isn’t the only company with warehouses that create traffic and air pollution. Some of its largest facilities are clumped together with warehouses that belong to other huge retailers, including Walmart, Target and Costco or logistics giants such as FedEx and UPS. But Amazon’s Covid-era expansion eclipses its competitors’, says MWPVL president Marc Wulfraat. Last year alone, the company opened more than two-thirds as many warehouse spaces as Walmart operates in total. Amazon’s delivery facilities are butting up against dense residential neighborhoods, feeding its unrelenting push to cut down on the wait between the moment a customer submits an order and the second it arrives at their door. In its 2020 boom, Amazon opened more than 115 warehouses within a mile of where at least 5,000 people live, according to CR’s analysis. “Communities that host delivery facilities end up being the losers,” says Sacoby Wilson, director of the Center for Community Engagement, Environmental Justice and Health at the University of Maryland, College Park, which worked with CR to analyze the locations of Amazon facilities. “They get more traffic, air pollution, traffic jams and pedestrian safety problems, but they don’t receive their fair share of the benefits that accrue from having the retail nearby. ” The huge warehouses coming to many communities tend to worsen existing problems, from noise to local air pollution, researchers say. “People can get their Amazon packages and never have to think about the Black and brown communities who bear the brunt of having the warehouse in their backyard,” says Ana Baptista, associate director of the Tishman Environment and Design Center at The New School in New York City. ‘All the Trucks Started Showing Up’ About six years ago, Brian Kolde and his wife found their dream home in Fontana, a city in California’s Inland Empire, the sprawling metro area of about 4.6 million people just east of Los Angeles. The home is a stucco two-story surrounded by palm trees in a friendly neighborhood with a park nearby. “We were happy,” he says. “Then Amazon came in and all the trucks started showing up.” The 680,000 sqft Amazon warehouse went up around the corner two years ago. Now, Kolde’s 11-year-old son keeps the TV on all night to drown out the constant growl of engines on the street. Kolde and his wife leave a portable AC unit running in their room for the same reason. “For a while, we would all be four peas in a pod, all in one bed together, because the kids would get scared of the noise,” he says. “Now they’re getting more used to it.” A traffic study from the project’s developer estimated that the Amazon warehouse and a smaller warehouse next door together generated nearly 6,000 vehicle trips per day, including more than 2,300 diesel truck trips. Not long after the warehouse opened, Kolde started noticing cracks in his house. The jagged gashes in the stucco probably came from round-the-clock vibrations generated by passing big rigs, he says city inspectors told him. The money Kolde has thrown at the problem hasn’t helped. “It’s been hundreds of dollars in the trash,” he says. Once he patches up one crack, another one appears. The Inland Empire is chock-full of warehouses, and not just Amazon’s. The area’s proximity to the country’s two busiest seaports – in Los Angeles and Long Beach – has helped cement its status as America’s logistics capital. Of the hundreds of warehouses in the area, Amazon operates about three dozen, according to MWPVL data – including a pair of “air hubs” nestled into nearby airports, which send Amazon-branded planes across the country. Like the Fontana subdivision where the Koldes live, most of Amazon’s delivery facilities in the Inland Empire are in neighborhoods with a higher share of residents of color than typical for the area, CR found. The Inland Empire’s high concentration of warehouses is one reason it has some of the country’s worst air quality in EPA statistics. Kolde’s seven-year-old daughter gets nosebleeds at least twice a week and his son sneezes constantly. Kolde says he’s started getting nosebleeds himself. He purchased air purifiers for the house and seldom opens the windows. “It’s a great home, a good community – but for how long?” he says. “It all comes down to the health of my kids. If they’re getting sick, why live here?” Truck-Sized Loopholes How much a specific warehouse adds to environmental hazards is usually uncertain, for two main reasons. First, no one publicly tracks emissions near warehouses: not the EPA, not local governments and not Amazon itself. Environmental regulators monitor air quality around the country, but their sensors are too spread out. The second reason is that warehouse operators generally don’t need emissions permits that account for the truck, van and car traffic they create. Warehouses are considered “indirect sources” of emissions, which are not regulated by the EPA or most state and local jurisdictions. “Warehouses fall into this really gray category of environmental regulation because they’re not traditional industrial facilities with a smokestack,” says Baptista of The New School. In the absence of good local air quality data, traffic statistics can provide a sense of what it’s like to live near a warehouse. More than two-thirds of Amazon warehouses nationwide are in areas that score higher on an EPA traffic proximity scale than most other neighborhoods in the surrounding urban areas, CR found. The traffic proximity score, which is based on 2017 data, estimates the average number of vehicles that pass within 500 meters of a spot every day, giving more weight to the closest traffic. Amazon has opened hundreds of warehouses in the years since this data was gathered, probably leading to increased vehicle trips in areas that were already burdened with heavy traffic. A 2010 review of hundreds of studies from the Health Effects Institute found that proximity to traffic worsens asthma in children and may impair lung function, bring about other respiratory symptoms and cause heart disease and death. Soon, a new rule from California’s South Coast Air Quality Management District, which oversees air quality in the Los Angeles area and the Inland Empire, will bring better accounting of warehouse-related pollution, which experts say could be a model for governments. The rule will require companies that operate warehouses 100,000 sq ft and larger to submit counts of trucks that enter and exit its facilities and choose from a menu of options to reduce their impacts on air quality and community health. The companies can either electrify their vehicle fleets, install solar panels, provide air filters for nearby homes and schools or choose to pay a fee. Enforcement starts in 2022 for the area’s largest facilities. Amazon’s Pledges, and Internal Dissent Amazon, for its part, has pledged to deploy 100,000 zero-emission vans by 2030 and a small number of them are already in operation. Amazon said in its 2020 sustainability report that it delivered more than 20m packages with electric vehicles in North America and Europe that year. (By comparison, Amazon shipped more than 4bn parcels in the US alone in 2020, according to an analysis from Pitney Bowes, a logistics company.) Boschetti, the Amazon spokesperson, said in the emailed statement that the company is choosing where to deploy its electric vans in part by considering a warehouse’s “proximity to environmentally disadvantaged communities who would benefit from our electric delivery vehicles in their community”. She says some electric vans are already delivering packages in at least a dozen major cities across the country, including Los Angeles and Chicago. For some environmental advocates and experts, electrifying vans is a promising start – but it’s not enough. Last year, Amazon ordered 10 battery-powered freight trucks from a Canadian manufacturer, but it hasn’t made a public commitment to electrify more of its heavy-duty fleet. In a “climate pledge,” Amazon has also promised to achieve net-zero carbon emissions by 2040 across its enormous operation, which also includes energy-hungry data centers that support internet cloud storage. The company says its priority is to eliminate sources of carbon emissions, but it will make up for the remaining emissions with carbon offsets such as paying for forest restoration overseas. So even if Amazon achieves net-zero carbon emissions to reduce its contributions to climate change, warehouse neighbors might still breathe in fumes from passing trucks and vans Last year, a group called Amazon Employees for Climate Justice joined with the People’s Collective for Environmental Justice to pitch a resolution to shareholders requiring Amazon to come up with a plan to wean itself off fossil fuels and reduce the pollution it brings into vulnerable communities. The resolution failed the 2020 shareholder vote by a wide margin, but more than 600 Amazon tech workers later signed a letter in support of the group’s goals. “Knowing my day-to-day work is being somewhat methodically used to pollute communities that are not wealthy and not white, it’s upsetting – even if it’s not intentional,” says one member of the group, a software developer who asked to remain anonymous for fear of retaliation. Unannounced Arrivals When Amazon moves in across the street, its neighbors are sometimes the last to know. Local lawmakers often refer to its plans using code names – like “Project Granite” in DuPont, Washington, and “Project Bluejay” in Bondurant, Iowa – and developers in many cases will not reveal the company until it moves in. Residents, however, often end up helping subsidize the company’s expansion. Amazon’s national warehouse boom has been fueled in part by more than $3bn in tax incentives since 2000, according to a database maintained by Good Jobs First, a non-profit research organization. “This is not a good use of taxpayer money,” says Christine Wen, a researcher at the organization. For local officials, tax breaks may seem worthwhile if they bring jobs to economically depressed areas – and once the tax incentives have run their course in a decade or so, maybe even some much-needed revenue. Cities that hold back from offering tax breaks can make that revenue much sooner. In one extreme case, Eastvale, a small city in California’s Inland Empire that didn’t offer Amazon any incentives, estimated recently that Amazon pays it between $24-$30m in annual sales tax revenue – more than enough to cover the city’s annual operating budget. “That’s going to help us build a city hall and a library and a police station and a third fire station,” says Bryan Jones, city manager of Eastvale, which was incorporated just over a decade ago. “They provide a lot of jobs for people. It may not be a job that everyone in the state of California wants to do, but it is a job for many people.” Some longtime residents who live near Amazon warehouses told CR they are pleased with the prospect of nearby work. One Amazon warehouse worker in Fontana said the company’s benefits outstripped its competitors. But despite the benefits, she says she still has mixed feelings. At local town halls, she’s heard testimony from people whose children are affected by the air pollution. “I see how this is affecting the community.” Recently, several Inland Empire communities have made moves to rethink their approaches to warehouse development with city councils passing moratoriums on new facilities. Opponents of new Amazon warehouses say that many of the new jobs they create end up harming workers. “They come in with the pretense of creating jobs, but in reality we know that these jobs are exploitative of our communities,” says Alfredo Romo, executive director of Neighbors for Environmental Justice, an advocacy organization based on Chicago’s Southwest Side. For Romo, the newly opened Amazon facility near his house is the physical embodiment of a missed opportunity. The warehouse is in the McKinley Park neighborhood, just three miles from the delivery center in Gage Park. “We could’ve done so many great things here – things that could’ve helped the community,” he said. “It’s just not worth it. We could do better.” Additional reporting by Aaron Brezel. Data visualizations by Andy Bergmann. A longer version of this investigation is available on Consumer Reports. CR has created a petition asking Amazon to address air pollution and other impacts on surrounding communities. Consumer Reports has no financial relationship with any advertiser on this site. Read the data methodology here1) On Saturday, Leeds visit Chelsea to continue one of English football’s most storied rivalries. Here’s action from their clashes over the years – memorable occasions include their 1952 FA Cup fifth-round second replay, the 1966 FA Cup fourth-round tieand the infamous 1970 FA Cup final replay. Here’s a collection of choice fouls, and Eddie McCreadie’s head-height assault on Billy Bremner; here’s Match of the Day’s report of crowd shenanigans in 1982; a league encounter from 1992 featuring a brilliant goal from Eric Cantona; and one from December 1999 featuring a double from Stephen McPhail and a red card for Frank Leboeuf. 2) Snooker’s 2021 UK Championship is in the books, and what a belter it was. Here’s an unbelievable shot from Judd Trump, and a Ronnie O’Sullivan special to enjoy. Kyren Wilson fluked green then brown to beat Wu Yize, then finished off Ben Woolaston with doubles, and what about this beauty from his semi-final loss to Luca Brecel? Ultimately though, the tournament was a coming-out party for the new champion, Zhao Xintong. Here he is finishing off Brecel to secure the trophy, his post-match interview, and chatting with O’Sullivan, who explains just how good he is. There was also the spectacle of a spectator blowing off steam during the final – or was it the return of the dreaded snooker trolls? 3) In this context, it is, of course, impossible not to revisit this classic Gary Anderson interview, given after he beat Wesley Harms in the 2018 Grand Slam of Darts. While we’re at it, here’s the Flying Scotsman laying into Wayne Mardle, Phil Taylor and Mardle in an awkward studio exchange and some recent beef between Peter Wright and Adrian Lewis. Still want more? Enjoy darts’ biggest bust-ups, part one and part two. 4) On Sunday, the amazing Amanda Nunes – UFC champ in the women’s featherweight and bantamweight divisions – defends the lighter belt against Julianna Peña. Here are five of her best finishes, and here she is with her wife, the UFC fighter Nina Nunes, as they talk about their relationship, careers, and daughter. In her most recent fight, Nunes finished Megan Anderson by reverse triangle armbar, then introduced Anderson to her daughter afterwards. 5) On this day in 1987, Larry Bird’s streak of 59 straight successful free throws came to an end; he went on to make 71 in a row in 1990. For an idea of how good Bird was at his peak, take a look at his putback effort from the 1981 NBA finals, and his over-the-backboard shot from 1986. More highlights: his famous-left-handed game from the same year, winning a three-point shootout without taking his coat off and in this clip he is unable to miss a one-pointer even when trying to. 6) On this day in 1993, the great Danny Blanchflower died. This is a terrific feature on his childhood in east Belfast, here he is delivering his famous line on tactics, and an explanation of what made him so successful. Blanchflower’s performance as Spurs captain in the 1961 FA Cup final sealed the first double of the 20th century. Our favourites from below the line last week 1) Nigel Mansell’s famous lap to win pole position at Silverstone in 1992. 2) A documentary following Mansell through the 1992 season. 3) Accounts of Jim Laker’s all-10 for England v Australia in 1956. 4) Anil Kumble’s all-10 for India against Pakistan in 1999. 5) Valentino Rossi’s top five comebacks. 6) Freestyle skills, but during matches. 7) How F1 teams set up a garage. Spotters’ badges: SticksMeister5, whobroughtoranges, vsbain67. Guardian YouTube football channel Do subscribe, if you fancy. Guardian YouTube sport channel Likewise.Boris Johnson’s entire life and career are littered with personal, professional and political deceptions. He breaks rules and tells lies with shameless confidence and without compunction. This is part of his act, but it sometimes feels as if it is almost a matter of self-regarding principle too. That is partly because, most of the time, he gets away with and is even rewarded for it. So why should it be any different now? The question facing British politics today is whether the image of a Downing Street Christmas party, and the excruciating insensitivity there would be in holding it on a day when nearly 500 people were dying of Covid, may be the event to burst Johnson’s bubble. Last week an online video spoof showed Johnson apparently receiving a Covid booster jab, then shrivelling up like an empty balloon. That video was someone’s fantasy. Now nature is imitating art. It was a deflated Johnson, a rare sight in any season, who turned up to answer prime minister’s questions on Wednesday. ITV’s toe-curling video of staffers smirking and joking about the party is the real thing, not a spoof. The reality it portrayed is likely to lodge in the collective mind. In less than a minute, the video captures all the shallow amateurism of modern politics: its absence of moral awareness, its capacity for awful judgment and its corrosive sense of entitlement, acted out against the backdrop of a wholly unnecessary, flag-draped new briefing room that is an expensive monument to a man-child prime minister’s ego and his absurd great-man view of himself. Does anyone wonder that public trust in politics is plumbing new depths, according to a report this week? The video certainly scared ministers off the airwaves for a while, leaving the government undefended against some genuinely cutting attacks from Labour and the Tory backbenchers. It left Johnson with no immediate alternative but to grit his teeth, try to look contrite and apologise, up to a point and uncharacteristically. He managed to take the political punches in the Commons without losing his rag and making things worse, but the damage was plain to see on the Tory benches. In the short term, Johnson now has three main options in this crisis. The first is to attempt to kick the Christmas party controversy into the long grass. He did this by the time-honoured expedient of referring the whole thing to an inquiry by the cabinet secretary, Simon Case. Johnson will feel he can pick and choose his response to any embarrassing findings here, as he did with the Priti Patel bullying case. He certainly does not want a police probe, which would be far more threatening, and Keir Starmer was smart to entrap Johnson into keeping that possibility alive. The second weapon is to create a headline-grabbing distraction of some kind. In an ideal Johnsonian world he would have done this by picking another fight with liberals over an issue like the Human Rights Act. But he is on the back foot now. It is a mark of the hand-to-mouth urgency of his present battle for survival that Johnson was forced to choose Covid restrictions as his diversionary tactic, an issue that divides his MPs, which he has consistently mishandled in the past, and on which his authority is now even further diminished because of the ITV revelations. The problem for Johnson is that this will blunt his third key weapon, the need to demand the support and loyalty of Tory MPs in helping the party and government through the furore. The response in Tory ranks matters most and will hold the key. The backbench response was bad enough for Johnson – there was talk of serious upset, tipping points, Barnard Castle moments and even apocalypse. There were gaps on the Tory benches during PMQs too, another sign of disaffection. But that is as nothing to the mood that would follow the loss of the North Shropshire byelection next week. It isn’t just that North Shropshire is a rock-solid Conservative bastion that in its current and earlier incarnations has returned a Tory at every election in the last 115 years (even unopposed in 1935). It isn’t just that this byelection was triggered by Johnson’s stupid attempt to bully the Commons into changing its standards regime to suit Owen Paterson, who promptly resigned the seat. It is that local rivalry between the opposition parties means a win for either the Liberal Democrats or Labour would be genuinely astonishing. It would be the loss of a seat. But it would also feel like evidence of a tactical-voting dagger pointed at the hearts of dozens and dozens of other Tory MPs. If North Shropshire falls, this week’s sullen impatience with Johnson could escalate quickly – even over the Christmas break. That is why this time things may indeed be different for Johnson. Partly because it is serious – perhaps even involving lawbreaking. Partly because the joke may not be funny any more, with the polls suggesting that voters have begun to tire of Johnson’s act. Partly because the whole episode reveals a prime minister, not to mention a former Downing Street press secretary, who is simply out of his depth. And finally, because the country may be on its quiet, midterm way to concluding not just that it needs a new government but that there may be a plausible alternative. None of this is remotely set in stone. The damage that politics has done to itself over many years, especially under Johnson, is very disabling, and not just to the Tory cause. Labour is only recovering slowly, and bright new dawns are not currently on offer. But the sense that the country can do better than this, can be better governed than this, that it needs to come together and not grow more divided, that it can find fairer and steadier ways of dealing with serious problems, not least in its wounded democracy, runs very deep. Johnson’s way is emphatically now part of the problem, not part of any solution. On that, I think, the wheel has begun to turn. Martin Kettle is a Guardian columnistJoin these dots. Start with the handful of former rugby players who have spoken publicly about their symptoms. Alix Popham, Michael Lipman, Steve Thompson, Carl Hayman, Dan Scarbrough, Neil Clarke, Tim Cowley, Jason Hobson, Neil Spence, Adam Hughes. Remember that the law firm is representing another 200 players, from union and league, all showing symptoms of brain damage. Add in the research done by the Drake Foundation, the University of South Wales and Durham University. How does the picture look now? At Durham the UK Rugby Health Project has been working on a study of a group of 189 retired rugby players, 83 of them elite, 106 amateur, 145 from union, 44 from league. When it published its recent review of the mental health and wellbeing of the group the lead author, Karen Hind, explained why so many retired players had signed up with the project in the first place. “People wanted to take part because it felt like a good way to get an MOT on their bodies.” A lot of them were suffering physically, and, it turned out, mentally too. The study provided evidence of a strong association between the two. Players who had suffered more concussions were more prone to depression. Among the elite group, 10% reported often or always feeling as though “life is hardly worth living”, and 20% said they would not seek help from anyone if they had a problem or were upset. These athletes needed help, and ended up joining a research project to try to find it. “Among the players I spoke to who came into the clinic, and there were over 100, the consistent feedback was that when they were playing at the highest level they were very well looked after,” Hind explained. “They had all the medical support they needed, however once they hit retirement there was nothing. That is the consistent message that came through.” I recently caught up with Popham, a year on from our first interview. The Durham findings didn’t surprise him. Popham has spent a lot of time in the past year trying to find ways to help players who are going through the same sorts of issues uncovered in Hind’s study. “I’m having conversations with boys who are struggling, and who are really not in a good place.” He knows people who are still working in the game who are have symptoms of brain damage, and who don’t feel able to talk, or get tested, because they are worried they will lose work. Popham’s foundation, Head For Change, has just opened up free access to the mental health app Thrive, which is backed by the NHS, and has a triage system built into it. It plans to expand into football, too, but felt it had to start with rugby because it felt the problem was so urgent. It is worried there will be suicides. It is working with the non-profit Beyond The White Line, which was founded by James Chiffi. “We might expect 25% of people to experience mental health challenges in a year,” Chiffi says. “In some of the sports teams I’m working with I’m seeing rates upwards 30%, 40%, they’re really high numbers. “A lot of athletes I work with will say they don’t feel comfortable going to their own organisations with these problems because they fear it will impact their contracts, or their selection or how they are perceived and equally a lot will say they don’t feel comfortable going outside the organisation either, either because of their profile, or because they have skewed ideas of what’s available. “Elite athletes see themselves differently, they think: ‘This isn’t for me, they won’t understand my situation’ and because of that issues tend to embed and deepen.” Chiffi, Popham and Hind are all providing ground-level evidence of a serious mental health problem in the sport, tied to the issues caused by brain trauma. There are a lot of current and former players struggling in silence, men and women who have given everything to the sport, and who now need something back from it. It reminds me of a roundtable interview Popham and I did with Dr Bennett Omalu in March. “Players need to realise that the governing bodies are not in business to provide healthcare,” Omalu said then. “They are not in business to take care of people like you, we need to be honest with ourselves. Their business is to provide entertainment, and make money.” Omalu is a cynical man (and after everything he’s been through, he has reason to be). We’ll see. There is progress. The Rugby Football Union has recently opened its Advanced Brain Health Clinic to provide support to retired players between 30 and 55. But it still feels like there is a degree of cognitive disconnect involved here; I feel it myself when I’m watching, and writing about, rugby. The things I love about the sport, the intensity, the brutality, the toll, are the same things we should be most worried about. The game rolls on, the regulations are tightened, the game is made, we hope a little safer, but it’s too late for all those players who are already suffering. The list is getting longer. Dane Heylett-Petty has just retired on medical advice at 32, because of the after-effects of concussion. Dillon Hunt has retired on medical advice at 26, because of the after-effects of concussion for the same reason. Popham sees it too. He and his wife, Mel, took their daughters to the Principality Stadium to watch Wales play Australia just a fortnight ago, and found themselves explaining to the fans behind them why the referee was right to send off Rob Valetini after he collided with Adam Beard in a stand-up tackle. “It wasn’t malicious,” Popham said, “but he wasn’t in control so it was reckless.” He won them around to his point of view too. He still loves the sport, only, he says: “I find I watch it through different eyes now.”After two decades of booming production, quarterbacks across the NFL have hit a wall this season. Patrick Mahomes, Aaron Rodgers, Josh Allen and Lamar Jackson, as you would expect, have been great at times this season. But they’ve also suffered down spells, fighting against iffy schemes, rough offensive line play, injuries or illness. Sometimes the eye test can be wonky though. However, the statistical case is unimpeachable. Let’s use Expected Points Added (EPA) as a measuring stick. EPA measures the value of each play, assigning a positive or negative score to the offense, defense, and individual player for how they perform above or below what was expected based on the historical precedent. The current leader among quarterbacks in EPA per play is Kyler Murray. The Cardinals star is the only quarterback in the NFL this season to rank above the 0.250 threshold that marks great play at the position – his current EPA per play sits at 0.263. Yet that figure would have been unremarkable over the past five seasons. Murray’s current mark would have seen him finish sixth among eligible quarterbacks a year ago, with seven quarterbacks clearing the 0.250 threshold. The year before that, four quarterbacks cleared the mark. The year before that: four again. Murray, it should be noted, has missed three games this season. He may well have stretched his lead, but he could also have fallen back towards the pack. The deeper you dig, the more telling the decline. The league’s middle-class has regressed: The sixth highest-ranked passer this season would have been 16th a season ago. And since Week 9, by which point a whole bunch of teams had hit their all-important bye week and been given the opportunity to tweak their offense, the most effective quarterback in football has been … Taylor Heinicke. And by some distance: There are caveats in those figures – different strength of schedules and Murray’s injury to name but two – but the numbers illustrate the overall point: Quarterbacks have struggled in 2021. Some of this is an elemental part of the sport, the seesawing nature of offense v defense. Nothing in football is new. Whoever is on the other side of the ball finds a counter. The new idea becomes an old idea. A new one takes hold. For the past five years, smart teams have taken tried-and-trusted concepts that work at the pro-level and paired them with new ideas that emanated out of college football’s enlightenment period. The age of pace-and-space came to the pros and the league hasn’t looked back since. Pair savvy structures with the most dynamic players to ever play the most important position, and you get something approaching football nirvana. The Chiefs and Packers torched fools with such structures. While over in Buffalo, San Francisco and Tennessee, quarterbacks that had spotty starts to their careers were suddenly elevated into MVP candidates or at least hit the Quarterback You Can Win With ceiling. The middle strand of quarterback talent was lifted to new heights; the best went places few could have conceived as recently as the 2010s. This season, defenses have fought back. Teams have shifted en masse to two-deep safety coverages, keeping as many men back as possible for as long as possible. The strategy is intended to cut off deep shots down the field. By doing so, they’re daring pass-heavy teams that are built to play through their quarterback to run the ball or to drive down the field in small chunks rather than go for huge gains through the air. Offenses are left with a tricky choice: To remove the ball from the quarterback’s hand altogether or to ask a batch of off-script freelancers to perform perfectly in 15 play increments. Defenses want opponents to take 10-20 plays per possession, hoping they’ll turn the ball over or make a mistake before they’re able to score. Are Mahomes and Rodgers willing to take easy, short passes rather than hang around for something to develop down the field? Will Justin Herbert or Joe Burrow get antsy, wanting to indulge their bombs away side? That’s the gamble defenses have made. It’s a more conservative style, but it has worked. Some of the league’s most prolific scoring machines have become stuck in the mud. The only answer: To run the ball more, something that is anathema to some of the game’s most forward-thinking offensive minds and that requires a perfect 11-man ballet to execute rather than the individual brilliance of the quarterback. Offenses shifting to a more run-focused plan is in and of itself a win for a great majority of the league’s defenses. There’s a reason that in a season that calls for defensive ingenuity, quarterback efficiency, and run-game diversity that Bill Belichick and the Patriots find themselves at the top of the AFC. To win this year’s title a team will have to run the ball well enough to force defenses out of their two-deep shells, creeping an extra defender up to the line of scrimmage to stop the run. The league’s most effective offenses are already adapting. No prizes for guessing that the Cardinals, Patriots, and Packers, three Super Bowl favorites, rank in the top-six in run-game EPA per play so far this season. The Bucs, the defending champions, sit in 10th. Last year’s Bucs were as well-rounded a champion as the league has produced. Offense, defense, special teams … you name it, they did it at a high level. It’s why bringing back everyone from that year’s group was so essential. It’s going to take a similarly well-built team to rip through the playoffs this go around. There will be no hiding place for a team elevated purely by the brilliance of the most important player on the field. The natural cycle of the NFL has swung back in favor of the defense, evening out the playing field. Now, it’s time for the sport’s top offensive minds to find counters to the counters. And the best answer might just be the oldest of them all: Line-up the big guys and run the ball.The UK has been hit by a record outbreak of avian flu that has led to 500,000 captive birds being culled in recent months. The environment secretary, George Eustice, told the House of Commons: “This year we are now seeing the largest ever outbreak in the UK of avian influenza, with 36 confirmed cases.” He said an avian influenza prevention zone had been declared across the UK at the start of November, requiring strict biosecurity measures and all birds to be kept indoors. He added: “Our chief veterinary officer continues to lead the response to this episode.” Earlier the chief vet, Christine Middlemiss, said she was “very concerned about what’s happening”. Speaking to BBC Radio 4’s Today programme after confirming more outbreaks overnight, she said: “We now have a total of 40 infected premises in the UK – that’s a really high number for the time of year for anything we’ve experienced before.” By comparison, there were 26 outbreaks last winter. Middlemiss said: “All the birds on the premises have to be culled because of the ongoing risk of infection that they pose. The total number is something like half a million will now have been culled.” She said food supplies would not be hit. “That sounds a huge number, and for those keepers affected it is really devastating, but it’s a relatively very small number in terms of egg supply, meat, chicken and so on.” The disease is spread by migratory wild birds from Europe, where high infections levels are also being recorded. A rare white-tailed eagle found dead on Skye is among the wild birds to have tested positive for avian flu, after a postmortem by the pathology unit at Scotland’s Rural College. It is thought to be the first detected avian flu case involving an eagle in Scotland. The adult eagle, from a well-established territory on Trotternish, was found dead on 14 November. Ornithologists believe it may have fed on infected greylag geese. Middlemiss said almost 300 wild birds had been found with the disease at more than 80 locations. There was “a lot of virus out there”, she said. The risk to human health is low but infected birds should not be touched. She said: “It used to be that we would have a reasonable-sized outbreak and then have two or three quiet years. But that’s not happening now. We’re seeing this across the whole of Europe. We need to understand better why we’re getting these ongoing infections every year.” Asked if the disease was still spreading, Middlemiss said: “We’re continuing to get the new detections. I confirmed another two last night and that’s the rate we’ve been going at for the last week or so. We’re seeing this as a huge pressure of infection from our wild birds.” Middlemiss urged people with garden bird feeders to “practice routine hygiene precautions” including proper handwashing. She added: “If you keep chickens and you want to feed wild birds, you need to make sure that everything is completely scrupulously clean and absolutely separate so that you don’t take infection into your own birds and make them sick.” Asked if the climate crisis was to blame for the increased infection, Middlemiss said: “We don’t know specifically, but it’s certainly one of the thoughts that our experts are having. The birds migrate to the north of Russia over the summer and mix with other birds on other global flight pathways and exchange the viruses. So it’s quite plausible that with climate change and change in pathways that different mixing is going on.”A freshwater fish that scientists thought was extinct has been found in south-east Turkey, after an absence of nearly 50 years. “I’ve been researching this area for 12 years and this fish was always on my wishlist,” said Dr Cüneyt Kaya, associate professor at Recep Tayyip Erdoğan University. “It’s taken a long time. When I saw the distinctive bands on the fish, I felt so happy. It was a perfect moment.” The critically endangered Batman River loach (Paraschistura chrysicristinae), a tiny yellow-and-brown striped fish which grows to a maximum length of 3.6cm (1.4 inches), was previously found in streams and tributaries of the Batman and Ambar rivers, where it was last seen in 1974. Kaya, a fish taxonomist, and Dr Münevver Oral, a geneticist and research fellow at the same university, focused their search for the loach upstream of the Batman Dam, which was built between 1986 and 1999. “Because the species was lost, we couldn’t know the original natural habitat, so we weren’t sure where to search,” said Kaya. “The species is also very small and cylindrical, so the nets’ mesh needed to be smaller. Earlier, we used larger nets and I think the fish went through the nets, so we didn’t find it.” Using tight-weave nets, Kaya and Oral found 14 loaches in shallow, rocky, fast-flowing areas of the Sarim stream and another nine in the Han stream. The fish’s size may have counted in its favour. “We’re lucky, because this species has no economic value whatsoever,” said Oral. “If we were talking about big trout, people like to go fishing. People usually think about fish they can consume. But the Batman River loach is so tiny. Local people say to us: ‘Is this why you came all this way, just to find this?’” More work is now needed to help secure the loach’s future, including examining possible threats, such as populations fragmented by the dam, drought (which has been particularly bad in Turkey in 2021) and pollution. “Man-made pollution is an issue, so we need to increase the awareness of local people,” said Oral. “The dam construction is another threat. There could also be invasive species. We don’t know the ecology of the species, so we need to do more research.” Kaya and Oral’s expedition was supported by conservation organisations Shoal and Re:wild, as part of their global Search For The Lost Fishes project. The Batman River loach is the first fish to be found on their list of 10 “most wanted” lost species, which also includes the fat catfish (Rhyzosomichthys totae) in Colombia’s high-altitude Lake Tota and the duckbilled buntingi (Adrianichthys kruyti) in Lake Poso, Indonesia. “Freshwater fish matter to millions of people around the world who rely on them for daily survival,” said Mike Baltzer, executive director of Shoal. “There are over 18,000 species of fish. They’re important for biodiversity and for climate change, and a perfect indicator of the health of rivers and lakes we depend on for survival. Once these fish are found, work needs to be done to save the species.” According to the World’s Forgotten Fishes report, which WWF, Shoal and other partners published this year, freshwater fish face severe threats. “Freshwater fishes are considered the most threatened group of fauna on the planet,” said Baltzer. “More than a third of freshwater fish species are threatened with extinction. Freshwater fish need more attention – we need to conserve rivers and lakes. “It’s very exciting to find a species like the Batman River loach that was thought to be extinct. [It shows] that if we focus our minds and efforts, we can find other species and stop the extinctions of fish.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresIn the early 1940s, the teenage James Ivory was lambasted by an army officer for wearing a “stupid and girlish” pink satin bow tie. “What do you think of me?” the officer asked at the end of his tirade. “I think you’re pompous,” Ivory replied. Now he wonders if the officer was a repressed homosexual as well as a bully. Either way the episode was important: it proved Ivory could look after himself and, despite being “a skinny boy with underdeveloped biceps”, hold his own in the world of men. He took his time to reach the pinnacle, if winning an Academy Award is a measure of that; he was 89 when he finally won an Oscar, for his work on the screenplay of Call Me By Your Name. Now 93, he has written a memoir looking back on his life and career. Though something of a ragbag, with letters, diary entries and magazine articles padding it out, it’s consistently entertaining, if only because Ivory, by his own admission, is “a fearful snob”. The snobbery began with his realisation, at an early age, that some boys are circumcised and others, less fortunate, are not: “I’m afraid the feeling that uncircumcised men are in some way socially inferior has stayed with me all of my life.” Ivory was adopted; his original surname was Hazen, which is as much as he knows to this day. If being abandoned as a baby made him sensitive to rejection, both at university (when he failed to get in the best fraternity) and later in life (when actors turned him down), he enjoyed the feeling of being an outsider, at odds with American culture – a Europhile and Indophile in the making. A sharp dresser, he was voted the most stylish boy in his Oregon high school, where his homosexuality came to the attention of his female drama teacher, who warned him he was the subject of gossip. Some of his crushes came to nothing, but the penises he gazed on are meticulously recalled: “a very shapely American frat-boy hard-on”, a “heavy, charged-looking cock, of the … end-of-the-garden-hose variety”. Despite the difficulties of falling for heterosexual men, a droit-de-seigneurial confidence remained. He knew what he wanted. He always had money to spare. And his taste was immaculate: clothes, furnishings, food, wine, hotels, palazzos – once his career got going, and wherever in the world he was, nothing but the best would do. Lucid in recalling his early years, he’s less forthcoming about his work as a director, with few tips to offer and most of those picked up from Jean Renoir and Satyajit Ray. He pays tribute to both his long-term partner Ismail Merchant (revered as charming, handsome and ebullient) and their collaborator Ruth Prawer Jhabvala, whose hauteur outdid his own (women she disliked were called Toads, and Mrs Gandhi was the Toad of Toads). But the longer chapters are on people he knew less well: Vanessa Redgrave for instance (a “brave, noble, wrong-headed being! … Had she lived in Massachusetts 300 years earlier, she might well have been branded a witch”) and Bruce Chatwin, whom Ivory went to bed with a few times (his was “a good, traditional English cock”, we’re told, “all ready for Maypole dancing”). Among other pen portraits here – Kenneth Clark, George Cukor, Lillian Ross, Susan Sontag – the two most damning are of Racquel Welch (“She wanted to be an actress, not just star, so I treated her as an actress, and not as a star. That was my fatal mistake”) and Luca Guadagnino, who had asked Ivory to co-direct Call Me By Your Name but then dropped him without explanation. Being “watched by millions – or was it billions?” as he received his Oscar was a consolation, of course. But his hopes of spending time in Italy (“a country I love and can never get enough of”) during the shoot were rudely dashed. At high school he used to put on a performance he called “Solid Ivory” and there’s a performative element to this book, which at times reads like a society gossip column – at a party at Wilton House, which he has travelled 3,000 miles to attend, he mingles with English aristocrats and royals – and at others like an Edmund White novel. And while there is much to enjoy here, those hoping for an insight into the Merchant Ivory films that made his name may finish it wanting more. • Solid Ivory is published by Corsair (£20). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Much of the advance commentary about Joe Biden’s two-day Summit for Democracy has been a diplomat’s version of a Charity Ball: long discussions about the guest list and how the guests will show up, and very little about its supposedly noble purpose. Potentially a rallying point for democracy, after the west’s crushing setback in Afghanistan, the summit has not been receiving rave advance notices even from those that have been invited. Unfocussed, unnecessarily divisive, an NGO merry go round or an extended photo op have been some of the kinder trails. There have also been noises off. Hungary, the only EU state left off the 110-country guest list, has responded by trying to block the EU attending the virtual event. Middle East potentates also excluded by Biden, such as the UAE, have quietly pointed to the competition between France and the US to sell the country jets. When Biden promised on the presidential campaign trail to hold the summit, the goal seemed to be to draw a dividing line with Donald Trump’s authoritarian allies and re-establish America’s standing in the world as the champion of human rights and liberty. “Democracy doesn’t happen by accident,” Biden said in February. “We have to defend it, fight for it, strengthen it, renew it”. The summit was as much about protecting as promoting democracy, as well as being a conscious response to American declinists. Not surprisingly the biggest ideological and social media barrage against the summit has come from its implicit targets: Russia and China. The countries’ two ambassadors to Washington even penned a joint article denouncing the event as “a product of cold war thinking”. Russia also issued a separate 2,000-word statement detailing the failings of US democracy, covering corporate manipulation of the media, the illegal enforcement of democracy overseas or the false charge that the 2020 election may have been stolen from Donald Trump. China, irate that Taiwan has made the guest list, has produced a long white paper on the superiorities of the Chinese model of democracy. This echoes the claim made by the foreign minister, Wang Yi, who argued in a speech in April 2021 that “democracy is not Coca-Cola where the US produces the original syrup and the whole world has one flavour. If there is only one model, once civilisation on the planet, the world will lose its vitality and be devoid of growth.” The white paper explains “There is no fixed model of democracy; it manifests itself in many forms. The principles of One Person, One Vote and party competition underlying the western electoral system are propagated by them as the sole criterion for democracy. “China has chosen a path to democracy suited to a vast country with a large population. As a populous country long plagued by weak economic foundations, China strives to strike a balance between democracy and development. The priority always rests with development, which is facilitated by democracy and in turn boosts the development of democracy. China has never indulged in empty talk on democracy regardless of a country’s development stage.” It continues: “In China, there are no opposition parties. But China’s political party system is not a system of one-party rule. Nor is it one in which multiple parties vie for power and govern in turn. It is a multiparty cooperation system in which the Communist party of China exercises state power.” At one point the paper gets into a spectacular muddle on how democracy and dictatorship coexist in China. Concepts such as media freedom and judicial independence are entirely absent from the white paper, or any explanation of how the Chinese nation ever chose that the party alone decide the national interest. That Russia and China have both gone to such lengths to defend their “democracies’ suggests the summit has at least hit an exposed nerve – or that the autocracies feel so emboldened by the state of American democracy that they feel they can mount a credible counter offensive. Daniel Fried, former US ambassador to Poland, fears it may be the latter. “The authoritarians are serious. This is not abstract. Tyrants start wars. Putin is threatening a generalised war with Ukraine. He thinks his time has come again and democracy is on the wane. We have seen this movie before and it does not end well. It’s the 1930s all over again.” There is no more urgent task than for democracies to renew themselves. But the gravity of the moment has not stopped the summit being attacked from both right and left in the west. Dr Colin Dueck, a Republican oriented professor speaking at the Heritage Foundation, predicts the summit will be a “virtue-signalling gab fest”. He also suggested the event will highlight how human rights simply is not at the centre of Biden’s US foreign policy – despite his rhetoric. He points to countries such as the UAE and Egypt with which Biden has made deals in office. “It is a campaigning position not a governing position”. Daniel Larison, writing from the Left in Responsible Statecraft, takes a similar position. “To the extent that ‘bad guys’ are ‘winning’ today, at least part of the explanation for it is that some of them have been given carte blanche by Washington to jail and kill their critics, destabilize other countries, and commit war crimes in reckless military interventions”. So if the Biden democracy summit is to get past a wall of scepticism, and not be passed off as another Zoom call for NGOs, it needs some granular deliverables or at least lines of work that can be pursued over the next year. The summit organisers have promised it will focus on three core pillars: “countering authoritarianism, fighting corruption, and promoting respect for human rights”. The issue of technology will run through all three. On the surface, the inclusion of corruption as a summit theme is an oddity, but according to the Atlantic Council’s Ben Judah, that reflects a position that corruption is not about individual bad actors, but the bad systems that authoritarians exploit. Other announcements are bubbling up. Biden has confirmed he will be mounting a diplomatic boycott of the Olympic Games. The US will provide a big dollop of cash to the recently launched International Fund for Public Interest Media. A further round of human rights sanctions are set to be announced. Various civil society alliances around technology, corruption and human rights have started appearing. The fact that campaigners from Belarus or the Hong Kong activist Nathan Law will speak, amid an array of self-organised fringe events, show that the organisers recognise this cannot be an American-owned, or even a solely government-owned, event. Judah says he is impressed by the quality of the administration’s just-published anti-corruption strategy – after a period of worrying silence on the issues. “It looks as if they will go into the summit with some really solid ideas – something they did not have ahead of the G7 or Cop26”.A Bondi Beach backpackers hostel in Sydney has been placed into lockdown for a second time due to fears of a Covid outbreak. It is not yet known how many people were staying at Noah’s backpackers hostel or whether the Omicron strain of the virus was present. A New South Wales police spokesperson confirmed NSW Health had requested the assistance of police at the hostel. Officers were at the venue on Thursday night with the building cordoned off with police tape. The hostel in Sydney’s eastern suburbs was the site of a previous Covid scare in April 2020. It was forced to temporarily shut after people were seen gathered on a balcony allegedly ignoring social distancing mandates. Noah’s describes itself as the “largest backpacker accommodation” at Bondi Beach. Thursday’s lockdown comes as New South Wales recorded 420 local cases of Covid – the highest number since October. Eight of the new cases were the Omicron variant, bringing the total number of confirmed cases of the strain in the state to 42. Health authorities are concerned case numbers will continue to surge due to transmission at festive season celebrations. A trivia night at a Sydney pub has sparked a new cluster of cases, with 44 patrons testing positive for the virus after attending the popular Oxford Tavern in Petersham on 30 November. Authorities are also concerned about 140 passengers who embarked on a Sydney Harbour cruise on Friday night, which has so far resulted in five cases of the Omicron variant. NSW Health deputy chief health officer, Marianne Gale, said more infections are expected. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning People who attended either venue are close contacts and must abide by testing and isolation rules. NSW Health has also issued an alert for a nightclub in Byron Bay where thousands of teenagers are celebrating schoolies. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, is urging “confidence, hope and optimism” ahead of most social distancing restrictions ending mid-next week. From 15 December, density limits will be scrapped, QR check-ins will only be required at high-risk venues, and masks will only have to be worn on public transport, at airports and on planes. NSW now has 93% of adults fully vaccinated – just two percentage points short of the goal nominated by the state’s chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant. – with Australian Associated PressUefa has confirmed that Tottenham’s Europa Conference League tie at home against Rennes on Thursday night is off in the wake of the alarming rise in Covid cases at the London club. The decision is sure to dismay Rennes, who had waited for assurances that the game was on before flying to London City airport on Wednesday. The French club released a statement late on Wednesday night complaining that the postponement had not been officially communicated by Uefa and accusing Spurs of failing to provide the full details of the outbreak. As they headed home on Thursday morning, they remained angry and frustrated at having made the trip for nothing. It is understood the governing body did not confirm the position on Wednesday night because it had not received written confirmation from Spurs. But it is satisfied after discussions with Tottenham that the game cannot go ahead. A date for the match is being discussed and, under Uefa rules, should be played before the end of the month, although there could be a degree of flexibility. Rennes said in a statement that they hoped “the interests of the club will be respected given the important sporting deadlines” that they face this month. Spurs, who have closed the first-team area of their training centre, released a statement at 9pm to say the game against Rennes was off, with English football confronting an escalating crisis in terms of the virus. Leicester earlier reported seven of their players had not travelled to their Europa League game at Napoli because of Covid or illness. Three members of staff did not make the trip either because of illness. The Spurs manager, Antonio Conte, had said he was “scared” as he revealed eight players and five coaches had tested positive, and the club announced “discussions are ongoing with Uefa [over the Rennes fixture] and we shall provide a further update in due course”. Spurs are now likely to ask the Premier League to postpone their match at Brighton on Sunday, and the visit to Leicester next Thursday is also set to be affected. But Rennes hit back in a statement of their own at 10.30pm, arguing that, faced with what they called a “London fog”, they reserved the right to approach Uefa. Rennes said: “This lack of fair play is all the more flagrant as Tottenham confirmed by email early this afternoon that the match would be held before informing us of their intention not to play after we landed at London City airport.” The Premier League had last week confirmed 12 positive results among players and staff – the highest figure since August – and, amid concern over the rapid spread of the Omicron variant, the situations at Spurs and Leicester are a worry. Conte had worked with a skeleton senior squad on Wednesday morning and said that after the session a player he had intended to start against Rennes returned a positive test. The senior outfield players pictured in the session were Matt Doherty, Eric Dier, Davinson Sánchez, Joe Rodon, Japhet Tanganga, Harry Winks, Giovani Lo Celso, Tanguy Ndombele, Dele Alli, Steven Bergwijn, Ryan Sessegnon, Jack Clarke and Harry Kane. Sessegnon was suspended and Lo Celso a fitness doubt. It was understood the goalkeepers Hugo Lloris, Pierluigi Gollini and Brandon Austin were available. Tobi Omole, who is on the Uefa A list, was also pictured. Under Uefa rules, if a club have fewer than 13 available senior players and no goalkeeper, a tie can be postponed, meaning Spurs were on the edge and, in the end, they came to feel the situation regarding the Rennes game was untenable. Spurs were also conscious of their responsibility not to put Rennes at risk. It is understood the Leicester players who did not travel are Kelechi Iheanacho, Ademola Lookman, Daniel Amartey, Jannik Vestergaard, Ayoze Pérez, Filip Benkovic and Vontae Daley-Campbell. Leicester need a draw to ensure they advance. “We’ve had a number of people, staff and players, who haven’t travelled,” Brendan Rodgers said. “We’ve had some positive [Covid] cases, some are generally not well, so we haven’t taken the risk. We will have seven unavailable. It’s been [over the] last few days, really. In general, you’re starting to see a few more cases and, for us, it’s always about the health of our players. We have to respect travelling into Italy. “The players who were unwell who we could’ve maybe given 24 hours to feel better – we couldn’t take any risk with those so we’ve kept them at home along with the other guys who were deemed positive.” Conte had spoken with emotion and no little anger at his media conference, which was staged remotely, and his biggest concern regarded the unknown. “It’s eight players and five members of staff but the problem is that every day we are having people with Covid,” he said. “People that yesterday weren’t positive, today are positive and we continue to have contact with people we think are negative but the day after they become positive. This is a serious problem. “Everyone is a bit scared because we have family and [we ask]: ‘Why I have to take this risk? Why?’ This is my question. Tomorrow, who [will be positive]? Me? I don’t know. Maybe. Better me than a player for sure but I think that it is not right for everyone because we have family and contact with them when we come back home. Football is the most important thing but today to speak about football is impossible. There are situations that made me very upset.” To advance to the Conference League play-off round Spurs must match Vitesse’s result at home against NS Mura and make sure their goal difference remains superior to that of the Dutch club.Progress on women’s and LGBT rights in Qatar should be part of any legacy from the country hosting the World Cup, the general secretary of the Dutch Football Association (KNVB) has said. Gijs de Jong has pledged that the Netherlands team will make the case for a “better future” in Qatar during the tournament next November and December, including “symbolic” acts such as visiting migrant worker camps. But as well as protecting improvements already agreed on workers’ rights, football should push for broader human rights change, De Jong said. “As a legacy, of course we would want it guaranteed that the legislation and reforms agreed in the past few years would be permanent and implemented fully across the whole country,” he said. “That’s on kafala, on heat protocols, on minimum wage. It would be even better if the work centre introduced by the BWI [Building and Woodworkers’ International] was made permanent. “The joint committees [between workers and employers] would be great. But it would be even more great if we made a first step on equality between men and women and also on the LGBT discussions.” Concern over exploitation of migrant workers has dominated the years leading up to the World Cup, with the Qatari government eventually instituting reforms. Whereas a recent Amnesty report suggested implementation of the laws had been undermined by “complacency”, LGBT rights in Qatar have been subject to less scrutiny. Qatari authorities have assured travelling LGBT supporters that they will be able to feel safe in the country, and rainbow flag livery will be allowed at stadiums. But “instigating … sodomy” is still illegal under article 296 of the country’s penal code. Women’s rights have also received less focus, but a Human Rights Watch report this spring argued that the country’s male guardianship system “denies women the right to make many key decisions about their lives”. De Jong said initial discussions regarding LGBT rights had taken place with the Qatari Supreme Committee for delivery of the World Cup, as part of inspections taken by the Uefa working group on Qatar of which the English FA is also a member. “When we were there last time … the focus was on workers’ rights but we also had a session with the national human rights committee. It was just one session of one and a half hours, so let’s not make that an example for everything, but we discussed some sensitive issues openly. Fifa have promised of course to allow the rainbow signs, the flags in the stadia, but we would like a little bit more.” The Dutch national team, alongside the KNVB, has developed a strategic response to the World Cup under the banner “football supports change”, with the message appearing on the team’s shirts before a qualifying match in March. De Jong says the country has been engaged in a response since 2015, when it lobbied Fifa to introduce human rights considerations in assessing World Cup bids, but that this response has stepped up since last year in dialogues with Amnesty International, the International Labour Organization, and the BWI, as well as with Fifa and the Supreme Committee. De Jong says the country will engage in “symbolic action” during the World Cup to “show our commitment” to change. “We’re still thinking and discussing with people what the best way will be to attract attention for this,” he said. “We could go to a good example [of a migrant worker camp], focus on that and show how you can organise the rights of migrant workers in a good way. That could be an option, but you get through in different kind of ways. “We are positive people in the Netherlands mostly. We believe in the future and we want to show what the future can look like. So we’re probably more tended to work to a positive than a negative example, but it can be different ways. We want to find a symbolic action which shows our commitment. Symbolic for some people sounds cynical, that we’re doing it for whitewashing or something like that, but that’s not what we’re looking for. We want to do something together with BWI and ILO to show a better future.”First Vladimir Putin came to visit. Then, for the second day in a row, the artists were turfed out of GES-2, a prestigious new arts centre built in a disused power station, as police and men in suits swarmed in for what looked like another VIP guest. Instead of our planned walkthrough, I trudged through the snow to catch up with Ragnar Kjartansson, the star Icelandic artist headlining the art centre’s opening by re-filming the popular soap opera Santa Barbara as a “living sculpture”. He had taken a booth in the nearby Strelka Bar and was taking the disruption in his stride, despite it coming one day before the grand opening. “We’ve been working on this for three years. We’re ready,” laughed Kjartansson, sporting a green neck scarf over a jean jacket. He keeps his mask on while we speak indoors. “It’s almost like a weird blessing. A breather before it begins.” This is the triumph of one of Russia’s richest men, Leonid Mikhelson, opening his marquee cultural hub just a stone’s throw away from the Kremlin. Estimated to have cost in the hundreds of millions of pounds (he won’t reveal the exact amount), the pricey transformation of the 1907 power station is about more than just art, seeking to showpiece Moscow’s place as an international cultural hub and his V-A-C Foundation (named for his daughter, Viktoria) as its premier institution. Set on the Bolotnaya embankment of the Moskva River, the 20,000 sq metre space sits inside of a hydraulic power plant renovated by the workshop of Italian architect Renzo Piano. Its new glass roofing, which bathes the building’s nave in light, could recall a botanic garden save for the Matisse blue pipe chimneys stretching 70 metres into the sky. When Putin arrives, he is met by Mikhelson, and the cofounder of V-A-C, Teresa Iarocci Mavica, who launches into a talk on the centre’s roots in Houses of Culture meant to educate the public and dwells on the inaugural season’s theme: Santa Barbara. How Not to Be Colonised?, a call for cultural dialogue on equal footing through a “reappropriation” of the American soap opera that became a Russian hit. It feels like a mission statement with a dab of politics for Moscow’s new premier art space, the Russian establishment’s answer to the Tate Modern or Centre Pompidou in Paris (also designed by Piano). Compared to the raw aesthetic of the Geometry of Now music festival in 2017, which featured a sound-based installation with recordings of prawns having sex and a lecture on gender, politics and sound by a transgender musician, it all feels far more manicured, considered, and safe. All the better, as this was something of a pitch meeting. “I asked [Putin] for his support. He looked at me and said, ‘How could I not support a project as great as yours’,” Mavica tells me Putin said to her after they finished his walkthrough. “It’s the most important thing, it’s important for us to receive that legitimisation.” That inaugural season is driven by the sensitive direction of Kjartansson, who is creating a “living sculpture” by re-staging, filming and editing 98 episodes of Santa Barbara, the soap opera that became a cultural phenomenon in 1990s Russia. Inspired by a Foreign Policy article about Santa Barbara’s influence on the former Soviet Union (there are housing developments modelled on the show), the exhibition also touches on the obvious tensions between east and west. “I’m an Icelander living right between Moscow and Washington. Put your finger in the air and feel how the relationship’s going … I just find some kind of poetic beauty in this project because of that,” he says. In Russia, the phrase Santa Barbara has become a kind of joke, meaning a tangled family relationship that it’s better not to get involved in. But Kjartansson says the work is deadly serious, paraphrasing Björk that “every song she writes starts as a joke and then she carves away until she finds the truth in it”. “It’s about traumatic times in this country and in world history. And reenacting them in this way,” he says. I ask him why he decided to call that “colonisation”, to me a provocative description that speaks to Russia’s interpretation of being taken advantage of in the 1990s. It turns out he hadn’t. “How not to give in to colonisation was totally from Teresa,” he said. “It has not been my thought. I’ve never ever thought like this is about cultural colonisation or cultural dominance, it’s just about cultural influence.” As Kjartansson notes, you can’t control how people will interpret your art. It’s clear he feels a warmth for Russia stretching back to his first visit in the mid-1990s and the art selected for his and Ingibjörg Sigurjónsdóttir’s exhibition To Moscow! To Moscow! To Moscow! – which opens GES-2 – speaks to that tenderness. He describes how he carefully recreated a scene from the opening of Russia’s first McDonald’s for a photograph, rhapsodises over Olga Chernysheva’s black-and-white photographs of truck drivers trapped in traffic jams, and swells with pride at bringing the original Dimmalimm, the Icelandic fairytale about a prince and a swan, abroad for exhibition for the first time. That raw enthusiasm and accessibility is what GES-2 was seeking when it chose Kjartansson to headline its opening season, said artistic director Francesco Manacorda, formerly of Tate Liverpool. “His pieces are emotional magnets,” he said, pointing to his 2012 video installation The Visitors, which the Guardian named its best artwork of the 21st century. Through Strelka’s windows we have a view on the golden-domed Cathedral of Christ the Saviour, where Pussy Riot filmed their Punk Prayer in 2012 and were subsequently imprisoned. When I ask Manacorda to what degree they’re ready to discuss explicitly political themes, he said he would “avoid it as the centre stage … Our field is culture. There will be elements that will have political resonance. But I don’t want to become a thinktank. I don’t want to be a sort of political organisation.” GES-2 House of Culture opens to the public on Friday as hundreds of journalists, bloggers, critics, artists and others descend on Balchug Island for a walkthrough and then an evening party. There, I catch sight of Mikhelson, the billionaire founder and head of gas giant Novatek, passing through the crowd with his daughter Viktoria, who also works for the foundation. He has declined interviews ahead of the opening and gives no speeches. Earlier that day, the Russian actors donned their tuxedos, ball dresses and pearls as they began filming their first scenes from Santa Barbara, filmed first on painstakingly recreated sets, then beamed over to an open-space editing room, and finally on to televisions showing the final product. Thirty years ago, these Santa Barbara sets were how Russians imagined the good life. Now, judging by GES-2, aspirations have grown loftier. When I asked what Russians saw in an American soap 30 years ago, Bridget Dobson, one of the show’s writers, had a quick response: “They saw themselves.”The Omicron variant is now in 57 countries. And that’s countries that have sequencing ability to find it. Even in Britain, estimates are that the hundreds of confirmed Omicron cases are just the tip of the iceberg. Given how fast it has spread globally, its probable increased transmissibility even compared with Delta, and the many mutations in this variant, this is another step change in the pandemic. And one in which governments again have to manage how a wave of infections would affect their health services, where staff are already hitting the emergency button and saying they can’t take on more patients. The good news is that vaccines (especially boosters) seem to be holding up well against Omicron so far. The bad news is that a more transmissible variant will find unvaccinated people faster, and infect more people. While the link between cases and hospitalisations is weakened, it is not broken. I recently joined a call with NHS clinical colleagues who have been running Covid-19 wards and managing wave after wave in hospital since March 2020. Their words were stark. Staff are exhausted. Burned out. Medical professionals not only have to cope with difficult shifts, large patient loads and public sector pay, but also risking their own health and that of their families. One nurse recounted caring for a fit and healthy woman in her 30s who hadn’t been vaccinated and was now on a ventilator. She sees little compliance with masks in shops, or any kind of infection control measures in society. One world in hospitals where the pandemic is still raging. One world outside where the UK government prematurely announced victory over Covid-19 on “freedom day” last summer. With this in mind, the UK government’s move towards plan B is a welcome step, but should have been introduced weeks ago, if not months. Again, waiting longer to take action means that stronger action might be necessary in the future. Scotland maintained face coverings in shops and public transport with high compliance and understanding that it is a necessary measure to maintain economic and social activity while a dangerous virus is circulating. Asking people to work from home is also wise as we head into the Christmas break, and a welcome move from the Scottish government. Testing regularly to catch infectious individuals is an important step so that chains of transmission are interrupted. The Cop26 conference in Glasgow showed that mitigations, such as vaccine certification and regular testing and masks, can make large events safer. There is a way to mix, socialise and maintain economic and social activity in a more secure way. However, recent reports of government Christmas parties have resulted in a loss of trust in leadership, which is a major blow during a pandemic. And continual lies means a fuzzier line between what is true and what is false, which again is a huge blow to public health messaging and response. We follow public health measures, such as masks, getting vaccinated and testing often, not because of politicians or top-down directives, but to help protect our communities and each other. And to help keep pressure off health services so that when our loved ones need healthcare, it’s there for them. I’d like to focus on two remaining issues that we haven’t heard enough about so far. The first is schools: school closures – like those we had last January and February – should be off the table completely. More than 100,000 children have been “lost in the system” and have not fully returned to school since the start of the pandemic, while in-person schooling is important not only for education, but child nutrition, wellbeing and safety. The UK is wasting time by not offering parents the option of vaccinating their five- to 11-year-olds and protecting them from illness. Around 5 million children under 12 have been vaccinated in the United States, with Denmark also rolling out jabs to younger people and the World Health Organization advising European countries to focus on this over the holidays. Again the UK is an outlier – and again, as with teenage vaccination, will probably go the way of other countries, just months later. The second issue is around travel: international travel is likely to be disrupted for the foreseeable future. The red-list “kneejerk” approach isn’t effective at stopping the introduction of variants, because people can just avoid direct flights from certain countries, and it punishes those countries that can sequence and detect variants and then share this data. It also creates hesitancy to book overseas travel with the worry of what it may cost to return home. Instead, aviation ministers from the G20 countries should agree standard travel procedures that would offer certainty and stability to the aviation sector for the next six to nine months, and strike a balance between international mobility and infection disease control. This could include agreed pre-departure testing, vaccine certification and day two testing on arrival. With all we have witnessed and the 146,000 lives lost in Britain, it should be clear by now that Covid-19 is a serious virus. Even to those in their 20s or 30s. And to those who think of themselves as fit and healthy and with a robust immune system. Fortunately we have vaccines now: their main role as new variants have emerged has been to blunt the full impact of Covid-19 on the body, and reduce it to a mild disease that can be managed at home for most. While people might think they’re getting vaccinated to save their grandparents, they’re actually getting vaccinated to save themselves. The sobering message is that Covid-19 is here to stay, and the increased number of animal reservoirs being found, including deer, hippos and mink, mean that it can continue to mutate and jump back into humans. Sars-CoV-2 spilled over into one human in Wuhan and spread across the world. All it takes is one person to be infected with a new variant with a major selective advantage, and again it will spread across the world as Delta has. And while we focus on Omicron now, we have to be thinking ahead to what the next version of Covid-19 could look like this spring, and how we get ahead of this virus, instead of always trying to catch up. This involves managing Covid-19 using vaccines, testing, masks and clear messages to the public on where we are and why. And having someone in charge whom we can trust to be honest and public-oriented. • Prof Devi Sridhar is chair of global public health at the University of EdinburghThe government has rushed in plan B Covid restrictions in England after confirming that cases of the new Omicron variant are doubling every three days or faster. It brings England closer in line with elsewhere in the UK, but rules and guideline still vary between England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. England Boris Johnson announced four new measures as part of the move to plan B: From Friday 10 December the legal requirement to wear face masks in shops and on public transport will be extended to most public indoor venues, including theatres and cinemas. But you will not have to wear masks in cafes, restaurants or pubs. From Monday 13 December people have been urged to work from home. “Go to work if you must but work from home if you can,” Johnson said. From Wednesday 15 December the NHS Covid pass or negative lateral flow test will be mandatory in nightclubs and other large venues. The venues are listed as: nightclubs; indoor unseated venues with more than 500 people; unseated outdoor venues with more than 4,000 people; any venue with more than 10,000 people. Daily tests for contacts of people suspected of having the Omicron variant will be introduced to replace the current isolation rules. But until the new tests are available, contacts of suspected Omicron cases will be required to self-isolate for 10 days, regardless of their age or vaccination status. Anyone who tests positive for Covid is still required to self-isolate. These measures are in addition to the existing travel restrictions requiring anyone entering the UK to take a PCR or lateral flow test in the two days before departure. Travellers also have to take a PCR test within 48 hours of arrival in the UK and self-isolate until they have a negative result. Scotland People are encouraged to keep a distance from people not in their group. And the 2-metre rule distancing rule remain in healthcare settings. People have been urged to defer Christmas parties Masks are compulsory on public transport and in shops Teachers and secondary school pupils have to wear masks indoors. Pubs, restaurants and cafes must record customers’ contact details. People are encouraged to work from home where possible. Proof of vaccine status is required at nightclubs and other venues. Wales Since 15 November the NHS Covid pass has been mandatory for entry to theatres, cinemas and concert halls. Face coverings are already compulsory on public transport, and in shops and hospitals. But you do not have to wear masks at cafes, restaurants and pubs in Wales, or at weddings. People are also urged to work from home if possible. Northern Ireland Indoor parties of more than 30 people are banned. Face coverings are mandatory on public transport, and in shops, indoor seated venues and visitor attractions. Pupils over 13 must must wear a face covering in school and on school transport. Teachers are encouraged to wear masks in schools.David Villa never delivered MLS Cup for New York City FC. Neither did Andrea Pirlo or Frank Lampard. Those names put NYC FC on the map in the first few years of the club’s existence, but celebrity counts for little in the playoffs. Now, the names are not so recognisable, but NYC FC are preparing for their first MLS Cup final on Saturday, when they will take on the Portland Timbers. Ronny Deila’s team are just one win from the title and vindicating the change in approach that took place after Villa, Pirlo, Lampard and the rest exited. Being under the City Football Group umbrella, NYC FC were always likely to boast one of the biggest budgets in MLS. This was certainly the case in 2017 when the club had the second largest payroll (nearly $18m) of any club in the league behind only Toronto FC. The way to draw attention, and to achieve instant success it was believed, was to spend big. The team got the attention but not the success. While Patrick Vieira’s side finished the 2017 season in second place in the Eastern Conference, they failed to make it past the Conference semi-finals in the playoffs. When Pirlo, Vieira and Jack Harrison left within the next six months, it was clear NYC FC had missed their chance to turn star power into silverware as the LA Galaxy did with David Beckham, Robbie Keane and co. The difference was that NYC FC found themselves caught in the midst of a league-wide transition. The LA Galaxy approach grew outdated. If MLS 2.0 was defined by the star names that were attracted to North America in the post-Beckham age (Kaka, Didier Drogba, Sebastian Giovinco, Steven Gerrard), MLS 3.0 saw clubs focus on creating their own stars through better scouting and shrewder recruitment. Atlanta United showed the way by ploughing their considerable resources into signing the best young players from South America they could get their hands on, winning MLS Cup in only their second season. Los Angeles FC followed this model when they joined MLS, with NYC FC also altering their strategy to the new landscape. Just two months after Villa left the Bronx for Vissel Kobe in Japan, NYC FC spent $9.1m on promising Romanian forward Alexandru Mitrita and around $4m on Brazilian striker Heber. The following year saw the club sign Uruguayan youngster Nicolas Acevedo for around $3.5m, then came the $8m addition of Vasco de Gama teenager Talles Magno in 2020. The transfer policy at Yankee Stadium had clearly changed. Deila’s appointment as head coach was also proof that NYC FC were taking a different approach. Despite winning back-to-back titles during his time as Celtic manager in Scotland, the Norwegian was an unknown to most MLS fans, unlike Vieira who had a brilliant playing career with Arsenal and France. Deila didn’t even have the links to CFG like Domenec Torrent, Pep Guardiola’s former assistant at Barcelona, Bayern Munich and Manchester City, had. Cut free from the expectations that came with being Manchester City’s American outpost, NYC FC have done a good job of carving out their own identity in recent seasons. Yes, they still play in sky blue and even use the ‘Cityzens’ nickname also used by the Premier League champions, but the loan traffic between the two sister clubs has stopped. There is no suggestion that Guardiola’s successor has been sent to the States to learn his trade, as was the case with Vieira. NYC FC, on the surface, appear to have greater autonomy. There were signs throughout the 2021 regular season, particularly in the final month, that NYC FC were gearing up for a playoff run. Indeed, Deila’s team ended their campaign on a four-match unbeaten run that included a 6-0 thumping of DC United. A strong summer stretch also saw them claim noteworthy wins over the Columbus Crew, Orlando City and the New England Revolution. In Taty Castellanos, NYC FC have the 2021 MLS Golden Boot winner and a player who embodies how they have changed as a club. There wasn’t much fanfare when the young Argentinian arrived in the Bronx on an initial loan deal from Uruguayan club Torque in the summer of 2018, but solid scouting recognised his potential. Good coaching has pushed him even further. Veterans such as Maxi Moralez and Sean Johnson are reliable performers while the likes of Jesus Medina, James Sands, Malte Amundsen, Santiago Rodriguez (on loan) and Keaton Parks give the team a young core. While MLS often suffers from the number of lopsided rosters across the league, a problem exacerbated by the salary cap and other roster restrictions, NYC FC have achieved a good balance. Of course, there is still work to be done. That they still call Yankee Stadium home and play on a field that has no place at the top of North American soccer is an embarrassment. MLS should be grateful that Saturday’s final is taking place at Providence Park and not in the Bronx, as would have been the case had Real Salt Lake won the Western Conference. Nonetheless, the sight of Deila and his players celebrating in Portland on Saturday would be proof of how NYC FC have matured. Growing pains have led to growth. NYC FC had fallen behind the curve, both in terms of their off-the-field approach and on-the-field results, but now find themselves at the vanguard of MLS. Big names might bring attention, but the right names bring trophies.The EU wants gig economy companies such as Uber and Deliveroo to ensure workers get the minimum wage, access to sick pay, holidays and other employment rights under plans for new laws to crack down on fake self-employment. Publishing long-awaited draft legislation on Thursday, the European Commission said the burden of proof on employment status would shift to companies, rather than the individuals that work for them. Until now, gig economy workers have had to go to court to prove they are employees, or risk being denied basic rights. Nicolas Schmit, EU commissioner for jobs and social rights, told the Guardian and other European newspapers that internet platforms “have used grey zones in our legislation [and] all possible ambiguities” to develop their business models, resulting in a “misclassification” of millions of workers. Companies that did not allow people to work for other firms, or had rules about appearance and how to carry out tasks, could be classed as employers, under the proposals, under criteria used to determine employment status. The new rules would not apply to genuinely independent contractors. In the EU’s 27 member states, about 5.5 million workers are misclassified as self-employed, when they should be treated as employees with benefits and protection, such as accident insurance, according the commission. Firms would only have to pay minimum wages, where they already exist. About 28 million people work for platforms in the EU, but this is expected to reach 43 million by 2025. The proposals are an attempt to provide legal certainty, after European courts have been asked to settle about 100 disputes relating to gig economy companies. France, Italy, Spain, Greece and Portugal tightened up domestic laws, but EU officials believe no government has fully addressed the problem. Since Brexit, the UK government has no obligation to follow EU laws, while judges have been left to clarify employment law for a new generation of internet companies. In 2016 an employment court found that Uber drivers are not self-employed and should be paid the minimum wage, a verdict upheld by the supreme court in February. Tim Sharp, senior employment rights policy officer at the Trades Union Congress, said there had not been any “significant government intervention in the UK” to address what unions see as abusive and problematic aspects of platform working. “If the European Union is seen to be taking a robust approach on platform operators, I think there will be more pressure on the government here to take measures to protect vulnerable workers,” he said. The EU proposals will be amended by national ministers and MEPs before they become law. Schmit, a former labour minister in his native Luxembourg, said some services might cost “a bit more”, but argued consumer convenience should not be at the expense of workers. Services, such as food delivery, were not free, he said. “I cannot consider if somebody brings the pizza at 11 o’clock in the evening to my home … that I have not to pay for that. This is a service. And if it’s a service, the guy who performs the service has also rights.” Under the directive, workers would also gain rights over algorithms, to stop situations where people are denied jobs, working hours or even fired as a result of machines’ decisions. Instead, workers would have the right to receive explanations for and contest automated decisions, while companies would have to ensure access to a human contact for anything that would have a significant impact on the person. The European Trade Union Confederation’s Ludovic Voet said the directive should “signal the end of the free for all” for companies such as Uber, Deliveroo and others. “For too long platform companies have made huge profits by dodging their most basic obligations as employers at the expense of workers while peddling the lie that they provided choice to workers,” he said. Companies in the gig economy have taken different approaches. Just Eat Takeaway, a Dutch company that is one of the world’s biggest food delivery firms, announced last year that gig workers would become employees with benefits. MoveEU, a body representing ride-hailing apps, such as Uber, has argued EU action could cost jobs. “Platform work is very diverse, and a one-size-fits-all approach could carry weight on the business model of platforms and ultimately negatively affect the many independent workers relying on them,” it said in a recent paper. George Maier, a specialist on digital technology at the London School of Economics, said companies would have to adapt to stay in markets. “For a lot of these platforms, because they are realising their model is not profitable, there is a big question over what change they can do and what change they can’t do.” “We have seen some evidence of platforms trying to get around the tightening grip of legislation by changing their business model. The alternative is to pull out of a country where they don’t see a profitable future.” • This article was amended on 9 and 10 December 2021 to clarify that gig economy companies such as Deliveroo and Uber would only be covered by the proposed EU legislation if their workers were not classed as genuinely independent contractors.For Dr Rina D’Abramo of the MetroHealth System in Cleveland, it’s difficult when patients in the emergency room tell her they have not been vaccinated. “You can hear it in their voice when you say, ‘Are you vaccinated?’” said D’Abramo, who works at a hospital in the Brecksville suburb. “They shrink down and are like, ‘No. Now I know why I need to be vaccinated.’ ” Unfortunately, there are plenty of people in Ohio and the rest of the US too who have not yet learned that lesson, even as infection rates nationally start to surge again amid fears of the possibly highly contagious new Omicron variant. Ohio is one of the states that has seen the largest recent increases in hospitalizations due to Covid as the number of cases climbs across the country. There has been 19% increase in hospitalizations over the past two weeks in the United States, according to a New York Times analysis of data. Ohio has a daily average of more than 4,400 people hospitalized due to Covid, which ranks fourth among states and represents a 29% increase over the past two weeks. While the increased number of people vaccinated against Covid had inspired hopes that Americans would be able to experience a relatively normal winter, the rise in Covid cases; holiday gatherings; and unanswered questions about the Omicron variant have sparked fresh concerns and warnings from doctors and public health officials in the US. “The yellow caution light has gone on because I think our progress in vaccination has slowed,” said William Schaffner, an infectious diseases expert at Vanderbilt University School of Medicine. Forty percent of the US population has not been fully vaccinated, and the number of doses administered each day has decreased from about 3.3m in April to about 1.7m today, according to the Times. Ohio is surrounded by states that have also seen a recent surge in Covid cases and hospitalizations. Pennsylvania and Michigan each have a daily average of more than 4,500 patients hospitalized, representing a more than 20% increase over the past two weeks. Illinois and Indiana have seen a 49% increase in hospitalizations. D’Abramo diagnoses about 10 patients daily with Covid, and about 98% of them are unvaccinated, she said. That trend has strained the capacity of hospitals in the Cleveland area. MetroHealth, Cleveland Clinic and University Hospitals announced last week that the surge has forced them to postpone some non-urgent surgeries. “This action frees resources for patients with immediate and life-threatening needs and manages the demands on frontline caregivers, who have served with distinction throughout the pandemic,” reads a joint announcement. At Beaumont Health, the largest healthcare system in Michigan, the emergency room and other parts of the hospital are full, primarily with patients who are not vaccinated, said Dr Matthew Sims, a Beaumont physician and director of infectious disease research. “With Covid patients, they have to be in rooms. You can’t go into overload conditions where you turn conferences rooms into emergency rooms or hallways into wards. You can’t do that sort of thing when it’s a contagious disease,” said Sims. Beaumont, like other hospitals in Michigan and across the country, has also had to contend with a staffing shortage. The federal government recently agreed to send 22 healthcare providers to a Beaumont facility in Dearborn and 22 providers to Spectrum Health in Grand Rapids, the Detroit News reported. In addition to the shortage, “everyone who works in healthcare is getting very tired. We have been dealing with this for two years straight, and it wears on us,” said Sims. Doctors continue to not only urge people to get vaccinated against Covid – and for those who are eligible to get a booster shot – but also to encourage people to wear N95 or KN95 masks during indoor gatherings and if possible, to gather outdoors or open doors and windows to improve filtration, said Dr Celine Gounder, an infectious disease specialist and epidemiologist at New York University. Gounder also suggested that people take rapid Covid tests before holiday gatherings. “I think we have chosen one of the most painful paths through the pandemic in this country” because of people’s refusal to get vaccinated, Gounder said. “I think we have prolonged our pain unnecessarily.” Gounder and others now wait for more data on the Omicron variant, which has been detected in 19 states and 50 countries, National Public Radio reported Tuesday. Researchers in South Africa have reported that Omicron may be more infectious but less severe than other forms of the virus. While Schaffner emphasized that we are still awaiting more information, if the variant proves more infectious and much less likely to produce hospitalization, “then Omicron might actually be a bonus because we would be vaccinating, but Omicron would also be spreading among the unvaccinated, making them mildly ill and offering them some protection.” That “would get us closer, faster, to so-called herd immunity, which would lead us to a more endemic circumstance,” rather than a pandemic, Schaffner said. In the meantime, D’Abramo, the Ohio emergency physician, continues to grapple with the pandemic inside and outside her hospital. Two unvaccinated friends with a 10-year-old child recently became very sick with Covid, she said. The wife remains on an ECMO life support machine; the husband was hospitalized for two weeks and is now home. “To me, that’s a tragedy. There is no way to say she wouldn’t have gotten sick if she was vaccinated, but most likely, she wouldn’t have,” D’Abramo said. At the hospital, she routinely has Covid patients waiting for beds in the intensive care unit. D’Abramo must decide whether to intubate them and connect them to a ventilator. “I don’t ever come home from a shift and be like, ‘That was a nice, normal shift.’” D’Abramo said. “It’s nonstop and it does kind of feel like you get beat down because you are getting beat down by something that I thought would maybe be over this winter.”There is something about the very English muddle of regulations, codes and standards that has set the quality of housing in this country on a race to the bottom. There are rules to ensure that a bare minimum of space, light and ventilation is provided, but, such are the commercial forces driving the industry, these minimum levels also serve as the maximum. Meeting the barely habitable baseline standard becomes the default goal. Bedrooms are sized to contain a bed, and not much else. Hallways are just wide enough to allow escape in the event of a fire, ceilings just high enough that you don’t bang your head. Windows are the smallest size possible to avoid too much heat escaping, while letting in a small chink of daylight. Lacking a minimum area, it is often the living room – where you might spend the most time – that bears the brunt of the squeeze, cut down to the meanest sofa-shaped sliver. The straitjacket of codes gives architects and their clients little other option, they say, particularly when working within the constrained budgets of local authority housing. But that’s not entirely true, as a new affordable housing block in east London goes to show. Built by the borough of Barking and Dagenham’s housing company, Be First, with the help of arts charity Create, it demonstrates how all the standards can be met and all the boxes ticked, while offering a radically open, flexible and light-flooded model of living – without costing the council a penny more to build. “We see it as a built research project,” says Nicholas Lobo Brennan of Apparata architects, standing in the lofty open-plan living area of one of the 12 new flats in the striking concrete building, which will provide affordable homes for artists. “There is so much bad housing being built in the UK, mostly the product of a totally risk-averse procurement culture. We want this project to be a wake-up call for the industry, to show it’s possible to do it differently.” There is a reason this project differs from the norm, but it shouldn’t be allowed to remain an anomaly. Dubbed A House for Artists, it was initiated as part of the council’s wider strategy to attract artists to move the borough, and retain those that are already there. “Barking not Berlin,” was council leader Darren Rodwell’s rallying cry when he launched London’s first artist enterprise zone in 2016, pledging to put “art in the heart” of regeneration. There has since been a flurry of new studios and workspaces, and two big new film and TV studios are on the way; the housing project is part of an attempt to make sure the creative workforce is not priced out of the area in the process. It is an unusual model. The 12 artist tenants, who have been selected from across London by a panel including Grayson Perry (who is making a permanent artwork for the site), will pay 65% of market rent in exchange for contributing to a community-facing arts programme in the ground floor of the building. “It could be anything from running homework clubs to dance sessions,” says Diana Ibáñez López, senior curator at Create, “or from video editing workshops to repair cafes. It’s not a gallery for exhibiting their work, but a public room for hosting a long-term, free programme that responds to local needs.” The artists range from people in their early 20s to mid-70s, working in everything from theatre and photography, to clothing, sculpture and film-making, from self-taught makers, to someone with a professorship, and some on incomes that would be too low to qualify for affordable housing. Create will work with them for the first two years to facilitate the public programme, before leaving the group to self-organise. The idea, they say, is to avoid the common phenomenon of artists acting as gentrifying agents, whereby their presence contributes to raising property values but has little benefit for existing residents. “How can they be embedded in the community,” asks Ibáñez López, “and give something back?” The building is a bold arrival, standing on the edge of Barking town centre as a stark stack of chiselled concrete forms. It looks like an oversized model, as if made from a set of primary-shaped toy building blocks of the kind children might be given to play with at an austere Swiss kindergarten. Neat rectangles are carefully arranged to form a grid, offset by the whimsical placement of triangles and circular cutouts, giving it the look of a creature peering around the corner, raised on sturdy legs, one ear cocked. The hoardings came down this week and it’s already become a local selfie-magnet. If it looks like something from more Teutonic climes, there’s a reason. Lobo Brennan and his partner Astrid Smitham spent several years working and teaching in Switzerland, absorbing a love of rigorous planning, structural logic and carefully poured concrete, before returning to London to found their practice in 2015. They bring not just Swiss precision, but a refreshing outsider’s approach to the maze of English regs and standards, starting from first principles rather than just doing what’s always been done. This is their first project on this scale and it shows an obsessive level of attention to the practical details of planning and construction, squeezing the tight budget as far as it will go. The typical arrival at a new apartment block in England can be grim. You often enter an artificially lit lobby, which leads to a windowless stairwell and, in turn, to a long windowless corridor loaded with single-aspect flats on either side, each home enjoying a view out in just one direction. But here, you are taken up an outdoor staircase and along broad red-tiled decks, wide enough for furniture and plants, each shared by just three flats, to reach your front door. Huge openable windows bring light flooding in from both sides, while the usual hallway has been banished, giving more space to the open-plan living room and kitchen. “Usually a big chunk of a modern apartment is eaten out by the hallway,” says Smitham, “and you’re left with meaner individual rooms. But we’ve designed these flats so the area that would be given to the hall can become an extra bedroom instead, or a study, or simply make a much bigger living area.” The flats meet the usual London space standards, but they feel vast, helped by 2.8 metre high ceilings (up from the mandatory 2.5 metres). Partition walls between bedrooms have been designed to be easily removed (they are electricity socket-free), while the bare ceilings mean additional walls can also be added anywhere to suit tenants’ needs. The kitchen, designed as a single movable unit, can be easily plumbed in at any point along the wall. The layout is not only more open and adaptable, but safer, too: the bedrooms lead on to another balcony deck at the back, providing a secondary means of escape in the event of a fire. The original competition brief called for co-housing, but Apparata won the project because theirs was the most practical and flexible model for how people actually live, with sharing “optional, not enforced”. One floor has been conceived as the potential co-housing level, with big double doors in the party walls between the flats, allowing three neighbours’ living rooms to be joined up – for shared childcare, co-working or simply having an amazing party in a warehouse-sized space. Another flat enjoys a double-height room in one of the quirky triangular volumes, allowing the potential for a mezzanine, and its own patio for messy outdoor work. “Most contemporary housing is still designed around the model of the nuclear family,” says Smitham, “but that doesn’t reflect the diverse configuration of people’s lives today.” She describes how their design can accommodate multiple arrangements, from caring for an elderly relative, to housing extended families, to catering to a more communal way of living. As local authorities increasingly have to accommodate diverse family needs, this is an ideal blueprint for 21st-century council housing, adaptable for the long term and future-proofed for any scenario. It may all sound like an experimental one-off, but this building is eminently replicable and, in the words of the council’s maintenance department, “a compliance dream”. It has been built with entirely off-the-peg components and standard building methods that Lobo Brennan says “any contractor could do”. Avoiding the usual waste of additional cladding and linings, the structure has been stripped back to the raw concrete envelope, which does every job (and has a low cement content, cutting the building’s embodied carbon footprint to 20% less than the RIBA’s 2030 target). It was cast with reusable metal formwork, without the usual sacrificial layer of plywood. As a result of these savings and the efficient layout, the overall construction cost was lower than usual for the borough’s affordable housing programme, while providing much more generous homes. In a curious way, the special status of the artist residents – classified in mayoral reports as a kind of fragile endangered species, pushed out of London by rising rents – has been a useful Trojan horse to ensure the high quality of these homes. When cost-cutting kicked in, and the business-as-usual approach threatened to take over, the nature of the tenants could be used as ammunition to argue for things such as bigger windows, higher ceilings and more robust finishes. It reflects the sorry reality of UK procurement culture that such things should be deemed special, a luxury for creatives. “It’s not just artists that should have light, generous, affordable homes,” says Lobo Brennan. “This kind of quality should be available to anyone.” If other councils and housebuilders take note of Apparata’s radically practical innovations in Barking, it could well be.About 3,000 graduate workers at Columbia University in New York City, who have been on strike since 3 November, recently received an email from the university human resources department threatening the workers with replacement if they continue striking. The strike is the largest active strike in the US. The email, sent on 2 December by Columbia University human resources vice-president Dave Driscoll, informed workers their positions would be replaced if they continue striking past 10 December. “Our interpretation of this email is that it’s basically a threat. They are saying here’s the date, December 10. If you’re still exercising your right to engage in protected activity on or after December 10 there’s no guarantee that you’re going to get your job back. So we think that’s the intention of the threat, but we also think that what they’re doing is unlawful,” said Ethan Jacobs, a graduate student worker in the philosophy department at Columbia University and a member of the GWC-UAW Local 2110 bargaining committee. Jacobs described the unfair labor practice charges filed by the union against the university with the National Labor Relations Board. They include the university enacting a wage freeze and changing wage disbursement schedules earlier this year without negotiating with the union after its members rejected a tentative agreement after a strike in the 2021 spring semester. According to the National Labor Relations Act, workers who strike to protest unfair labor practices cannot be discharged or permanently replaced. Jacobs expressed the union’s intent to file additional charges with the NLRB over the university’s threat to replace workers on strike. Graduate workers have been on strike over improved compensation to cover the high cost of living in New York City, a third-party arbitration process for harassment and discrimination complaints and improved healthcare plans for student workers, including dental care and vision coverage. “Columbia University operates like these early 20th century company towns. For example, I live in an apartment that is owned by Columbia, so the university is also my landlord. They are the source of my health insurance, the source of my job, the source of my academic progress. In nearly every aspect of my life, Columbia has some sort of say in how that goes and that’s really problematic,” added Jacobs. Over the past several years, graduate student workers at Columbia University have fought for a first union contract with the university, after securing a ruling by the NLRB in 2016 that affirmed graduate students are employees with the right to unionize. Workers are pushing for a wage floor of $45,000 annually for first-year doctoral students on one-year appointments and a minimum hourly wage of $26 for hourly workers. Current wages vary by department from as low as $29,000 annually for student workers at the School of Social Work to $41,500 for engineering student workers. The hourly minimum wage at the school is $15. “The pay structure we have now is the subject of our second unfair labor practice charge. We used to get paid in a lump sum at the beginning of the semester. Our pay was never enough to begin with, but people could budget around it,” said Jonathan Ben-Menachem, a graduate student worker in the Department of Sociology, who noted student workers have been forced to sign an attestation form that they were not striking in order to receive pay during the strike. Columbia University received returns on their endowment of 32.3% in fiscal year 2021, increasing the school’s endowment value to $14.35bn and ending the fiscal year with a $150m operating surplus, recovering from initial financial losses incurred by the Covid-19 pandemic. Tamara Hache, a graduate student worker in the Latin American and Iberian cultures department and an international student, expressed concerns over the threat of replacement and its impact on the university as a whole, including international students who cannot work outside the university. “This measure the university is trying to carry out, of this threat, would be incredibly destructive for everyone at the university. It wouldn’t just affect us as graduate student workers, but everyone. The quality of our students’ education and our departments would be terribly impacted,” said Hache. In response to the threat of replacement, the union is rallying support from undergraduate students, parents, alumni, faculty and the public, and have held protests. Columbia University said in a statement, “In the face of enormously trying circumstances created by the strike, our first priority is the academic progress of our students, particularly undergraduates whose classes are being disrupted. The message sent last week to the union bargaining committee explaining the university’s approach to spring appointments and teaching assignments was necessary to fulfill that commitment. Replacing instructors who leave the classroom is permitted by US labor law. With respect to striking student workers who return to work after December 10, we will make every effort to provide them with suitable positions, as available.”In a warehouse by Farringdon station, in central London, I am watching people burn through millions of pounds of investment in real time. Great big stacks of cash, all bet on the assumption that the future of grocery shopping will be app-enabled and delivered to our homes in less time than it takes to brew a cup of tea. Here, at the ultrafast grocery delivery startup Gorillas, workers push trolleys around a so-called micro-fulfilment centre, selecting food and toiletries and alcohol to be delivered by e-bicycling couriers in 10 minutes flat. I am being shown around by the commercial director, Matthew Nobbs. “Imagine you go to a standard supermarket for breakfast,” says Nobbs, over the pounding dance music. “I’m going to have to go all the way to the bakery aisle for my croissants, and now I need some jam, so I have to go to the store cupboard aisle, and now I need some bacon, so I have to go back to the chiller. Or, I can just go on an app, and order what I need.” We pass the fresh produce. “Look at that for an apple!” says Nobbs, palming a Pink Lady with an evangelical flicker in his eye. (In fairness, its skin is so glossy it could be lacquered.) The at-home ultra-rapid grocery-delivery revolution is the latest iteration of our mania for eliminating analogue inconveniences from our daily routines, via apps and an army of often low-paid workers. In scarcely a year, a wave of companies have landed in the UK. In addition to Gorillas, there is Zapp, Getir, Weezy, Jiffy, GoPuff and Yango Deli, while Deliveroo recently announced a partnership with Waitrose. (According to the upmarket supermarket, avocados are among its most-requested items for urgent home delivery – cue much eye-rolling at the prospect of emergency avocados.) These startups envisage a world in which the wealthy move through the world seamlessly, unencumbered by anything as tedious as bags of shopping. Since launching in March this year, Gorillas has opened 25 sites in London alone, in addition to centres in Southampton, Manchester, Cambridge and Nottingham. “It’s been steep, aggressive growth,” says Nobbs. He won’t disclose information about Gorillas’ target demographic, or user numbers. (Globally, the company has delivered more than 4.5m orders.) “They’re people who are interested in fresh products; they’re interested in local; they’re invested in quality,” he says vaguely. But looking around the shelves, which feature five types of oat milk, and slow-churned gelato, it’s not hard to guess. These are what we increasingly call the “time-poor”, meaning city-dwelling professionals with plenty of disposable income. Gorillas’ most commonly ordered products are bottled water, alcohol, bananas and – of course – avocados. For the convenience, users pay a markup, plus a £1.80 delivery fee. Prices are considerably higher than a big supermarket. A tub of Ben &amp; Jerry’s ice-cream costs £5 from Gorillas, but £2.75 from Asda; a Pizza Express pizza is £5.50 from Gorillas; £3.75 from Asda. “Our pricing is great value,” says Nobbs, “but we don’t yet have the volumes a supermarket will.” The founders of these apps are staking large sums in the hope their returns will be as lush and green as the flesh on their famed avocados. Already, Gorillas has achieved a $2.1bn (£1.6bn) valuation, despite the fact that it was founded only last year, has burned through hundreds of millions of pounds in investment and is not even close to turning a profit. The overall experience of shopping from these apps can feel like meeting Tom Ripley in an Italian holiday resort: too good to be true, and therefore somewhat sinister. As they are mostly financed by venture capitalists with deep pockets, consumers currently enjoy unbelievable value. “It feels very reminiscent of that period of madness when Uber first arrived in the UK,” says Dr Jamie Woodcock, author of The Fight Against Platform Capitalism. “They spent vast amounts of money fighting to get new customers on board.” Discount codes are ubiquitous; early adopters can flit between apps to make the most of generous signup incentives. “Getir did by far the most ridiculous offer I have ever seen,” says Matt Taylor, a 31-year-old product manager from London, dreamily. “Spend £16 and get £15 off. I bought a whole roast dinner for a quid.” I order from a variety of apps, always using a discount code that gives at least 50% off. Gorillas’ arrives in 12 minutes and is handed to me by a smiling courier on an electric bike. Inside is a free tote and a banana. GoPuff takes 20 minutes, but its grapes are firm five days later, which, in an era of supply-chain delays, seems nothing short of miraculous. (The chicken I order, however, is so watery as to be inedible.) Zapp has a limited selection – many items are out of stock – but my groceries arrive in 15 minutes, with a free bag of sweets. Testing these apps, I recognise within myself a quality I do not like: the realisation that while it’s nice not to have to walk to the shops in the rain, the next time I do I’ll likely feel put upon in a way I did not previously. My only comparable frame of reference is the one time I flew business class. It’s a feeling Woodcock recognises. “I never got a cab before Uber. Whenever I did I regretted it, because it cost me an arm and a leg. Now people get Ubers all the time. It’s changed our relationship to transport. And I do think there is a chance this will change our relationship to shopping.” Whether these apps will prove to be durable in the long term is unclear. Uber has yet to turn a net profit; Deliveroo’s much-hyped stock market debut in March was a flop. “Investors and the public mistakenly think that as soon as you create an app, profits will magically emerge,” says Prof Annabelle Gawer, director of the Centre of Digital Economy at the University of Surrey. After all, the concept of grocery deliveries is not new. “People have done that for decades,” Gawer says. In the 20th century, butchers’ boys would deliver orders on bikes. In the 90s, at the height of the dotcom boom, the California firm Webvan pioneered a rapid grocery delivery service. It was briefly valued at $7.9bn, before going bust. “Platformising a bad business,” says Gawer, “does not make it a good business.” The most successful platforms, such as Facebook or Airbnb, do not hold inventory. But most of the ultrafast grocery apps have so-called “dark shops” – warehouses in city centres – that are costly to run (Deliveroo and UberEats have partnerships with supermarkets and convenience stores). “When we talk about getting physical stuff and driving it to people,” says Gawer, “the industry you are disrupting is not the industry of the supermarket itself, but that of local delivery. But delivery has never been a profitable industry.” She expects that there will be a consolidation of the market, as the bigger apps acquire their competitors – in November, Getir bought rival firm Weezy. Prices are likely to go up as the apps strive for profitability, in the same way that Ubers in London can now cost as much as black cabs. “They start dirt cheap,” says Gawer, “and give you something for nothing, to build an audience. Eventually it’s not sustainable. Something has to give. So they raise prices.” But Nobbs insists this is not Gorillas’ plan. “If we put our prices up,” he says, “customers won’t stick around for very long … it’s a cut-throat market, retail. If you don’t get it right, people will go elsewhere.” For now, the venture capitalists have spread before city-dwellers a generous bounty. “They’re trying to dominate the market through capital,” Taylor says. “So I think, how can I abuse this as much as possible? I feel like Robin Hood.” But what is the social and environmental cost of this 21st-century infatuation with convenience? The word “disruption” is often bandied around by these apps’ founders. “We are incredibly excited to continue our journey in disrupting the skyrocketing ultrafast grocery market,” said Kristof Van Beveren, CEO of Weezy, in November. “Disruption can be good, and it can be bad,” says Gawer. “Some sectors have inefficiencies. Some firms don’t deliver a good service and get paid too much … if you are able to undercut your competitors, keep the quality of the product good and don’t transform your workers into slaves, bravo.” The gig economy has long been criticised for exploitative labour practices. Workers for platforms such as Deliveroo and UberEats are self-employed, meaning that they do not qualify for pensions, sick leave, annual leave or parental leave. “These are shitty jobs,” says Gawer, “which are really non-jobs, because the person doesn’t even have the status of an employee.” When Waitrose announced its partnership with Deliveroo, it said that it had “lengthy discussions” with the platform and “received assurances about its self-employment model and its rider fees”. In practice, it is unclear what this means. “I can probably take 60 or 70 litres on my back,” says Andy (not his real name), a 25-year-old Deliveroo rider from Northamptonshire, “because I’ve got strong shoulder blades. But it’s the damage you do to the bike. The back wheel buckles.” Andy frequently delivers groceries from the Co-op and Morrisons, but says that when working for Deliveroo, its algorithm does not take into account the weight of the items, meaning he sometimes has to reject orders that are too heavy. Last year, during lockdown, he made as little as £8 an hour, which is below the minimum wage; now things are busier, it’s between £10 and £12. “There are some days you can feel down about it,” says Andy, of the low pay. Some of the new ultra-rapid apps distance themselves from these earlier offerings. “They’ve got a different proposition,” says Nobbs. In the UK, Gorillas’ workers are on full-time employment contracts and paid £11.50 an hour, which is above the “national living wage” (NLW). “It’s part of our founder’s vision that everyone should be employed,” says Nobbs. When I accost the Gorillas rider dropping off my delivery, he seems genuinely happy to work for the company. “It’s the best courier job I’ve had,” he says. The fact that some, if not all, of these platforms avoid the worst practices of gig economy apps – Getir says it has created 3,000 full-time employee positions in the UK, paying the NLW; it also offers riders pension contributions and paid leave, as does Jiffy – is significant. “If you had said to me five years ago,” says Woodcock, “that new companies wouldn’t be using self-employed workers, that would have felt like a big victory. Some of the arguments about the state of the gig economy have clearly gotten through, and people are realising that the model of forcing people to be self-employed doesn’t work.” But Gorillas has been accused of union busting in Germany, where the company is headquartered. “All of these platforms are incredibly anti-union,” says Woodcock. When I ask Nobbs whether he would be happy for Gorillas workers to form a union, he declines to answer; later, a spokesperson emails that: “It has always been in our core values to create a positive environment for our crew so we will always examine all the options to ensure we offer the best working conditions possible.” Gorillas also subcontracts out to another courier company when it is busy or setting up new facilities. It is unclear whether these subcontracted workers are employees with benefits, or self-employed. (When asked about this, Nobbs declined to comment.) Then there’s the wider social impact of these apps. Some fear they will drive corner shops out of business, although Chris Noice, of the Association of Convenience Stores, is bullish. “We don’t see them as a fundamental threat,” he says, pointing out that 85% of corner shops are in non-urban areas these apps don’t serve. “People on their way home will still stop at shops to pick up what they need.” There is, too, an environmental cost. While most of the grocery apps use e-mopeds or e-bicycles, a more sustainable method of food shopping would be to walk to the shops. “Only about 37% of our electricity currently comes from renewables,” says Dr Julian Allen, a transport expert at the University of Westminster. “And even if it all did, we would still want to reduce our energy demands.” He points out that riders will be creating congestion, and there will be safety implications. “Many will be under pressure to make fast deliveries,” Allen says, “on vehicles they are not used to using.” On Twitter, angry people tag in the apps, complaining about near-misses with pedestrians. Leaving the micro-fulfilment centre, I am passed by a bus wrapped in a Gorillas decal. At the tube station, I walk past an advert announcing a Gorillas-Tesco partnership. I drink my complimentary smoothie – refreshing, fridge-cold – and contemplate a future in which those who can afford it never have to browse a supermarket aisle again. Many investors have bet that the ease and convenience of these apps will get us hooked on ultrafast grocery deliveries like lab rats on sugar water. Having tried them, I’m sure they’re right. The grocery revolution is coming, and we may be powerless to resist.Sajid Javid has admitted having doubts about whether Covid rules were followed in Downing Street at an event last year alleged to have been a Christmas party. The health secretary said it was right the gathering was being looked into after Allegra Stratton, the prime minister’s then spokesperson, resigned for being caught, in leaked footage, joking about the lack of social distancing there. A string of parties attended by senior government figures have come to light over the past eight days, both from sources who spoke to the Guardian and in other media reports. Javid said he did not know why Stratton had resigned but suggested it may have been out of embarrassment, given the footage shows her laughing and joking with No 10 aides when asked as part of a mock press conference about a party in the building on 18 December. The event took place when London was in tier 2, the “high alert” Covid level, during which time indoor social mixing between households was banned. Javid said the cabinet secretary, Simon Case, would have a “wide remit” to examine whether rules were broken. He said he had had to rely on other people’s assurances there was no party and that no rules were broken, given he was a backbench MP at the time. “I don’t know what actually happened or not,” Javid told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “I think there is a need to have an investigation, because I think there’s enough doubt that’s been thrown on this by the reports and by looking at that video.” The health secretary was firm that the rules “apply equally to everyone”, when asked why people should follow new Covid restrictions announced by the government on Wednesday. He said: “It couldn’t be more important that it is clear at all times that these rules, whatever they are, whether it was back then or the rules we talked about in parliament yesterday, they apply equally to everyone. No one is exempt, no one is above the law on this.” Several of his own backbenchers raised concerns about whether people would stick to the new Covid rules during a heated session in the Commons on Wednesday. A Tory MP said they had “never seen the backbenches like it” with Javid facing most opposition “from his own side” and some government frontbenchers deliberately asking to be given permission to miss the vote next week so they did not have to vote against the government. Given how many parties are now under the spotlight, Javid said Case was “not just looking at a particular date” but “free to look at whatever dates he wants to consider”. Explaining why he was absent from the morning round of broadcast interviews he was lined up on Wednesday, Javid said he had been “upset” by Stratton’s comments. The health secretary said: “I spoke to my colleagues in No 10 and we actually agreed it is best to take some time to respond to the video in the way that the prime minister has now, by ordering an investigation by the cabinet secretary. “And so the idea was to give some space to react but I’m pleased the prime minister has asked for an investigation, and I can see also why so many people would have been upset by that video.”Reviewing Charles and Mary Cowden Clarke’s illustrated edition of Shakespeare’s plays in 1869, an anonymous critic blamed “the numberless alterations, mutilations, corruptions, or whatever we may choose to call them” on Mary, and wished that “the lady editor had refrained from thus tampering with our great poet’s language”. More than 150 years later, the lost work of the female editors of Shakespeare is set to be recovered in a new book which aims to overturn the male-dominated history of his writings. Independent scholar Molly Yarn drew on university and library archives, and the records of government agencies, while writing Shakespeare’s ‘Lady Editors’, which is out on 9 December from Cambridge University Press. She looked at letters, diaries, contracts, ledgers and wills to uncover the contribution women have made to Shakespearean scholarship. “I vastly underestimated how many I would find – I knew of about 20, and probably would have been happy with 30 or 35. Obviously I got more than I bargained for,” says Yarn, who is also associate editor of the Royal Shakespeare Company’s new edition of the Complete Works. “I include 69 editors in the book, but that number should definitely be higher; there are a few that I left out for boring, technical reasons, and I’m sure there are still more to find. There’s much more work to be done in this area.” Yarn pointed to the work of Clara Longworth de Chambrun, who was born Clara Longworth, part of an American political family, and married Aldebert de Chambrun, a descendant of the Marquis de Lafayette, to become the Comtesse de Chambrun. “She earned her doctorate at the Sorbonne at age 48 and was one of the founders of the American Library in Paris, which she helped to keep open during the Nazi occupation. Early on, when Nazi regulations banned Jews from entering the library, the countess and the staff hand-delivered books to Jewish subscribers,” says Yarn. Chambrun edited a 1913 edition of the sonnets. Laura Jewry Valentine, meanwhile, is credited by Yarn as the editor of an 1868 Chandos Classics edition of the works. “I love Laura Jewry Valentine’s story: to go from a naval lieutenant’s daughter, to a governess in India, to a novelist, to a destitute widow, to an editor of Shakespeare – amazing,” says the academic. “I feel so invested in all the women I researched for this project, even the ones whose lives were less obviously ‘exciting’ – many of them were teachers who worked for decades and influenced countless students, and I feel honoured and proud to record and recognise their work.” Yarn said that while some of Shakespeare’s female editors have previously been identified by scholars, this has focused on single editors such as Cowden Clarke, whose 1860 edition of the plays made her Shakespeare’s first female editor, rather than looking at early women editors as a group. Yarn points out that the Cowden Clarkes – perhaps anticipating criticism – write in a preface to Mary’s 1860 edition that: “while the man-editor uses his masculine judgment as to what expressions are fittest to be expunged from a chastened edition of Shakespeare, the woman-editor is not without her use in bringing feminine discernment as an aid and exponent to some of his passages”. They add, pointedly: “It is, perhaps, good and befitting that Shakespeare, who is not so much a man as human – containing in himself the best parts of woman’s as well as man’s nature – should have a woman to assist in editing and analysing him.” Yarn credits her interest in the topic to her former teacher Ann Thompson, one of the general editors of the Arden Shakespeare series and a professor at King’s College London. “During the 80s and 90s, Ann was one of the main voices pointing out the gender gap in Shakespeare editing and articulating the principles of feminist editing,” says Yarn. “The field of Shakespeare editing has really narrowed its gender gap over the last few decades, thanks to a lot of hard work by women like Ann and their allies.” But Yarn believes there is still a lot of work to be done to stop editing being such an exclusive field. “We have a long way to go to improve diversity among editors in terms of race, nationality, religion, sexuality, disability, gender identity, economic and educational background, institutional affiliation, and more,” she says. “These things matter because the editor shapes and presents the text to readers – editing isn’t a neutral task … As I say in my epilogue, now we need to think about how to institute broad, lasting changes, not just focus on metrics like male v female editors in a series.” Shakespeare himself, added Yarn, is unlikely to have been too bothered about being edited by a woman. “On a certain level, I don’t think he would mind – not to say that Shakespeare was particularly feminist, but I personally can’t read a play like Much Ado About Nothing, with a character like Beatrice, without feeling like he definitely appreciated a smart woman. And the development of a play, through writing, performance and publication, was so collaborative during the early modern period, I don’t think he would be offended by the idea of being edited,” she says. “But at the same time, I sort of ... don’t care what he would think. Coming from a theatre background, I’ve grown up with the idea that we start with the text, then we make it ours; and over the years I’ve seen people do plenty of things that Shakespeare might not have liked (or understood) but that I thought were brilliant. We all make our own Shakespeares – his feelings don’t necessarily have much to do with it.”In November 2001, Terry Pratchett was in Chester, famed for its Roman ruins and well-preserved medieval architecture. Staying at a hotel in the city centre, Pratchett opened the window of his room, and looked across the historic skyline. “I realised I could drop down on to a roof,” he wrote later. “And from then on there was a vista of roofs, leads and ledges leading all the way to the end of the street and beyond; there were even little doors and inviting attic windows … There is a line break, and then he adds. “I’m going to have to stop playing this game.” Pratchett was not considering a new career as a cat burglar. He was reflecting on his favourite video game – Thief II: The Metal Age. Released in March 2000, Thief II was the sequel to 1998’s Thief: The Dark Project, a pioneering stealth game set in a gothic fantasy world. In both games, players donned the cowl of Garrett, a laconic master thief partly inspired by Raymond Chandler’s PI Philip Marlowe. Thief charged players with breaking into medieval mansions, rooftop apartments, banks, cathedrals even police stations, stealing as much coin and valuables as they could while avoiding patrols of sword-wielding guards. Pratchett’s relationship with video games is well documented. Always technologically savvy, he was an early adopter of PC gaming, and enjoyed everything from Doom to Deus Ex and Call of Duty. He even helped to create a mod (an unofficial add-on) for The Elder Scrolls IV: Oblivion, writing lines of dialogue for a character. But Pratchett held a particular affection for Thief. He played all three games in the series, and often contributed to a Usenet newsgroup named alt.games.thief-dark-project. That newsgroup, analogous to a modern forum, has long since been deactivated, but its posts survive in a Google groups archive. Combined, they provide a fascinating record of Pratchett’s evolving relationship with both the Thief series and video games in general. Pratchett first appears on the forum in August 2001. Like so many players who become involved in online communities, he posted because he was stuck. In a post titled: “Help! Spotted Every time” he requests assistance with Thief II’s eighth mission Trace the Courier, in which players must follow a Lieutenant of the City Watch as she carries a secret message to an unknown recipient. “Whatever I do, the game ends on the basis that I’ve been spotted – even if, as I head up the slope, I go invisible. Can anyone help, please?” Pratchett wrote. But he soon begins to share his own thoughts on the game. In a post titled: “Favourite Thief II Mission”, he chooses Life of the Party, an expansive level wherein Garrett gatecrashes an extravagant reception hosted inside a vast, mechanised tower, infiltrating the structure via the city’s rooftops. “Life of the Party before you get to the tower seemed to me what [Thief] should all be about,” he wrote. “High above the city in a world of your own, exploring every opportunity, with no other goal than ‘nick anything you find’, and the sounds of the Watch are floating up from below …” Pratchett liked that Thief II was a game that you could finish without killing anyone, which appealed to his personal morals. “I get edgy in games that require killing as an objective,” he wrote in July 2002. “But being able to hide from guards who appear to have amazing acuity sometimes is a talent in itself.” He also liked that Thief II let you solve its problems at your own pace, and in your own way. “I think a game goes wrong when you start to fight the programmer rather than the game,” he observes. “The Thief games are good in this respect – there are plenty of problems, but they can be solved by forethought, care, cunning, lateral thinking or running like hell.” There was shared lineage between Thief’s nameless city and Pratchett’s own work in the Discworld novels. Both take popular fantasy tropes and recontextualise them into a more human world, unafraid to explore the weirder edges of fantasy. Thief’s bumbling, grumbling guards share certain traits with Pratchett’s own motley crew of city watchmen. Pratchett was fascinated by Thief’s rich and distinctive atmosphere. “I wonder what the quintessential ‘Thief’ quality is? The sense of ‘being there’? The feeling of free exploration?’” he pondered in 2003. “THE Thief moment was me dreamily roping my way from beam to beam across that big hall in the Bank, while below me the guards patrolled. No other game has offered that, although Deus Ex had its moments.” Posting under his own name, Pratchett’s presence on the forums did not go unnoticed by the wider community. “Having Terry involved was a very cool experience,” says David Geelan, an associate professor at Australia’s Griffith University, and a contributor to the alt.games Thief forum during the same period as Pratchett. “This was an early example of an author I was a big fan of engaging with something else I loved.” This sentiment is shared by another user, Mika Latokartano. “Being a big fan of Discworld novels, it was naturally great to see him on the forums and to be able to exchange a few words with a world-famous author.” It’s worth pausing at this point to ask: how did the community know this was the real Terry Pratchett, and not some impostor masquerading as the author for a jape? Geelan points out that Pratchett didn’t make a big deal out of his identity, and his purpose on the forums appeared earnest. Geelan believed he could “recognise [Pratchett’s] ‘voice’ from both the novels and the various interviews with him I’d read and seen.” The most compelling evidence, however, is the email attached to that particular usenet account - tpratchett@unseen.demon.co.uk – an account fans had used to send emails to Pratchett since the early 90s. “I tried to be cool and just be a fellow gamer and not behave like a fan,” Geelan says. Nonetheless, the community sometimes couldn’t help but wonder about the relationship between Discworld and Thief. Pratchett addressed their questions patiently but definitively. When one community member asked whether Pratchett had spotted any references to Discworld in Thief, he answered: “I’ve been careful not to look for DW references. There’re quite a few similarities between the city and Ankh-Morpork but that is because they’re drawing on the same general tradition.” When another user asked whether any of Thief had inspired Ankh-Morpork, Pratchett was a touch more sarcastic. “Well, sure. From now on I’ll definitely set my books in a quasi-medieval city with anachronistic modern touches, like a police force, and I’ll definitely have these guys who wear black and sneak around the rooftops)”. That said, Pratchett makes minor nods to Thief in some later Discworld novels, such as Night Watch. In July 2002, months before the book’s launch, Pratchett mentions a “moment” that is “only a reference for taffers” (a slang insult used by Thief’s guards). “A corridor, one lamp out, barely any shadow … you’ll see,” he teases. Thief II was Pratchett’s first experience with the series, and his favourite. He called The Dark Project “Tomb Raider with edged weapons”. The third game, Deadly Shadows, didn’t come out until 2004. “I sure hope T3 takes after T2,” he wrote in December 2001. “The ‘genius’ of the Thief world is in levels like The Bank, or Life of the Party – proper honest thieving.” Deadly Shadows didn’t quite live up to Pratchett’s expectations, but he praised the game’s most famous mission – Robbing the Cradle – for its intense atmosphere and cunning use of horror. “I’ve always said I play Thief for the immersion, but on that one I came closer to drowning,” he wrote about the infamous orphanage-turned-insane-asylum. “Insofar as it does exactly the job it sets out to do, this is a wonderful level.” Outside Thief II, Pratchett’s favourite Thief experiences were delivered by Fan Missions, or FMs. Thief has a small but dedicated community which, over the years, has created hundreds of custom maps for the game. Many of these are enormously ambitious, and Pratchett frequently praises the talent on show in FMs such as Durant, Lord Alan’s Fortress, and Calendra’s Legacy. “I can’t help being amazed again at the quality of so many FMs.” he wrote in July 2003. “I recently played through T2, and some original missions paled by comparison.” Pratchett continued posting until the end of 2006. By this point, he’d been introduced to Elder Scrolls IV: Oblivion, a fantasy RPG that featured stealth systems similar to Thief, but in a much larger world to explore. Ironically, it was a user of the Thief forums who put Pratchett on to Oblivion. In April 2006, Mika Latokartano asked Pratchett: “Have you tried Oblivion yet?”, to which he responded: “No, but it’s now been ordered.” Two days later, Pratchett posted again, writing “Aaargh! What have you done to me? Bought the game on your recommendation, and now I see my life slipping away.” Pratchett’s posts on the alt.games Thief forum are a unique record. Not only do they evidence in detail an artist’s heartfelt affection for another type of art, they also represent a mode of interaction between a creator and fans that is far less viable in the age of mass social media. Geelan, who around this time also frequented a cyberpunk forum visited by William Gibson, notes that “authors could react more directly with the few hundred or couple of thousand people who might have been on a web forum or usenet group in the mid 90s, than with the millions or tens of millions who would want that contact now.” On the alt.games newsgroup, Pratchett may have been posting as a famous writer, but he was also posting as a fan, with all the unabashed enthusiasm, obsession with minor details, and debates that entailed. Thief established common ground between him and the rest of the community, allowing them to talk on level terms, and share in the devious delights the game offered. Nothing demonstrates this better than a post he made in June 2002, titled “Back in the dark”. “Brothers and sisters, I hay-ave sinned,” Pratchett began. “I forsook the true path, and took the way of Medal of Honour, Return to Castle Wolfenstein and even of Alien v. Predator 2, for the new games machine here was top of the line. “And then I reloaded T2 the other night, and how nice and calm it all is. Just me, the night, the occasional jingle of a key, and the thwop of blackjack on helmet. Here’s to stealth gaming. I’m back.”The price of a pint could rise by about 10p as a result of the latest Covid restrictions, according to the chairman of the City Pub Group who said Christmas party cancellations had risen since the move to plan B was announced on Wednesday. Clive Watson said the cost of a pint was already on course to rise by about 25p as a result of higher costs, including energy and wage bills, but that weaker than expecting trading over the key Christmas period would lead to further hikes. “From about 10 days ago, office parties started to get cancelled, particularly those office parties which were being funded by companies, so typically parties for 40 to 50 people,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. While some companies had postponed their celebrations until the new year when there may be more certainty, others had cancelled their parties outright. “After yesterday’s announcement, that has again accelerated, so we’ve seen … a meaningful drop off in those types of bookings”, Watson said. It could result in further pain for chains such as City Pub Group, which has 50 pubs in market towns and cities nationwide. “Not only are you not making the money, but you’re not building out the cash to help you in the very lean periods in January and February … It’s almost like just taking off the life support machine,” he said. “Energy prices have gone through the roof. Labour prices … have also gone up significantly. Inflation is running at 5%. A price of beer in London could be £5. So that comes out at 25p but probably has to increase even more over the course next year. “But … now we haven’t got the Christmas froth that we were anticipating and somehow we have got to try and recoup that,” Watson said. “[So that’s] probably another 10p.” He joined a chorus of hospitality bosses now calling for government support to help prop up the sector amid restrictions that include work-from-home orders, which could reduce footfall in city centre establishments over the crucial Christmas period, which makes up a third of some businesses’ annual profits. Watson said he did not oppose the introduction of public health measures, but wanted proportionate assistance from the chancellor, Rishi Sunak. “If that helps slow down the progress of this horrible variant, fine. But please, please give us an enhanced state aid to help tide us over to those leaner months in January and February. Otherwise, a lot of businesses in our sector will run out of cash,” Watson said.Shoppers have been warned to be wary of texts claiming to be from courier companies this Christmas, as one bank revealed the majority of fraud cases starting with an SMS involve fake deliveries. Since the pandemic began there has been a leap in the number of fraudulent texts telling people that they are due a delivery and asking them to click on a link and input personal details. Once the information has been harvested by the scammers, victims are typically called and persuaded that they are speaking to their bank’s fraud department and that they need to move money into a “safe account”. These transfers make up 20% of all fraud losses, with victims losing an average of £4,500 each. TSB said its internal data showed that in October, 81% of scams beginning with a text message involved an SMS claiming to be from a delivery firm. Royal Mail was the most impersonated delivery company, accounting for 62% of the cases it dealt with, followed by DPD (19%) and Hermes (15%). With consumers expected to do billions of pounds worth of shopping online this year, there are fears that people waiting for a parcel to arrive could be caught out. Earlier this year, the Guardian highlighted the cases of readers who had been defrauded through delivery scams, including one who was persuaded to move £35,000 to what she was persuaded was a safe account. Paul Davis, director of fraud prevention at TSB, said: “Clicking on a link in an SMS might seem like a small act, but it could be the beginning of your life savings being stolen from you. “It’s important to remain on guard. Never input personal details into an SMS link, and certainly not your card details. Spread the word – don’t let a fraudster ruin your Christmas.”In an interview with the Hollywood Reporter, James Bond producer, Barbara Broccoli was asked who should next replace Daniel Craig in the franchise. She said: “He should be British and any [ethnicity or race].” We would like to hear your thoughts on which British actor you think should be the next James Bond? Why do you think they would be well-suited for the role? Share your suggestions You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.I’m often asked how I keep up with the news. Obviously, I avoid the unhinged rightwing outlets pushing misinformation, disinformation and poisonous lies. But I’ve also grown wary of the mainstream media – not because it peddles “fake news” but because of three more subtle biases. First, it often favors the status quo. Mainstream journalists wanting to appear serious about public policy rip into progressives for the costs of their proposals, but never ask self-styled “moderates” how they plan to cope with the costs of doing nothing or doing too little about the same problems. A Green New Deal might be expensive but doing nothing about the climate crisis will almost certainly cost far more. Medicare for All will cost a lot, but the price of doing nothing about America’s cruel and dysfunctional healthcare system will soon be in the stratosphere. Second, it fails to report critical public choices. Any day now, the Senate will approve giving $778bn to the military for this fiscal year. That’s billions more than the Pentagon sought. It’s four times the size of Biden’s Build Back Better bill, which comes to around $175bn a year. But where’s the reporting on the effects of this spending on the national debt, or on inflation, or whether it’s even necessary? Third, it indulges in false equivalence, claiming that certain Republican and Democratic lawmakers are emerging as “troublemakers” within their parties or that extremists “on both sides” are “radicalizing each other”. These reports equate Republican lawmakers who are actively promoting Donald Trump’s big lie that the 2020 election was stolen with Democratic lawmakers who are fighting to protect voting rights. These are not equivalent. Trump’s big lie is a direct challenge to American democracy. In the looming fight over whether to preserve the Senate filibuster, the mainstream media gives equal weight to both sides’ claims of radicalism. But ask yourself which is more radical – abolishing the filibuster to save American democracy or destroying American democracy to save the filibuster? The old labels “left” versus “right” are fast becoming outdated. Today, it’s democracy versus authoritarianism. Equating them is misleading and dangerous. Why doesn’t the mainstream media see this? Not just because of its dependence on corporate money. I think the source of the bias is more subtle. Top editors and reporters, usually based in New York and Washington, want to be accepted into the circles of the powerful – not only for sources of news but also because such acceptance is psychologically seductive. It confers a degree of success. But once accepted, they can’t help but begin to see the world through the eyes of the powerful. I follow the mainstream media, but I don’t limit myself to it. And I don’t rely on it to educate the public about bold, progressive ideas that would make America and the world fairer and stronger. I read the Guardian, every day.The Pentagon has asked a Washington thinktank to draw up a report on the future of the US intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) programme and deliver it before the end of January. The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace (CEIP) will present options based on three rounds of virtual consultations, which began on Tuesday, between Pentagon officials, nuclear weapons experts and arms control advocates. Critics say the Carnegie Endowment consultations and its final report fall far short of an independent assessment that some congressional Democrats had demanded, scrutinising the main options: extending the life of the current ICBM, the Minuteman III, for a few years; or developing a totally new $100bn missile, known as the Ground Based Strategic Deterrent (GBSD). “As one of the individuals who was invited to be part of the first virtual consultation that CEIP organised yesterday [the first of three], I can say quite assuredly, that it’s not a substitute for the independent cost evaluation comparing the Minuteman III extension and the GBSD program,” said Daryl Kimball, the executive director of the Arms Control Association. Arms control advocates fear that Biden will not keep his pledge to reduce the role of nuclear weapons in US defence planning, and that the president will be boxed in by a set of options drawn up by nuclear hawks in the Pentagon in the 2022 Nuclear Posture Review (NPR). The role of the CEIP was laid out in a letter from Colin Kahl, the undersecretary of defence for policy, to the Democratic senator Ed Markey, and a series of Pentagon responses to Markey’s follow-up questions about the NPR. “The department has … tasked the Carnegie Endowment to conduct an external study of diverse views on the intercontinental ballistic missile leg of the nuclear triad to inform the NPR,” Markey was told. However, by the time the Carnegie Endowment delivers its report, in late January, the NPR is due to be delivered to the White House, raising questions on whether its findings will have any influence on decisions about the future nuclear arsenal. In the first Carnegie session, some of the participants asked Pentagon officials what the point of the exercise was, if its conclusions would come too late to influence the posture review. “Their response was: ‘Well, we promised we would reach out to a number of constituencies, different people with different views’,” one participant said. “And so it is a box-ticking exercise with no particular influence.” Commenting on the administration’s approach to drafting its nuclear weapons policy, Senator Markey said: “I’m pleased that the Biden administration says it is committed to listening to voices outside of the nuclear weapons confederacy that advocate an unnecessary and wasteful $1.2tn in upgrades. “But the proof will be in the pudding whether the Pentagon gives the president options to boldly reduce the role of nuclear weapons in our defence strategy – or if it defies the president’s guidance.” James Acton, the co-director of the CEIP’s nuclear policy programme, said the project was not intended as a substitute for a thorough study, based on classified data, of the cost and feasibility of a Minuteman III life extension. “What we are doing is to tee up options and identify critical questions for further study, and to do that we are trying to engage a genuinely wide range of expertise,” Acton said. “We would not have agreed to do this study if we had believed it was not a genuinely useful piece of work.” One of the controversies plaguing the Pentagon’s drafting of the NPR was the abrupt removal in September of the woman in charge of the process, Leonor Tomero, who had raised questions about the cost of the GBSD programme, raising the ire of senior Republicans in Congress. The Pentagon insisted that her job had been eliminated as part of a bureaucratic reorganisation and that she would be given another role. The assistant secretary of defence Mara Karlin assured Markey that Tomero had not been dismissed. However, Tomero has not been offered another job in the administration, according to her friends. “Leonor Tomero was fired and is now being blackballed because those of us on the outside are complaining,” said Jeffrey Lewis, a professor at the Middlebury Institute of International Studies at Monterey. “What’s the point of working with the Democrats when they fire anyone who doesn’t please the Republicans? Unless congressional Democrats come to life, Biden’s nuclear posture review is going to look exactly like Trump’s.” A defence department spokesman said the Pentagon had nothing to add to its previous account of Tomero’s departure.Jennifer Rae Wilson, a social worker and single mother of three children in Richland, Washington, has struggled with student loan debt since she went back to school and graduated in 2000 – more than two decades ago. Struggling to raise three boys with very little child support, Wilson decided to attend college 10 years after graduating high school to improve her career prospects. She was eventually able to move out of low-income assistance housing and off government assistance programs. “But then the school loans hit,” said Wilson. “I couldn’t afford the payments on top of rent and all of the other things. There was no way that I could make those payments.” She is not alone, as student debt in America has become a crisis for millions of citizens that often feels like it will last for people’s whole lives, or at least blight them for many years after graduation. About 44.7 million Americans have outstanding student loan debt, totaling over $1.86tn, with 42.3 million Americans holding federal student loan debt. The US Department of Education paused repayment, collections and interest on federal student loans in response to the Covid-19 pandemic under Trump, with the final extension on the pause scheduled to expire on 31 January 2022. But now millions of Americans are bracing for resuming payments on federal student loans after nearly two years of relief – and the crisis is set to roll on again. Between rent, bills and daycare costs, Wilson went into default after not being able to keep up with student loan payments. Then her paychecks started being garnished in 2010 to pay off the loans, reducing her pay by about $1,000 per month – and that was just paying off the interest. The pause on student loan repayments during the pandemic allowed Wilson to catch up on other bills and buy a home, but she worries about the payments restarting. “It kind of concerns me a little bit with it coming back with what they’re going to be able to offer us in terms of payment plans,” added Wilson. “I’ve been making payments for 20 years and my balance has only gone up. That doesn’t make any sense. If I made a $1,000 per month payment on my car, or on my house, I would be paid off and I would not have a home loan or would not have a car loan. But with this, it doesn’t seem to make a difference.” A recent survey of more than 33,000 student loan borrowers conducted by the Student Debt Crisis Center found 89% of borrowers are not financially secure enough to resume payments on 1 February. Before the pandemic, more than half of all student loan borrowers were either in default, forbearance, deferment, or otherwise not making payments on their student debt. PJ Rivera of Texas is one of the borrowers not prepared to resume student loan payments. His initial student debt wasabout $80,000, but has increased with interest to $110,000, even though he makes payments of $1,000 a month. “Student loans have crippled my ability to have personal savings but the inability to help my family who are struggling with hospital bills and other medical bills,” said Rivera. “The system doesn’t work. It’s not the students’ fault because you need money to pay for your career. Maybe tuition shouldn’t be so high to start with. Everyone should be able to study and learn about whatever they are passionate about without going broke or living to pay and nothing else.” The average student loan debt for new college graduates is about $30,000. Joe Biden campaigned on cancelling $10,000 in student loan debt per person and cancelling student debt for Americans who attended Historically Black Colleges and Universities and public colleges, but the Biden administration has yet to cancel debt for these Americans. Beverly Dunker Brown of New York City completed her undergraduate and graduate degrees in the 1980s and 90s, but with high interest rates and taking on parent plus loans for her son, her student loan debt has increased from about $43,000 to more than $150,000. “I will be in my late 80s paying student loans off of social security income,” said Dunker Brown. “I have Federal Family Education Loan Program loans which were not paused. I can’t afford to pay them and continue to request forbearances on them.” Despite making a six-figure salary in business administration, she is unable to properly save for retirement, and she cares for her disabled husband who is a cancer survivor and regularly requires dialysis. Her own student loans are $862 monthly and the parent plus loans for her son will add another $362 a month when the federal student loan pause ends. “The interest and penalties are just crazy. My student loan balance increases each month. Black and Brown people can’t get ahead,” added Dunker Brown. “I have no generational wealth, retirement savings or savings for an emergency, yet I have an MBA that I earned in 1996. Having a fancy degree wasn’t the answer it was supposed to be.” Black college graduates owe an average of $7,400 more in student loans than white college graduates, and that gap more than triples to nearly $25,000 after four years from graduation. Sabrina Elliott of Charlotte, North Carolina, couldn’t afford to make payments toward her student loans for the first eight years after graduating law school. By the time she could afford to start making payments, the debt had ballooned from about $72,000 to more than $166,000. For the past seven years, Elliott has made monthly minimum payments of nearly $1,400 a month, but still owes more than the original loans despite paying over $90,000 toward the debt in that time. “Student loans should not impair a person from being a homeowner, starting a family or [be] a badge of shame,” said Elliott. “I have made payment for over seven years and the balance is the same. As you can see, I have repaid the original loan. The minimum payment is a mortgage payment but not high enough to reduce the debt.” Kaida Flowers, a family and child therapist in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, has struggled to pay her student loans from her undergraduate and master’s degree She makes about $50,000 a year working a job she pursued to try to help people, and emphasized that student debt is causing her and others who pursued similar career paths to struggle to get by. When the payments resume, she will be forced to pay $300 a month again toward her student debt, most of which goes toward interest. “They’re killing the middle class,” said Flowers. “Part of the American dream is you go to school, you try to do something to have a better life, but it’s just not what it is.”Winning tip: Magical emporium, Bridport, Dorset Ink &amp; Page is a magical emporium, the brainchild of artist Kim Squirrell and her bookbinder husband David. Behind the exquisite early Victorian frontage, with its delicate gothic ironwork, is a treasure trove of handstitched notebooks and sketchbooks, letterpress cards and prints. Alongside the beautiful stationery made in the first-floor workshop, there’s a selection of work by local craftspeople, from ceramicists to textile artists. Ink &amp; Page is a celebration of the handwritten, handprinted and handcrafted – a go-to place for a thoughtful gift and the perfect slow shopping experience. Karen Heaney Christmas is in this shop’s DNA, Cambridge Bene’t Street is known for the Eagle pub, where Crick and Watson announced their DNA research breakthrough in 1953. The street is also home to Podarok, a delightful gift shop. Small but packed with eye-catching items, the shop’s name is Russian for gift, reflecting the birthplace of the original owner. From rainbow-hued bicycle spoke reflectors, to handbags in classic book designs, to earrings shaped as red squirrels, there’s a quality gift for a range of tastes and budgets – particularly for those attracted to a bit of quirk. Sharon Pinner Remarkable and recycled, Corbridge, Northumberland I love the philosophy as much as the eclectic selection of homeware and gifts sold by RE, in its cavernous shop in Bishops Yard. The ethos centres on REmarkable, REcycled, REscued and REstored, and its quirky range includes leaf garlands made from salvaged telephone directories, and toasting forks from Northumberland blacksmiths. RE sources stock from local craftspeople and from all over the world: it supplies many Fairtrade items, ensuring that goods are ethically produced. Moira Feat of clay, Rye, East Sussex Rye Pottery is a beautiful shop that has been producing charming handmade and hand-painted ceramics since 1869. From unique kitchen tiles to charming Sussex Pigs, there is so much here to take in and appreciate. The hand-thrown “little red clay” vases are so stylish and timeless they would make the perfect gift for any stoneware lover. The shop intertwines Sussex history with pottery based on 1066 and the Bayeux tapestry. It also offers personalised gifts so you can really find something unique this Christmas. Rebecca James Wares from the Wirral, Merseyside Concept Corner is an independent gift shop in New Brighton selling handmade items from local artists. It is a welcoming space that supports and grows local talent. From raw crystals, hug-in-a-box tokens or vegan soaps there is always something new and something I love. Its scarves, candles, paintings and jewellery make great gifts. Many items are illustrated with depictions of the local area and as it is situated close to the River Mersey, there is an emphasis on nautical themes. A vegan baker is often in residence at the weekend – perfect for refuelling after browsing. U Watson Treats from Italy, St Albans Buongiorno Italia deli has been in St Albans for more than 40 years and the owner, Tony, knows almost every customer by name. At Christmas, it’s stacked from floor to ceiling with panettone (with fruit) and pandoro (without fruit) in every imaginable flavour, like a pile of presents. The deli counter is full of cheeses, cured meats and cannoli (crispy tubes filled with pistachio or chocolate), but at this time of year, six sizes of hampers are lined up on the bench in front, packed with prosecco, pasta and panforte. And there are plenty of miniature pre-mixed bottles of Aperol spritz or limoncello if you need any extra Christmas spirit! Vanessa Wright Christmas casts its spell, Ironbridge, Shropshire The Little Christmas Shop of Ironbridge is a great place to head to for decorations. Most are reasonably priced, starting at about £3. Set in a beautiful location overlooking the world’s oldest major cast iron bridge (opened in 1781) the place looks lovely as it gets dark. Michelle Nicholls The art of Paignton, Devon Lollipops and Roses in Paignton Devon is an art and craft shop filled with the most delightful bits and bobs. You’re surrounded with so many beautiful handmade crafts you won’t know where to look first. Pebble art, jewellery, picture frames, upcycled gifts and more this shop is an Aladdin’s Cave for people who adore nice things. Step inside: the magical gifts created here will warm your heart. Nichola Legge Cloud cuckoo land, North Yorkshire Cloud Cuckoo is as enticing from the outside as it is within, and is an unashamedly girly place to browse. As well as home furnishings and hand-painted furniture, owner Kimberley stocks a tasteful selection of elegant gifts made by local craftspeople. They are reasonably priced and include beautiful soy wax melts, silver bracelets cleverly packaged for a range of occasions, and “perfect pouches” crafted from vegan leather. Clare Heathen heaven, Glastonbury Goddess Temple Gifts is a picturesque and idiosyncratic shop, perfect for gifts you won’t find anywhere else. It’s a haven for artists to sell their fabulous goddess creations in myriad different shapes and forms. My favourite seasonal gift in 2021 is a 100% natural hand-blended incense, infused with sacred intent to bring the energy of the Lady of Avalon into your home space. It comes in a beautiful glass pot for £6.50 for 25g. Lynne SedgmoreWhere would we be without the Thursday quiz? On one of the other days of the week I guess. All your favourites are here as you face 15 topical or general knowledge questions. Can you spot the hidden Doctor Who reference? Can you avoid the lure of answering Kate Bush to the music question? And will Ron from Sparks end up disappointed with you – yet again? It is not entirely serious, but let us know how you got on in the comments. The Thursday quiz, No 33 If you do think there has been an egregious error in one of the questions or answers, please feel free to email martin.belam@theguardian.com but remember, the quiz master’s word is always final, and you wouldn’t want him to notify Santa that you should be put on the naughty listDevils may not seem very festive but David Greig’s tale of midwinter magic is an inspired bit of Christmas programming, creating the feeling of being gathered cosily around the fire. Through story and song, The Strange Undoing of Prudencia Hart transports us to a snow-blanketed Scottish border town, weaving a good old-fashioned yarn. Prudencia is a scholar of folklore, specialising in the topography of the underworld. During a conference, she becomes trapped in her own idea of hell, stranded in the snow and surrounded by fashionably post-poststructuralist colleagues. As if things couldn’t get any worse, there’s karaoke. Escaping this nightmare, Prudencia runs out into the snowy night, where she encounters a devilishly friendly B&amp;B owner. Greig’s play, co-created with director Wils Wilson, was designed for pubs rather than theatres. The storytelling at its heart is informal, intimate and enjoyably rowdy. In Debbie Hannan’s exuberant production, it transposes well on to the Royal Exchange’s in-the-round stage, drawing the audience in like a circle of revellers congregating to hear a ghost story. The simply but wittily told first half whips along, with the exception of a tiresome tangent featuring a drunken hen do. But it’s in the captivatingly strange second act that this production comes into its own. Max Johns’ previously sparse set is transformed, with pub carpets removed to reveal Ellie Foreman-Peck’s illustrations of the underworld. As Prudencia languishes in this hell, the stage slowly turns, while glowing rods of light form the bars of her shimmering cage. As Prudencia, Joanne Thomson unravels beautifully, her stiff limbs slowly loosening as her clothes become dishevelled. It’s easy to believe she’s spent millennia here, only discovering the messy value of life through immortality. She has an ideal match in Paul Tinto’s devil, a stressed manager of the underworld who finally descends with her into poetic passion. Threaded through with Michael John McCarthy’s folk compositions, this is a wickedly joyous mix of music, revelry and enchantment. As Hannan and their team prove, the devil really does have the best tunes. The Strange Undoing of Prudencia Hart is at the Royal Exchange theatre, Manchester, until 15 January.God of War A majestic adventure across Norse mythology in the company of buttoned-up old god Kratos and his young son Atreus. Alongside jaw-dropping encounters and fights with the creatures, places and gods of the Norse canon, it unexpectedly has a lot to say about family dynamics and grief. The current high bar for action games. • Read the review Horizon: Zero Dawn A post-apocalyptic game that’s decidedly exciting, imagining a world in which robot dinosaurs have taken over the Earth and humans have once again become cave dwelling hunter-gatherers. Fighting the machines is great fun, as is getting around this fascinating world. • Read the review Shadow of the Colossus Combines astounding beauty with an understatedly profound story about grief, loss and power. In this game your task is to ride into a forsaken wilderness, find moss-covered ancient colossi and bring them down with a pathetic little sword and a bow – though it’s not long before you start to question your motivations. • Read the review Bloodborne This electrifyingly scary horror-action game starts in a doomed Victorian-styled city and gets steadily more disturbing as you go on. Through exploring and fighting properly terrifying beasts, you slowly piece together what happened in this dreadful place. It is a challenge both for the reflexes and the intellect; there are no other games out there with this level of conceptual sophistication, except director Hidetaka Miyazaki’s other masterpiece, Dark Souls. • Read the review Yakuza 0 A prequel to a long series of Japanese gangster soap operas that offers you the chance to beat up thugs in back alleys, sing karaoke and eat and endless selection of photorealistic food in Osaka restaurants. More accessible than any of the other Yakuza games thanks to the absence of convoluted backstory, Yakuza 0 is a unique, lovable combination of melodrama, fun and ridiculousness. Persona 5 A group of teenagers form a small anarchist rebellion in Tokyo, studying and hanging out by day and delving into a parallel universe to do battle with the corrupt adults’ psyches by night. Enormously stylish, with a vibrant sense of place. • Read the review The Witcher 3 Taking well-worn fantasy tropes and twisting them into something memorable and blackly comic, The Witcher 3 is an enormous, sprawling game in which everything nonetheless feels authored. A pinnacle for open-world role-playing games. • Read the review What Remains of Edith Finch Discover the sad tale of a very unfortunate family by exploring their abandoned home. This magic-realist story is short but profoundly affecting, grounding its flights of fancy in a relatable tale about family and the fear of living. • Read the review Monster Hunter World Mean-eyed dragons, amphibious leonine creatures, bat-like wyverns that puff themselves up like fluffy hamsters – Monster Hunter World’s creatures are amazing, and hunting them with a selection of overblown, cartoonish weapons is incredible fun. Enjoyable as much for the believable fictional ecology as the David-v-Goliath face-offs against enormous foes. • Read the review Red Dead Redemption 2 A stubbornly slow-paced, obsessively detailed American epic, placing you in the spurred boots of outlaw Arthur Morgan in the dying days of the wild west. Its creators’ determination to immerse you in the incredible world it has created means that this is not the kind of game that slips down easy, but it is so lifelike, well-written and beautifully shot that it is well worth the time and attention it demands. A true landmark game. • Read the review Tetris Effect A hypnotic, psychedelic reimagining of the legendary puzzle game, adding reactive music and visual effects to, well, astonishing effect. Created by Tetsuya Mizuguchi, the mastermind behind puzzlers Rez and Lumines, its a transcendental experience, in which the familiar Tetris shapes drop into place over swooping deserts and mesmerising starscapes. • Read the review The Last of Us 2 The brutal post-apocalyptic adventure continues, with troubled protagonists Ellie and Joel now part of a brittle community of survivors – until tragedy strikes. An emotionally bruising tale that brilliantly intertwines the violent trajectories of its lead characters, this is interactive storytelling at its most advanced – and most devastating. • Read the review Overwatch Blizzard’s brash and colourful interpretation of the multiplayer team-based shooter is a thrilling escapade, mixing varied, interesting character with excellent controls and vibrant sci-fi locations. Rewarding group tactics and intricate knowledge of character abilities over run-and-gun savagery, it’s a truly tactical blaster that provides euphoric moments of victory. • Read the review Dreams When the makers of gorgeous handicraft platformer LittleBigPlanet set out to make a powerful creative tool for PlayStation owners, it was always going to be something special. And Dreams truly is incredible, allowing users to build whatever they want with its intuitive toolset, from games to animated movies to music videos, and then share the results online. Not sure what to build? Don’t worry; a large, friendly community has already made thousands of things to download, try out and be inspired by. • Read the review Uncharted 4 The grand finale of the Indiana Jone-styled exploration adventure sees hero Nathan Drake confronting his past while trying to build a future with his wife Elena, far away from deadly quests for ancient artefacts. But first, there is one last globetrotting romp to enjoy, as Drake and Sully hunt for the treasure trove of legendary pirate Henry Avery. An unexpectedly emotional swashbuckler. • Read the review Ghosts of Tsushima The Mongol invasion of Tsushima island in the 13th century provides the historical backdrop for this visually arresting samurai epic from US studio Sucker Punch, a loving tribute to Japan’s cinematic tradition and natural beauty. The open world provides a spellbinding panorama and the sword-swishing combat is suitably bloody. • Read the review Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain The rollicking, ridiculous finale to Hideo Kojima’s epic stealth series gives us everything we expect from this convoluted odyssey, with psychotic villains, intense tactical engagements and dubiously attired female assassins. Even if Konami ever made another Metal Gear game, it would never capture the freedom and insanity of Kojima’s last stand. • Read the review Marvel’s Spider-Man: Miles Morales The incredible amount of work that developer Insomniac Games put into capturing the feel of web-slinging across the rooftops of NYC pays off again in this superlative superhero yarn. From the fizzy script to the fun set-piece battles and emotional showdowns, it’s like starring in your own Marvel movie – a dream realised for millions of fans. • Read the review Assassin’s Creed Odyssey Following vengeful mercenaries Kassandra and Alexios into a densely detailed evocation of Ancient Greece during the Peloponnesian War, Odyssey could be the pinnacle of Ubisoft’s time-spanning assassination series. The game offers hundreds of hours of open world exploration, a compelling narrative featuring cameos from all areas of Greek history and mythology, and even a non-violent tour mode for budding classical scholars. • Read the review Resident Evil 7 After two disappointing, action-orientated instalments, Resident Evil 7 brought the series back to its tense, Romero-esque origins, switching the perspective to first-person and giving us an everyman hero trapped with a nightmarish red neck family. The jump scares and gross-out moments come thick and fast, and there’s even a VR mode for the truly brave/crazy. • Read the reviewLast month, Alicia Keys gave an interview to a women’s magazine in which she expounded on her life during the pandemic. Anyone who has found it hard to motivate themselves over the past two years – first paralysed by lockdown, then plagued by the sense that there’s no point doing anything given the ongoing state of the world – may be pleased to learn that even 65m-selling singer-songwriters found themselves in a similar pickle. When asked whether all this time at home had fuelled her creativity, she said that wasn’t her experience at all. “I didn’t even know how to work. What was I supposed to work on? Where was I supposed to work? And when? It was so much of making sure everything was organised and the kids were good’.” But when considering Keys’ hopelessly unproductive pandemic, it’s probably worth noting that some people’s idea of being not knowing how to work involves in front of Netflix while drunkenly balancing a takeaway on their ever-swelling stomach – and some people’s, well, doesn’t. In the time since Covid-19 hit, Alicia Keys has variously released and promoted an autobiography; launched her own “skincare and wellness” brand; recorded and released a collaborative single with Brandi Carlile encouraging voter registration in the US election; promoted a 20th-anniversary edition of her debut album, Songs in A Minor; helmed a 21-day online meditation programme in collaboration with Deepak Chopra; starred in her own YouTube docuseries, Noted, alongside her husband Swizz Beatz (“Episode 3: Me And Swizz Are Holding Nothing Back About Our Love”); appeared in commercials for Mercedes-Benz and US insurance company Allstate; and announced her first graphic novel. She also found time to write and record her eighth album, which is an hour and a half and 26 tracks long: it’s effectively the same album twice, first in “broken down” “Originals” versions – the same phrase she used to describe her piano-and-vocals version of Empire State of Mind – then versions described as “Unlocked”, which feature Mike Will Made It co-producing with Keys. It’s a strange and perhaps unique enterprise. The Originals versions carry neither the show-me-your-workings quality of demos, nor the raw, stripped-down force of “unplugged” sessions – they’re slickly produced in their own right. Nor does it feel like the spread betting of Shania Twain’s 2002 album Up!, which came out simultaneously in country, pop and Bollywood versions. Its author has likened it to contemporary remix albums of old tracks by Nina Simone, someone a less self-assured artist might think twice about comparing themselves to, particularly given what’s on offer here. The first album exists in a space bordered by classic soul, early-70s singer-songwriters, the more upmarket end of MOR and jazz, which is pretty much where Keys started out, albeit without a song as undeniable as her breakthrough hit Fallin’. There is good material – the Bond-theme orchestration of Nat King Cole; the sweet paean to spring Daffodils (or is it an allegory about the end of the Trump regime, or the loosening of Covid restrictions?) – but more often its contents provoke faint praise: it’s pretty, nicely played. Is It Insane is the kind of thing that simultaneously points up Keys’ strengths and weaknesses: it’s a beautifully sung torch-y ballad, but letting it run over six minutes amounts to rattling on, and covering it in fake crackle, as if it’s being played off an old shellac 78, labours the point. Things pick up considerably on Keys Unlocked: the jump in excitement levels between the Originals version of Only You and its “produced” version – decorated with snatches of sampled vocals and the occasional burst of gunfire – is immediately striking. Sometimes the improvements are straightforward: the retro soul ballad Old Memories has its tempo picked up; Is It Insane is better for having two minutes lopped off its running time. Sometimes they’re more intricate: freshly draped in electronics, Best of Me’s atmosphere is significantly shifted to a summery drift; Dead End Road, nothing special in its original version, gains something from the addition of a woozy-sounding synthesiser. But, like Keys’ notion of pandemic productivity, it’s all relative. Unlocked is definitely a better album than Originals, but not an amazing album in its own right. Undeniable, sucker-punch songs are still notable by their absence – it’s certainly not a description that fits one track that doesn’t have an Originals counterpart, Lala, an Auto-Tuned ramble featuring Swae Lee that samples Tyrone Davis’ fabulous 1979 slow jam In the Mood. You’re left with an album that seems to say less about Alicia Keys’ boundless creativity than it does about both the art of the record producer and the limitations of said art, which can improve an average song but can’t transform one into something extraordinary. You can’t help thinking that wasn’t really the intention. This week Alexis listened to Saint Etienne – Her Winter Coat Not a Christmas song per se, but a glorious, chilly, melancholy, seasonal breeze that confirms Saint Etienne’s ongoing renaissance.My husband and I have been together for four years, although we married recently. We love each other very much and have regular, enjoyable sex. The issue is that since lockdown my husband is terrified of being without me. I have to travel for work, and he is having panic attacks at the concept of not being able to come with me. (He often can, as he is able to work remotely, but it’s not always practical.) He counts down the days from when we last had sex, especially if I’m in a busy period at work or will have to travel soon. I find that quite stressful and a turn-off. If we can’t be together working from home, he wants to spend all our evenings together, and gets upset if I read an article on my phone, even if I’m cuddling him as I do it. If friends or family are coming to visit, he is stressed for at least a week beforehand about getting to spend enough time with me before they arrive. I’m nervous about mentioning work commitments that take me away from home overnight. I love travel and this is partly sucking the joy out of my job, which involves translation and writing. I want to compromise, but I’m not sure what more compromise I can find. His mum died the year before the pandemic, after a very long illness, and he struggled with being alone then too. He has had counselling and made a lot of progress since her death. He recognises that he is probably trying to make up for a lack of affection when he was younger. We have talked about couples therapy and I found a therapist we agreed to try, but we haven’t arranged anything yet. His counsellor feels that he still has his own things to work through, which could be the case, but I also feel something needs to change. In situations such as this it is reasonable – in fact, desirable – to add couples therapy to individual therapy (with a different therapist). In your case, I recommend this starts as soon as possible, especially as you are being negatively affected by your husband’s dependence and urgently need support and tools. Relationship problems frequently manifest in a sexual way, or are played out in a couple’s sexual arena, but quite often the problem is not, essentially, a sexual one. Underlying mental health issues, or relationship factors such as unexpressed anger or resentment, can seriously affect the erotic connection, as well as poisoning feelings towards each other. Hopefully, you will be able to maintain compassion, receive help and understanding yourself – and he will achieve healing. Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist who specialises in treating sexual disorders. If you would like advice from Pamela on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your concerns to private.lives@theguardian.com (please don’t send attachments). Each week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.California is preparing to become a “sanctuary” of reproductive care for people from other states seeking abortion if the supreme court overturns Roe v Wade. The California Future of Abortion Council, made up of more than 40 providers, advocacy groups and lawmakers, published a list of 45 recommendations, including covering travel and accommodation costs and procedures for people from other states. How many people travel to California for abortions? We don’t know – but about 15% of all abortions nationally are performed in the state. How will the costs be covered? California will have an estimated $31bn surplus next year. How many states could ban abortion? More than two dozen states are ready to do so if the supreme court overturns Roe v Wade next year. US government to go carbon neutral by 2050 The federal government – the largest landowner, energy consumer and employer in the US – has pledged to reach carbon neutrality by 2050 after Joe Biden signed a new executive order. The government will reduce its emissions by 65% by 2030, before reaching carbon neutrality by 2050, by transitioning to a completely electric fleet of vehicles and using electricity only from clean energy sources. What are the deadlines before 2050? All new government vehicles from 2035 will be zero-emission versions, while buildings must halve their emissions by 2032. All electricity must be clean by 2030. What difference will this make? The order will tackle about 15% of all carbon emissions in the US. Maxwell trial: third accuser’s ex-boyfriend corroborates her account The third accuser in Ghislaine Maxwell’s sex-trafficking trial has had details of her testimony corroborated by an ex-boyfriend. The accuser, Carolyn, said Maxwell began booking her in to give Jeffrey Epstein sexualized massages when she was 14, and also testified that Maxwell groped her. Carolyn said Epstein’s abuse went on to include penetrative sex and group encounters. She said she was introduced to Maxwell and Epstein after her boyfriend at the time, Shawn, introduced her to Virginia Giuffre in the early 2000s. Giuffre asked Carolyn if she wanted to earn money giving an older man a massage. Maxwell has pleaded not guilty to all charges. What did Shawn testify? He said Carolyn “only had two jobs ever” – working for a fast-food restaurant and “working for Jeffrey”. Shawn said he would drive Carolyn and Giuffre to Epstein’s house and they would leave with “hundred dollar bills”. When did this happen? Carolyn said she went to Epstein’s house more than 100 times from age 14 to 18. She stopped seeing him at 18 when she was “too old”. In other news … New Zealand will ban smoking for the next generation by raising the legal age to buy tobacco every year, so those aged 14 and under today are never legally able to buy it. The measure is one of a raft of policies aimed at making the country entirely smoke-free within the next four years. The evidence against Jussie Smollett is “overwhelming”, the prosecution has said in closing arguments in his criminal trial. The former Empire actor is facing charges, which he denies, that he lied to Chicago police about an 2019 attack. The number of journalists in prison globally reached a new high in 2021, according to a study that found 293 reporters were behind bars on 1 December. At least 24 journalists were killed this year because of stories they had covered. A diver pulled a woman’s body out of a car submerged in water near the edge of the Niagara Falls on Wednesday. It was too late to rescue the woman, who was said to have lived nearby. Stat of the day: nearly 100 former British Council staff remain hidden in Afghanistan Almost 100 former British Council staff contracted to teach British values and the English language remain in hiding in Afghanistan after being refused the right to come to the UK. A former British Council Afghanistan English manager, Joseph Seaton, has said their applications have not been processed or responded to, months after they were sent. They are “living in constant fear of their lives”, Seaton said. Don’t miss this: one woman’s lifelong crusade against Hitler’s favourite film-maker The documentary maker Nina Gladitz made it her life’s work to prove the complicity of Leni Riefenstahl in the horrors of nazism. As Hitler’s favourite film-maker, Riefenstahl worked as a propagandist during the Nazi era, producing films considered landmarks of early cinema. After the war ended, she tried to distance herself from the regime, saying she had only wanted to make beautiful art: “I don’t know what I should apologise for. All my films won the top prize.” Berlin correspondent Kate Connolly charts Gladitz’s “obsessive” efforts to hold Riefenstahl to account. … or this: an Indian woman’s fight to reclaim her son after adoption without consent After Anupama Chandran’s parents put her baby up for adoption without her consent, she began a hunger strike, sitting by the gates of the Kerala state secretariat in all weathers. Chandran, the daughter of a local communist leader, and who is upper-caste, faced anger from her parents after falling in love and having a child with Ajith Kumar, a man from India’s lowest caste. Hannah Ellis-Petersen, the Guardian’s south Asia correspondent, reports on how the couple defied the odds to get their baby back. Last Thing: Botoxed camels barred from Saudi beauty contest More than 40 camels were disqualified from a beauty contest in Saudi Arabia after authorities ruled they had been given Botox injections and other cosmetic alternations. Artificial touch-ups are strictly prohibited at the King Abdulaziz camel festival, where camel breeders are invited to compete for about $66m in prize money.We would like to hear about your favourite television of the year. Did you discover a hilarious new sitcom or heart-rending drama? Perhaps an irresistible reality show? Which bingeworthy series would you recommend? How to get in touch Share your TV recommendation in the form below and tell us in a few words how it helped you during this year. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Forza Horizon 4 Explore an astonishingly beautiful re-creation of Britain in an impressive roster of cars, taking in everything from rally racing in the Lake District to street races in a wintry Edinburgh. The ultimate driving game on Xbox One (or anywhere). • Read the review Ori and the Blind Forest Visually luscious and accompanied by a stirring orchestral soundtrack, this ecologically minded 2D platformer is brimming with soul. Don’t expect an easy ride: developer Moon Studios has crafted a complex and challenging journey through a danger-strewn forest. • Read the review Red Dead Redemption 2 A stubbornly slow-paced, obsessively detailed American epic, placing you in the spurred boots of outlaw Arthur Morgan in the dying days of the wild west. Its creators’ determination to immerse you in the incredible world it has created means that this is not the kind of game that slips down easy, but it is so lifelike, well-written and beautifully shot that it is well worth the time and attention it demands. A true landmark game. • Read the review Titanfall 2 The sequel to Respawn’s multiplayer-focused giant mech shooter adds a turbo-charged single-player story, tweaks a lot of the systems and provides a more varied array of mega-robots to cause havoc with. An under-appreciated blaster that brilliantly exploits its David v Goliath setup to create a fulsome and fulfilling ride. • Read the review The Witcher 3 Monster slayer Geralt of Rivia returns with gruff panache in a truly epic open-world adventure that leavens its rather po-faced fantasy with humour, poignant story moments and sexy relationship-wrangling. A state-of-the-art game in the truest sense. • Read the review Inside An abstract, threatening short story about a lone boy navigating a nightmarish laboratory filled with dark, threatening figures. It sounds about as far from Super Mario Bros as you can get, but thanks to developer Playdead it has a similar way with puzzles, level design and challenge, making it an evocative, tense and thoughtful masterpiece. • Read the review Nier Automata Designed by idiosyncratic genius Yoko Taro, Nier Automata is ostensibly a sci-fi action RPG set on a post-apocalyptic Earth occupied by warring androids. But thanks to its genre-hopping structure, breathtaking landscapes and moving narrative, it is as much an exploration of humanity, memory and experience, designed to be replayed over and over again. Overwatch The greatest team-based multiplayer online shooter since Counter Strike, Overwatch presents a colourful sci-fi world and an array of memorable, differently skilled characters and lets players just get on with the fight. The result is a beautiful, bright and diverse challenge to the dour grey-brown world of military gun games. • Read the review Metal Gear Solid V: The Phantom Pain Hideo Kojima’s final Metal Gear instalment is his weird, wonderful, eccentric, controversial magnum opus. An open-world stealth adventure set in 1980s Afghanistan and Angola, it is a complex labyrinth of classic character rivalries, emerging mercenary squads and intense resource management. Whatever happens, you won’t forget it. • Read the review Hellblade: Senua’s Sacrifice Senua is a Pict warrior who must journey into the Norse underworld to save the soul of her slaughtered lover. Her quest involves fighting demigods and solving cunning environmental puzzles, but the unforgettable beauty of this game is as much about the hallucinatory visual style, the incredible central acting performance, and the simulation of Senua’s psychological trauma, as it is about the action. • Read the review Gears of War 5 The super-macho, musclebound sci-fi blaster takes a surprisingly thoughtful turn in this iteration, with Kait Diaz leading the cast as she seeks the origins of the alien Locust horde. The open campaign environments, new weapons and fresh multiplayer options are all welcome additions, but veterans will be at home with the thundering gunplay. • Read the full review Halo: The Master Chief Collection This huge anthology of six classic Halo titles (numbers 1-4 as well as Halo 3: ODST and Halo Reach) got off to a bug-ridden and laggy start, but developer 343 Industries dug in and patched the problems, and this is now a vibrant nostalgic treat. All the missions and multiplayer maps are here, visually updated and loaded with memories. • Read the review Assassin’s Creed Odyssey Following vengeful mercenaries Kassandra and Alexios into a densely detailed evocation of Ancient Greece during the Peloponnesian War, Odyssey could be the pinnacle of Ubisoft’s time-spanning assassination series. The game offers hundreds of hours of open world exploration, a compelling narrative featuring cameos from all areas of Greek history and mythology, and even a non-violent tour mode for budding classical scholars. • Read the review Rainbow Six Siege Ubisoft’s answer to Counter-Strike is a fraught and compelling tactical shooter, where teams made up of differently skilled spec-op soldiers fight it out in cleverly designed locations, from beautiful mansions to presidential jets. Crammed with gadgets, explosives and destructible environments, each bout becomes a tense trade-off between guns and guile. • Read the review Outer Wilds A lone alien explorer trapped in a strange solar system has to solve the mysteries of a long dead civilisation before the universe explodes. The thing is, you only have 22 minutes to do it – but in this time-loop puzzle game, you get those minutes repeat over and over again, allowing you to pick up new details each time. The result is a clever, rewarding, transcendental experience quite unlike anything else in the sci-fi adventure oeuvre. Yakuza Like a Dragon Sega’s acclaimed gangland series continues with a hapless new protagonist Ichiban Kasuga trying to make a life for himself on the violent streets of Yokohama. Swinging wildly from genuine drama to weird, hilarious mini-games, and featuring a new turn-based combat system, Like a Dragon is a blast from the start to the distant finish line. • Read the review Doom Eternal Players are taken straight to Hell (literally) in the latest blood-splattered Doom incarnation, where shotgun-blasting demons into gooey slabs of meat is the aim of the game, and the dizzying dismemberment never lets up. Add in fun multiplayer modes and you have the ultimate in space-marine combat carnage. • Read the review Psychonauts 2 After a long hiatus, Double Fine finally returns to its cult classic platformer – in spectacular style. Lead character Raz is now a trainee psychonaut and must rummage through a new series of mindscapes, each filled with surreal, psychedelic characters and challenges. A confidently weird, effortlessly funny adventure. • Read the review Apex Legends The battle royale genre dominated the later days of the Xbox One era, and if there’s one title from that onslaught that counts as a genuine shooter classic, it’s this one. Respawn Entertainment’s immense skill with fluid action and brilliant controls, together with great characters and power-ups, made this the Fortnite-beater for people who actually care about gun-feel, balance and strategy. • Read the review Minecraft With a host of new blocks, mobs and narrative features, the 200m-selling construction game came into its own on Xbox One. Ten years on from its debut it remains an essential experience, offering unique experiences to every player, whether their aim is creation, exploration or just messing about in a big blocky world. • Read the reviewTo really grasp the present, we need to imagine the future – then look back from it to better see the now. The angry climate kids do this naturally. The rest of us need to read good science fiction. A great place to start is Kim Stanley Robinson. Robinson is one of the most brilliant writers of the genre. During Covid quarantine, I read 11 of his books, culminating in his instant classic The Ministry for the Future, which imagines several decades of climate politics starting this decade. The first lesson of his books is obvious: climate is the story. Compared with the magnitude of the crisis, this year’s United Nations climate summit, Cop26, was a poorly planned pool party where half the guests were sweating in jeans, having forgotten their swimming suits. If you’re reading this, you probably know what climate science portends – and that nothing discussed in Glasgow was within rocket range of adequate. What Ministry and other Robinson books do is make us slow down the apocalyptic highlight reel, letting the story play in human time for years, decades, centuries. The screen doesn’t fade to black; instead we watch people keep dying, and coping, and struggling to shape a future – often gloriously. I spoke to Robinson recently for an episode of the podcast The Dig. He told me that he wants leftists to set aside their differences, and put a “time stamp on [their] political view” that recognizes how urgent things are. Looking back from 2050 leaves little room for abstract idealism. Progressives need to form “a united front,” he told me. “It’s an all-hands-on-deck situation; species are going extinct and biomes are dying. The catastrophes are here and now, so we need to make political coalitions.” The point of Robinson’s decades of sci-fi isn’t to simply counsel “vote blue no matter who.” He told me he remains a proud and longtime member of the Democratic Socialists of America (DSA). But he does want leftists – and everyone else – to take the climate emergency more seriously. He thinks every big decision, every technological option, every political opportunity, warrants climate-oriented scientific scrutiny. Global justice demands nothing less. Robinson’s “all-hands” call is even more challenging on technology and economics than on electoral campaigns. He wants to legitimize geoengineering, even in forms as radical as blasting limestone dust into the atmosphere for a few years to temporarily dim the heat of the sun. As Ministry dramatizes, and as he reminded me, there’s a good chance that a country being devastated by climate breakdown will try this, whether it’s authorized by the international community or not. More broadly, Robinson seems to be urging all of us to treat every possible technological intervention – from expanding nuclear energy, to pumping meltwater out from under glaciers, to dumping iron filings in the ocean – from a strictly scientific perspective: reject dogma, evaluate the evidence, ignore the profit motive. It’s an admirable view. And Robinson is no blinkered techno-optimist: some of the most compelling characters in his novels use science to reject swaths of technological development. He doesn’t necessarily want to pursue every form of geoengineering that we investigate, but he wants us to debate them. As he put it to me: “science good, capitalism bad”. He sees the development of the scientific method as a phenomenon as universal to the human condition as art. In his ice age novel Shaman, one character invents a new kind of ankle brace while another invents a new kind of cave painting. I’m attracted to this vision. But I’m not convinced that the science v capitalism binary is as clear in practice as Robinson asserts. We live in a world where capitalist states and giant companies largely control science. (Just consider the moral insanity and capitalist logic of global vaccine apartheid.) Some of the biggest backers of technology to capture carbon and store it underground are oil companies like Exxon. Yes, we need to consider technologies with an open mind. That includes a frank assessment of how the interests of the powerful will shape how technologies develop. Robinson could learn from the positions of activists of color, especially Indigenous and environmental justice groups, who fight against “false solutions” based on centuries of exploitation and sacrifice. Robinson’s imagined future suggests a short-term solution that fits his dreams of a democratic, scientific politics: planning, of both the economy and planet. It’s a grandiose imperative, but the underlying insight is sound, and it’s borrowed from Robinson’s reading of ecological economics. That field’s premise is that the economy is embedded in nature – that its fundamental rules aren’t supply and demand, but the laws of physics, chemistry, biology. The upshot of Robinson’s science fiction is understanding that grand ecologies and human economies are always interdependent. Robinson believes that once progressives internalize the insight that the economy is a social construct just like anything else, they can determine – based on the contemporary balance of political forces, ecological needs, and available tools – the most efficient methods for bringing carbon and capital into closer alignment. Success will snowball; we’ll democratically plan more and more of the eco-economy. Seen from Mars, then, the problem of 21st-century climate economics is to sync public and private systems of capital with the ecological system of carbon. Robinson’s elegant solution, as rendered in Ministry, is carbon quantitative easing. The idea is that central banks invent a new currency; to earn the carbon coins, institutions must show that they’re sucking excess carbon down from the sky. In his novel, this happens thanks to a series of meetings between United Nations technocrats and central bankers. But the technocrats only win the arguments because there’s enough rage, protest and organizing in the streets to force the bankers’ hand. Robinson thus gets that climate politics are fundamentally the politics of investment – extremely big investments. As he put it to me, carbon quantitative easing isn’t the “silver bullet solution,” just one of several green investment mechanisms we need to experiment with. Robinson shares the great anarchist dream. “Everybody on the planet has an equal amount of power, and comfort, and wealth,” he said. “It’s an obvious goal” but there’s no shortcut. Moving in that direction, he argues, requires radical pragmatism – preventing ecological collapse, while ratcheting up public control of investment. We just can’t know in advance what works best. In his political economy, like his imagined settling of Mars, Robinson tries to think like a bench scientist – an experimentalist, wary of unifying theories, eager for many groups to try many things. And there’s something liberating about Robinson’s commitment to the scientific method: reasonable people can shed their prejudices, consider all the options and act strategically. This blurring of science and politics is what draws me to his work, even when I (often) disagree with his conclusions. Like the great socialist film-maker Ken Loach, Robinson is a leftist who portrays debate as one of the greatest activities in organized social life. It’s in that sense that Robinson’s optimistic opposition between science and capitalism is most compelling: not beakers versus banks, but social action based on thoughtful discussion of social and ecological needs instead of the murderous supremacy of profit. Of course, there are limits to people’s good sense. Robinson gets that too. The years ahead will be brutal. In Ministry, tens of millions of people die in disasters – and that’s in a scenario that Robinson portrays as relatively optimistic. And when things get that bad, people take up arms. In Ministry’s imagined future, the rise of weaponized drones allows shadowy environmentalists to attack and kill fossil capitalists. Many – including myself – have used the phrase “eco-terrorism” to describe that violence. Robinson pushed back when we talked. “What if you call that resistance to capitalism realism?” he asked. “What if you call that, well, ‘Freedom fighters’?” To be clear, Robinson insists that he doesn’t condone the violence depicted in his book; he simply can’t imagine a realistic account of 21st century climate politics in which it doesn’t occur. He has spoken approvingly of Andreas Malm’s book How to Blow Up a Pipeline, which urges sabotage against the fossil fuel industry. Malm writes that it’s shocking how little political violence there has been around climate change so far, given how brutally the harms will be felt in communities of color, especially in the global south, who bear no responsibility for the cataclysm, and where political violence has been historically effective in anticolonial struggles. In Ministry, there’s a lot of violence, but mostly off-stage. We see enough to appreciate Robinson’s consistent vision of most people as basically thoughtful: the armed struggle is vicious, but its leaders are reasonable, strategic. And the implications are straightforward: there will be escalating violence, escalating state repression and increasing political instability. We must plan for that too. And maybe that’s the tension that is Ministry’s greatest lesson for climate politics today. No document that could win consensus at a UN climate summit will be anywhere near enough to prevent catastrophic warming. We can only keep up with history, and clearly see what needs to be done, by tearing our minds out of the present and imagining more radical future vantage points. If millions of people around the world can do that, in an increasingly violent era of climate disasters, those people could generate enough good projects to add up to something like a rational plan – and buy us enough time to stabilize the climate, while wresting power from the 1%. Robinson’s optimistic view is that human nature is fundamentally thoughtful, and that it will save us – that the social process of arguing and politicking, with minds as open as we can manage, is a project older than capitalism, and one that will eventually outlive it. It’s a perspective worth thinking about – so long as we’re also organizing. Daniel Aldana Cohen is assistant professor of sociology at the University of California, Berkeley, where he directs the Socio-Spatial Climate Collaborative. He is the co-author of A Planet to Win: Why We Need a Green New DealA pair of talented teenage runners are dangling off the monkey-bars at the side of the athletics track. As they’re joking around and dreaming of the future, Ann (NicK King) tells Sophie (Charlotte Beaumont) that all she wants to do is run. But when she’s classed as having abnormally high levels of testosterone, she’s stripped of the ability to compete. With clear resonances with Caster Semenya’s story, Fair Play reckons smartly and sharply with the narrow-minded rules of elite sport. But most of Ella Road’s play isn’t about any of this. Soundtracked by squeaking trainers, the majority of this dynamic two-hander sees the two friends just having a good time, doing what they love. Sophie is cocky and deadpan. Ann’s confidence is slower to arrive, but quickened by Sophie’s certainty in her, and the pair fall easily into a friendship that’s full and alive. As they jog and stretch, they bicker and break into feverish giggles, cackling over boys and dreaming of sponsorships. They seem to fizz when they’re together. Directed by Monique Touko, with scenes marked by little beeps of the starting line, the pace never drops. From an intimate story about friendship – or is there more between them? – the play zooms outwards. Ann, who is seen to have become too good, too fast, is labelled “abnormal”, with too much testosterone to be able to compete as a woman. Ann’s outrage and pain are tangible when she describes an all-white board deciding who and what she is. In her devastation, and in Sophie’s selfish response, Fair Play throws us into the brutal ignorance and invasiveness of the way elite sport approaches gender, with results that disproportionately impact Black women. What makes this play remarkable is the way the scale of the political and ethical arguments are held within this pair of teenagers, their legs sick with lactic acid, their minds full of the attention of the press. As the media debates Ann’s body, and her future is narrowed to a fight she didn’t choose, what matters almost as much as the final ruling is whether her friend decides to stand by her side throughout it all. At the Bush theatre, London, until 22 January.The European Commission’s plans to protect people in precarious jobs in the gig economy could be the most ambitious extension of workers’ rights from Brussels since Britain left the EU. If adopted, the plans would mean that gig economy companies, such as Uber and Deliveroo, would have to treat workers as employees with minimum wages (where they exist), sick pay, holidays and better accident insurance, unless they could prove that drivers and couriers were genuinely self-employed. Workers would also get greater protection against management by algorithm, which would mean they cannot be denied work or fired by a machine whose code is wrapped in secrecy. The British government will have no hand in making these rules, nor any obligation to apply them. That, after all, was the point of Brexit. Yet British policymakers and firms operating in the UK may find it hard to avoid the gravitational pull from Brussels. EU law applies only to 450 million people in 27 member states, but its effects can be felt far more widely, as global companies adopt EU rules across their business to cut costs or avoid complexity. The so-called Brussels effect can be seen in the reach of the EU’s data protection rules, as well as standards on chemicals, cars and food safety. Nicolas Schmit, the EU commissioner for jobs, suggested the same effect could apply with the latest gig economy plan. “This standard will influence not only the 27 member states and the platforms operating in the 27 member states, this will probably also become some kind of a standard which will apply to other countries or even parts in the world,” he told the Guardian. That judgement might be too soon to call. An estimated 500 gig economy companies are active in the EU. They will probably respond in different ways to the EU legislation, which still has to be agreed in complex, months-long negotiations between EU ministers and MEPs. Some firms could choose to treat gig workers as employees, as Dutch company Just Eat does, or follow Danish cleaning company Hilfr, which offers employee status to those who have worked more than 100 hours on its platform. Others may seek to adapt their business model, or quit a country altogether if they see no way to be profitable. In the UK gig economy, companies are having to respond to rulings from courts rather than new legislation. A landmark ruling from the supreme court earlier this year defined Uber drivers as workers who are entitled to the minimum wage and holiday pay. The category of “worker”, as distinct from employee and the self-employed, was set out in the 1996 Employment Rights Act. George Maier, an expert on the gig economy at the London School of Economics, said companies had sought to take advantage of ambiguities in a law written for the pre-internet age. “At the moment it feels like gig workers, often coming from some of the most disadvantaged backgrounds, have been left to bear the costs associated with fighting for their basic rights in court. This shouldn’t have to happen.” Boris Johnson was elected in 2019 on a manifesto promise to introduce “measures to protect those in low-paid work and the gig economy”, an idea expanded in the Queen’s speech that year with a pledge to bring forward an employment bill that would “protect and enhance workers’ rights as the UK leaves the EU, making Britain the best place in the world to work”. Nearly two years after that speech, no employment bill has been published by the government. While the pandemic has knocked many plans off course, there is also an unsettled debate about what Brexit really means. When trying to get his EU withdrawal bill through the Commons in October 2019, the prime minister voiced his commitment to “the highest possible standards” on workers’ rights, saying “whatever the EU comes up with, we can match it and pass it into the law of this country”. The sentiment he voiced on that day is far from shared across the government. In a little-noticed speech to the Centre for Policy Studies last month, the Brexit minister, David Frost, threw his weight behind a low-tax, light-touch regulation economy on a different path from the EU. “If after Brexit all we do is import the European social model, we will not succeed,” he said. The latest EU proposal will add pressure on the government to meet its promise for stronger employment rights, following a pandemic that exposed dependency on low-paid workers in care homes, supermarkets, in delivery vans and on bikes. The EU proposals “will undoubtedly help to inform and inspire” unions in the UK, said Tim Sharp at the Trades Union Congress. “This is a government that came to office following Brexit saying they would protect and enhance workers’ rights. I think if workers in the European Union are seen to be gaining rights and having power, then workers here would expect the same.” A spokesperson at the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial strategy said: “The UK has one of the best records on workers’ rights in the world – going further than the EU in many areas – and we believe the UK’s current employment status framework strikes the right balance between the flexibility our economy needs and protections for workers.”A record number of almost 6 million people are waiting to have hospital treatment in England, the latest NHS monthly performance statistics show. The number of patients on the waiting list for non-urgent hospital treatment, including surgery such as a hip or knee replacement or cataract operation, rose to 5,975,216 in October, the highest since records began in August 2007. Labour seized on the figures as evidence of Conservative governments’ mishandling of the NHS. “One in every 10 people in England are on NHS waiting lists today and the situation is set to get even worse, despite the Tories’ unfair tax rises on working people. Under the Tories we’re paying more and getting less,” said Wes Streeting, the shadow health secretary. He added: “The NHS went into the pandemic with waiting lists at record levels, staff shortages of 100,000 in the health service and 112,000 social care vacancies thanks to a decade of Conservative mismanagement.” Under the NHS constitution, 92% of patients should be treated in hospital within 18 weeks of being referred by their GP. But in October 2,053,268 patients – more than a third (34.4%) of all those waiting – had had their treatment delayed for longer than that. It was only the second time that more than 2 million people had been made to wait more than 18 weeks. In addition, the number of people made to wait more than 52 weeks to start treatment stood at 312,665, up from 300,566 in September and nearly double the number in October 2020, which was 167,067. NHS England said that on average last week 10,500 patients every day were occupying a hospital bed even though they were medically fit to be discharged. That reflects continuing difficulties in the ability of social care services, which are experiencing major staff shortages, to look after people once they have left hospital. Hospital bosses and NHS staff are bracing themselves for the next few months being particularly challenging. Even before the Omicron variant of coronavirus emerged two weeks ago, the health secretary, Sajid Javid, the NHS England boss, Amanda Pritchard, and Prof Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer for England, had acknowledged that this winter could put the health service under its most intense strain ever. The Society for Acute Medicine, which represents hospital doctors who treat non-surgical patients, said the NHS was under much greater pressure than a year ago. “The current feeling in acute medicine is just how busy it is even without large numbers of people suffering from Covid and there is immense pressure across the whole NHS frontline,” said Dr Tim Cooksley, the society’s president. “Compared to this time last year it feels far worse and the data shows just how tough things are. The workforce is now struggling not only with the relentless workload but also the uncertainty we all feel.” A relentless rise in pressure on all types of NHS care has led organisations representing doctors, nurses and hospital bosses to warn in recent weeks that patient safety is at risk. Last month bosses of the 10 regional NHS ambulance services in England said in a report that patients across the UK were dying because so many ambulances were tied up outside hospitals because A&amp;E staff did not have the capacity to admit people. The Royal College of Emergency Medicine, which represents emergency care doctors, also estimated that more than 6,000 patients a year were dying because A&amp;E units were becoming so crowded. NHS England and the Department of Health and Social Care were due to publish their “elective recovery plan” last week, setting out details of how hospitals would tackle the backlog. But it was delayed after the emergence of Omicron. The plan, which is expected to come out before Christmas, is likely to recommend that patients who have had treatment in hospital receive fewer follow-up appointments in order to free up consultants to do more surgery, and an expansion of Covid-free “surgical hubs”, as well as other measures. More people seeking cancer care are facing a delay, the latest figures also show. The number of patients who waited more than two weeks to see a cancer specialist after being urgently referred by a GP grew to 42,430 in October, the highest figure in 12 years. The proportion of patients seen within the standard fell to a low of 81.3%, against a target of 93%. In addition, just 67.8% of cancer patients – the smallest proportion ever – underwent their first treatment within two months of urgent referral, well below the 85% target. Daisy Cooper, the Liberal Democrats’ health spokesperson, highlighted that ambulance services were struggling to respond to the number of 999 calls they were receiving and that the number of people forced to wait at least 12 hours in an A&amp;E to get a bed had shot up to 10.646, another new record. NHS England said the service was the busiest it had ever been last month, with a record number of 999 calls and more than 2 million people seen at A&amp;E or an urgent treatment centre.If you wanted to launch a vibrant new European club rugby tournament you would possibly not start from here. The spectre of Covid already stalks the 2021-22 Heineken Champions Cup and scheduling its entire pool stages in the deepest, darkest and dampest weeks of a northern winter is not the obvious catalyst for a dazzling cavalcade of festive sporting cheer. Already the quarantine-affected Scarlets have had to forfeit their opening game, unable to raise a competitive side to face Bristol, with Cardiff and Munster also still without players who were marooned in red-listed South Africa last week. The ripple effects are likely to be swiftly apparent, with the misfortune of a few threatening to skew the entire competition and massively assist those clubs who kick off with a rush this weekend. Because with 16 teams advancing and possibly only 21 realistic candidates on the start line, before we even mention those sides who are lagging domestically, there is less of the knife-edge pool jeopardy that has traditionally made Europe so compelling. If clubs can make it through even with two unadventurous home wins and a scruffy away victory over depleted opposition does the word “Champions” truly apply? The finer print of the regulations also reveals that if, say, Leinster score a truckload of points home and away in Pool A against a toiling Bath, the Irish contenders already stand every chance of “gaming” the qualification system to their advantage in the spring. Finishing in the top four, which they should achieve standing on their heads, and seeing off moderate last-16 opposition over two legs could prove a giant step towards securing home advantage in the last eight and semi-finals as well. It is something of a passion killer, even if Munster’s relish for backs-to-the-wall adversity clearly renders them not dead yet. But as Brian O’Driscoll, the former Leinster, Ireland and Lions captain, makes clear it also makes a fast start imperative. “We’ve created more knockout rugby, which is exciting, to try and get rid of the dead rubbers we were sometimes finding in rounds five and six,” says O’Driscoll, a pivotal cog in Leinster’s golden era of three titles in four years between 2009 and 2012. “I totally get that but it does seem that if you get away early you can find yourself reaching a final having barely played away from home. I don’t know if it’s going to be here to stay or a Covid stopgap but everyone’s in the same boat. The big thing is starting well. You don’t want to be on the back foot in week one. If you’re at home it’s a must-win, even more so in this format.” Which makes it even harder to look past Leinster or the holders Toulouse, who will take an immediate grip on their respective destinies if, as expected, they brush past Bath and Cardiff respectively this weekend. O’Driscoll is already backing them for the final in Marseille come May – “I just can’t see away from those two” – with the caveat that big underdogs can be problematic. “In rugby playing scared is a serious weapon,” says O’Driscoll. “I played scared a few times and sometimes it can really work in your favour. If you’re looking at a potential hiding and an embarrassment it sharpens the mind and pulls people together.” The great centre also reckons Stade Français should watch themselves in Connacht on Sunday – “I hope they bring their thermals” – and remains a firm believer that a good Six Nations campaign can make a significant difference when that country’s players subsequently return to their clubs for Europe’s later stages. “When we won our first European title at Leinster we’d just come off the back of winning a Six Nations grand slam. There’s nothing like the injection of positivity from a national setup when you get back into your club setup. Leinster had 12 starters against the All Blacks. You’d have to imagine that if the national side have some success that should translate back into their setup.” And while O’Driscoll is not anticipating miracles from the majority of this year’s field – “there aren’t many outstanding sides” – he is in little personal doubt as to where the tournament should go from here. For him a World Club challenge, featuring the best clubs and/or provinces from the north and south, is the logical next step. “I do feel it would be very exciting. We think we’ve got a very competitive tournament up here in Europe so there would be no better chance to pit yourself against the best teams in the world. “It does feel like there’s less focus on the defensive side of things in Super Rugby. It’s that Kevin Keegan ethos … we’ll score four, you score three. But if you can create a competition where we can finally say: ‘Well, the winners of Super Rugby are better than the Saracens, the Leinsters or the Munsters’ you’d hold your hand up. “I do think there’s merit in it. And if you can package it the right way the world will think so too. Certainly as a player it would appeal. For those players who don’t get to play internationally it’s a chance to play against the best in the southern hemisphere. To pit yourself against the likes of Sam Cane, Ardie Savea or Samu Kerevi is a pretty exciting prospect.” Can they hack it on a wet, windy night in Galway? One day we might just find out. BT Sport is the home of the European Rugby Champions Cup. The 2021-22 season kicks off with a weekend full of games, including Leinster v Bath live on BT Sport 2 at 3.15pm on Saturday. Find more information on how to watch at bt.com/sportPaul Thomas Anderson’s new film is a love story set in 1973, and far too interesting and complicated to be called “coming-of-age”. A grinningly fast-talking 15-year-old boy meets a bored 25-year-old woman who works as assistant to a photographer taking pictures for the high-school yearbook. She is in equal parts amused, intrigued and depressed when this kid starts hitting on her, and she realises that she is somehow interested in him. Anderson makes glorious movie stars of his two newcomers. Cooper Hoffman, son of the late Philip Seymour Hoffman, is eerily assured as Gary Valentine, a heavy-set kid with iffy skin whose child-actor career in TV and movies is coming to an end, and is therefore turning his various side-hustles into the main event, running his own cockamamie company selling waterbeds. Alana Haim, of the pop band Haim, is superb as the permanently exasperated Alana Kane, a young woman with Barbra Streisand’s beauty and charisma; appropriate, perhaps, as Streisand’s notoriously quick-tempered onetime boyfriend Jon Peters is played by Bradley Cooper in a walk-on role, as one of Gary’s dissatisfied waterbed customers. The love between Gary and Alana, if love it is, does not run smooth. Alana breaks Gary’s heart by holding hands with another child actor hardly older than he is; Gary infuriates Alana by putting the moves on a girl his own age. Alana retaliates by flirting with ageing movie star Jack Holden (Sean Penn), presumably based on William Holden (why not just make him William Holden?) and then uptight political candidate Joel Wachs (Benny Safdie). But we all know, even if we can scarcely believe it, where this is heading. And this hypnotically gorgeous, funny, romantic movie freewheels its way around from scene to scene, from character to character, from set piece to set piece, with absolute mastery. You float and ripple around it as if on a waterbed. But every casual line, kiss, automobile ride, set-up and joke is a joy.Given the ubiquity of René Magritte’s images in our culture it is a shock to learn that no one was interested in the Belgian surrealist until it was almost too late. All those bowler-hatted men with occluded faces, the pipe that isn’t a pipe, the giant apples and the looming clouds were hard to like and difficult to sell until 1965, when a major retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art in New York put him explosively on the map. Suddenly everyone from Andy Warhol and Roy Lichtenstein to a young Ed Ruscha couldn’t get enough of Magritte’s visual teases, linguistic puzzles and deadpan affect, which made banal objects – combs, matchsticks, bird cages – at once uncanny and irresistible. And still his reign continues: we are all Magrittians now, whether we know it or not, automatically decoding puzzles of space and scale presented to us in the countless advertisements and other commercial art that remains saturated by his hi-lo sensibility. Magritte only had two years left to live by the time of the MoMA show, dying in Brussels in 1967 in the “villa” he had commissioned from an architect using his late-burgeoning fortune. He and his wife Georgette were very particular about having wall-to-wall carpeting. These dull, bourgeois touches are important, since the received narrative about Magritte’s life has always been that, in contrast to his shocking and sometimes pornographic imagination (one of his most famous works shows a woman’s naked body cut into pieces), his life was one of almost parodic respectability. He stayed married to the woman he had met when he was 14, invariably wore a suit like one of the men in his pictures, and took the dog (which was always called Loulou) for its walk at the same time every day. Alex Danchev suggests that Magritte’s rigid scheduling and besuited self-presentation may have provided a model for our own Gilbert and George. Danchev, who died suddenly and far too young in 2016, has produced surely the definitive full-length biography of an artist whose life has too often been considered too dull to bother with. The final chapter of this book was completed by the Magritte scholar Sarah Whitfield. But everything else is pure Danchev – immaculately researched, deeply felt and with a knowledge of the wider political and economic pressures at play in the 20th century that came from his day job as a professor of international relations at St Andrews University. Danchev can talk about Magritte’s fractured home life – his father was a bully and a bore, his mother killed herself when he was 13 – with as much insight as he brings to the artist’s move from abstract to figurative art in 1926, or the appearance of Nazi soldiers stamping down the Brussels streets in May 1940. The shift to figurative art came at around the time that Magritte decamped to Paris, in an attempt to consort with the reigning stars of surrealism – André Breton, the poet Paul Éluard, Max Ernst, Salvador Dalí and the rest. Inevitably it was an edgy time. Magritte was truculent, clinging to his outsider status (he took a flat far out in the suburbs) while wanting to show the French citizens that he could give them a run for their money. They, in return, mocked his Walloon accent and cloddishness (his suit read as petit bourgeois bank clerk rather than ironic disguise). Still, it was a hugely prolific and productive time. It was then that Magritte started experimenting with his word pictures, which remain his best known works. In these he set out to sunder the stale connections between text and a particular image. The big breakthrough came with La Clef des Songes (The Interpretation of Dreams), a painting divided into four panels. In the upper left is a holdall labelled “Le ciel” (“the sky”); in the upper right, a penknife, labelled “L’oiseau” (“the bird”); in the lower left, a leaf, labelled “La table” (“the table”); in the lower right, a sponge, labelled “L’éponge” (“the sponge”). It was a format that he would repeat many times, each iteration further driving home the arbitrary and treacherous nature of language. No surprise, then, that decades later post-structuralists including Derrida and Foucault couldn’t get enough of Magritte’s images, which on the surface pass as gags, but which actually comprised a profound meditation on the instability of meaning in the modern world. • Magritte: A Life is published by Profile (£30). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.It’s a familiar image. There’s a well-stacked burger: domed bun, a couple of patties, the crimson flash of fresh tomato. It’s not unappetising. Next to it, however, is an emblem for all that is naff, irritating and deathly in the restaurant world: a mini chip fryer basket full of chips. Because what could be more fun than a miniaturised version of a piece of kitchen equipment? It’s exactly the kind of thing you’d expect to find in a dreary low-rent British gastropub; one that has decided crass serving items are a substitute for a commitment to good food. Except this image is not from a clumsy gastro pub. It’s certainly not from Britain. It’s from Fast Food Le Jasmin, a restaurant in Guelma, in north-eastern Algeria. I can show you other examples from Costa Rica and French Polynesia. For the joyous revelation that restaurant stupidity is not restricted to the UK, we must thank a Twitter account called Random Restaurant or @_restaurant_bot, created by one Joe Schoech. As its name suggests, it uses a bot to search Google randomly for information on restaurants all over the world. Around 20 times a day it posts a map link, plus the first four photographs it finds. Certain countries, including China, are excluded because Google isn’t available there. Otherwise, it provides an extraordinary window on how we eat out globally. So what can we learn, other than that mini chip fryer baskets are a planet-wide blight? Firstly, pizza is available bloody everywhere. A quick scroll through Random Restaurant would convince anyone it is the global dish. It’s on the menu at Ghibabo Restaurant and Pizzeria in Eritrea, Aroma Pizza and Café, Bhutan, Twins Pizza &amp; Burgers, Suriname and Roliz Pizza, Ghana. Also, these pizzas generally look awful: pallid, thick biscuity bases, pucks of waxy cheese, indeterminate meat. Though, to be fair, none looks quite as terrifying as the stuffed crust monstrosities served at Pizza Hut on Jersey. Talking of brands, they appear less frequently than you might imagine. While the big players like KFC, McDonalds and Subway make an occasional showing, they are vastly outnumbered by what are clearly family-run cafes. There is something utterly compelling about being able to glimpse these places in far-off countries where real life is played out: the strip-lit dining room of the Ochil Dasturxon Restorani in Yanikurgon, Uzbekistan with its bronzed baked goods, or the functional thatched roof of the terrace at the Gambia’s punningly named Come Inn. These are third spaces, where communities gather. Indeed, the fancier a restaurant happens to be, the more detached from its surroundings it seems to become. At the top end all luxury restaurants end up looking the same, a mess of upholstery and polish, as if they’ve all been following the same Instagram accounts. What else? Madagascan restaurant Eurasia seems to serve really good ramen. I want the roast piglet at Charcuterie Colombia in Togo, west Africa. Bring me a kebab platter from Leonidas Gyros in Budapest. I am less attracted by the food at Sushi Shop in Polack, Belarus where everything comes slathered in Day-Glo mayonnaise, and many of the dishes at Altin Balik in Turkmenbashi, Turkmenistan look frankly terrifying. There’s a curl of roasted fish, complete with pointy head, which looks like it might eat you before you eat it. But the main things that Random Restaurants really teaches us is this: almost all food photographs on the internet are truly terrible, an overlit riot of brown, beige and sludge. And that’s even when they don’t turn up with the eye-rolling calamity that is the ubiquitous mini chip fryer basket.EU citizens and other non-Irish or non-British nationals who cross the border from the republic of Ireland into Northern Ireland will have to get pre-clearance under new rules being proposed by the UK government. They will require a US-style waiver known as an Electronic Travel Authorisation (ETA) to cross the border as part of the new post-Brexit immigration nationality and borders bill. The scheme is expected to come into force in 2025 but has already been denounced as “unworkable” on the Irish border, where thousands of people commute in both directions for schools, work and shopping. Stephen Farry, an Alliance party MP, said it would create “new bureaucracy” and “legal uncertainty” for ordinary people going about their daily business, while the campaigner Emma DeSouza said the move was “absolutely wild” and would represent a “hardening of the border”. The immigration minister Kevin Foster told the House of Commons Northern Ireland affairs committee that the ETA would be a simple authorisation, obtained online, and would, like the US Electronic System for Travel Authorization (ESTA) last multiple years. Asked if the UK would be checking paperwork at the border, he said: “Absolutely not”. “We don’t operate routine immigration controls through the common travel area,” he said referring to unique rules and laws that allow British and Irish nationals to live, work, study or retire in each other’s country without immigration controls. “We anticipate this will be a fairly simple process. When the US ESTA originally launched you could fill it in at the airport and fly an hour or two later. “I don’t want to perhaps get that type of guarantee yet, but we’re certainly looking at how we can make a simplified process as quick and simple,” Foster added. The issue of post-Brexit borders creates particular problems in Ireland where EU nationals still enjoy freedom of movement rights, which means they do not need visas to live or work south of the border. The 5.2 million EU citizens and their families who have been granted pre-settled or settled status in the UK who holiday on the island of Ireland will not be impacted. Foster said any non-Irish or non-British national who did not have the right to be in the UK visa-free would “probably get used to the idea that they need to apply for something in terms of [travel into] the UK”. He said he was very “conscious” of the special circumstances that applied around the Irish border and that “enforcement of it will be proportionate”. This is not the first time the issue of Northern Ireland being used as a “back door” to immigration to the UK has arisen. Before Brexit, police on both sides of the border coordinated control of non-EU immigration abuse of the common travel area through a joint scheme known as Operation Gull. Data is not published but records shared with an Irish politician showed that in 2017, almost 800 individuals trying to get into Britain via Northern Ireland were stopped in one year. Post-Brexit, EU nationals living in Ireland entering the UK via Northern Ireland would not be required to show passports as there was no airline liability on these internal routes, said Foster. This would not, however, mean they could circumvent post-Brexit rules on work or residency rights as the Home Office’s “compliant environment” would “kick in”, he said, which requires employers and landlords to check their rights.John, 71, Pickering, North Yorkshire Occupation Retired engineer Voting record Votes for the candidate, not the party, and currently supports the Conservative MP Kevin Hollinrake, “a very good man, in with the wrong gang at the moment” Amuse bouche Keeps four bullocks, though being five months old, they are properly called stirks Linda, 59, Scarborough, North Yorkshire Occupation Semi-retired university tutor Voting record Brought up in a Tory household, cast her first vote for Margaret Thatcher in 1979. Since then has floated between Lib Dems, Greens and, predominantly, Labour Amuse bouche Recently played a Paraguayan millionaire in an amateur production of 1920s musical Mr Cinders For starters Linda He arrived first – he looked sweet and approachable, not at all like a scary fascist. John Linda seemed very friendly, very amicable, very lighthearted – a lovely kind of woman. Linda I had a risotto – I’m pescatarian – then an amazing ice-cream with creme brulee. John I had beef pie with square chips, triple-thingy-ed. Linda I think he’s one of the most charming men that I’ve met. Apart from my husband, obviously. John She’s kind, forgiving. She doesn’t like what I do or how I live. The big beef Linda In a rich country like the UK, there’s no need to eat meat. There’s so much choice. Why bother having something killed to eat a corpse? John likes to have livestock. He said he had too many cockerels at one point, so had them dispatched and then ate them. I just thought, there’s millions of other things you could eat, why not just leave the poor buggers alone? But the most shocking thing was his Christmas present for his kids this year. He personally selects a sheep and then takes it to the abattoir to be butchered, then gives it to them in a box. He did it last year. I said: “Did they like it?” And he said: “They didn’t say, so I’m doing it again this year.” John I think her idea of animals is you keep them until they get old and die. But Linda likes fish. I pointed out to her that fish go through an awful trauma to end up on our plates. She didn’t think that was the case, until I explained to her that, if I’m a fish 300ft deep in water, and I go from there to surface in the time it takes to winch a net up, my swim bladder would blow up inside me. I’d rather be a sheep and have somebody pop me off quickly than go through that. Linda One thing I will say for him is that he’s under no illusions about the origins of meat. And he knew much more about deep-sea fishing than I do. John I could see it clonking in her head: “I’ve never thought of that.” Sharing plate Linda We had this massive similarity – I’m half-Polish and his wife is of Polish Jewish extraction. He’s been to Poland loads of times, and actually knows more about the country than I do, because my dad was traumatised by the war and never talked about it. John They are wonderful people. You find connection in Poland, because that’s just the way it is. Linda One thing I’m very sad about is the far-right Polish government, and Lukashenko in Belarus, shipping those poor refugees to the border where they’ll find no sanctuary. John We agreed about immigration. People have to experience it for themselves before they can be critical of migrants. We both agreed that Priti Patel is a pretty nasty piece of work. And we understood mutually what you go through, what your parents’ generation might have gone through. So we were very connected. For afters Linda We were both utterly condemnatory about Prince Andrew. We both thought it was disgusting that Boris Johnson said the royals were “beyond reproach”. John But I think Prince Charles has a lot to be praised for. We’re all talking about eco-this and conservation-that. He’s been doing it for 50-odd years. Takeaways John She wrote her number on a piece of paper, with one of those pencils you girls use to paint your eyes with. The kind of thing you do on a first date. It was a lovely, not-to-be forgotten evening. Linda I said: “If you’re ever in Scarborough, give me a call.” Additional reporting: Naomi Larsson • John and Linda ate at Ox Pasture Hall, Scarborough Want to meet someone from across the divide? Click here to find out moreWarning: this review contains spoilers from the first episode of And Just Like That. The first 20 minutes of the long-anticipated, much-hyped reboot of Sex and the City, And Just Like That (Sky Comedy/HBO Max), are terrible. The Manhattan streets are alive with the sound of crowbars jimmying more exposition into the dialogue than Carrie’s closet has shoes. Samantha’s absence (Kim Cattrall declined to take part in the new show, apparently as a result of longstanding animus between her and Sarah Jessica Parker) is briskly dealt with. She moved to London (“Sexy sirens in their 60s are still viable there!” says someone with their tongue not firmly enough in their cheek) in a fit of pique after Carrie told her she didn’t need her as a publicist any more. That this does not square with anything we have ever known about Samantha apparently matters not a jot. Viewers are then led at a quick jog through the news that Carrie’s Instagram account has really taken off now she is on a podcast, Charlotte is still dyeing her hair, and Miranda has left her corporate law job and is heading back to college to get a masters degree in human rights law after realising she “can no longer be part of the problem”. Writer and showrunner Michael Patrick King gets her to lay out the show’s organising principle too, for the cheap seats at the back. “We can’t just stay who we were, right? There are more important issues in the world.” You worry – King was, after all, the man responsible for both the execrable SATC movies – but you forgive, because it has been nearly 20 years since we were last together and there was always going to be a bit of awkward catching up to do. The next test of faith, however, is harder and lasts longer. Because then the show starts to address all its past issues and the criticism it has amassed (like its reputation for being the whitest, after Friends, most blinkered show on 90s television) among audiences who weren’t born when it first aired, AND haul itself into the modern world. There are – and this is not said lightly, as it was the worst thing committed to celluloid in recent memory – shades of the crassness of the second SATC film in its confronting of gender-fluidity, sexual orientation, racial sensitivities and privilege. It does so mostly by dragooning new characters into spelling out the problem and granting our three Musketeers a valuable learning experience. And there is a series of excruciating scenes, that could have been written by a high school student for a particularly terrible high school sketch show, between Miranda and her new Black lecturer Dr Nya Wallace (Karen Pittman). They make the former look like the idiot she has never been (“I’m sorry,” she says fretfully after hitting a mugger attacking Wallace, “I wasn’t sure if that was a white saviour moment or not?”) and shunts the latter into an unrewarding role as saint. The onslaught of “woke” teachings lends the show a smugly self-congratulatory rather than ironically self-aware air. This does nothing to make it sing like the original, which – even if it was narrow and elite – knew its world inside out and could allow the comedy and the drama to arise in ways that felt effortless. Perhaps more importantly for the overall success of the series, it reduces the original characters to a baffled trio trying to negotiate a strange new world, as if the only thing ageing has to offer us (or women at least) is confusion and failure. All that said – there are reasons to hope that these are teething troubles only. There is a handful of good lines, there are flashes of the old spirit and there is one sex scene – centred round Big (“I’m getting some lube. I’m not 30”) – that recalls the genuinely pioneering original, and what fun it used to be. There is also, at the end of episode one, a twist that means Carrie at least will have more to do than be aghast at the changing face of modernity. In her new situation, she will be forced to navigate life differently and explore other parts of what it means to grow older. We can only hope the same will be true of the rest, and that the group dynamic can be re-established (including one or more of the so-far peripheral characters, whose casting is too good for them to be sidelined) for the joy and benefit of all. Or at least all who survived. That was a bold launch episode move. RIP.Rolls-Royce is no longer burning cash after making deep cost cuts in response to the coronavirus pandemic, the jet engine maker has said as it appeared to shrug off the fresh uncertainty facing the aviation industry as a result of the Omicron variant. The FTSE 100 company has been hit hard because of its reliance on revenues from maintaining the jet engines it sells. The hours flown by its large engines remain at only half of pre-pandemic levels – albeit an improvement from the average of 43% in the first half of the year. However, Warren East, Rolls-Royce’s chief executive, said the company returned to positive free cash flow in the third quarter of 2021 after a period in which spending has far outweighed inflows. Cash outflow in 2021 would be lower than the £2bn previously predicted, although that was flattered by delayed payments to some clients, he said. There had been a gradual recovery in large-engine flying hours, said East, adding that the company is “controlling what we can control”. But he noted that the recovery had been uneven across different countries and its continuation was unlikely to be linear. “What we’ve seen with the new variant is airlines opening new routes and then pausing,” said East. “It’s going to be a story of 10 steps forwards and two steps backwards.” The emergence of new coronavirus variants represented small interruptions but would not put the aviation industry back further, he added. Rolls-Royce has been forced to ask investors and government for £7bn in equity and debt to keep it afloat during the pandemic. It has also announced sales of businesses worth £2bn, and it will have cut 8,500 jobs by the end of the year. The company has previously said it would be able to generate £750m a year in cash if flying hours reach 80% of pre-pandemic levels in 2022. Investors are worried its recovery will be delayed further by fresh travel restrictions while governments assess the threat posed by the Omicron variant. Despite the company’s upbeat tone on Thursday, investors did not seem as convinced about the aviation sector’s recovery. Rolls-Royce shares were down 3% in morning trading, making it the FTSE 100’s biggest faller. The second biggest faller was International Airlines Group, the owner of British Airways. Rolls-Royce also reported further problems in the supply chain of its power systems business. The unit, which builds large diesel engines mainly for yachts and trains, has taken on more importance as aerospace has suffered. East said these problems included the shortage of semiconductors, an issue that has hit a range of sectors across the world including electronics and the car industry. The disruption has cost Rolls-Royce tens of millions of pounds this year, he said.It is clear there is a three-horse race for the Premier League title as we enter a crucial phase that could have a huge influence on where the trophy ends up. The games are coming thick and fast and the side that navigate the next month most smoothly could make themselves frontrunners. The three teams have very different styles, which makes it a more exciting battle. Manchester City are the side I would pay to watch because of their buildup and team play. Opponents know what City are going to do but are usually unable to stop them thanks to the bewildering level of attacking talent at Pep Guardiola’s disposal. Sometimes, though, that brilliance is not enough to win games, as Crystal Palace proved by defensively blocking and making themselves difficult to break down, leading to rare individual errors from City. What could prevent City from retaining the title is their well-documented lack of a No 9, which was evident against Palace. Against the top teams City are irresistible but when sides defend deep they can lack cutting edge. Considering how much quality they have going forward it is surprising they have scored the fewest league goals (32) out of the top three, but that is influenced by the lack of a striker. Jack Grealish has come in and been creative but has not hit the ground running, scoring one and assisting twice in the Premier League. They have missed Kevin De Bruyne, which is one of the main reasons they have not been scoring as much. Last season he created 12 goals, five more than anyone else at City. Bernardo Silva is the standout performer this season but he is a very different player; De Bruyne’s delivery from deeper areas is different to Silva’s and City’s set-piece threat without the Belgian is weaker. Although City have won their past five league games, Liverpool look the best team at the moment. They have 44 goals already as they return to their best form after a tricky season. Injuries and a lack of form cost them in 2020-21 but they have players back in their best positions, such as Jordan Henderson returning to central midfield after being forced to play in defence, and the forwards look unstoppable. The form of the front three is much improved but that is because the team are defending better. It means the attacking players can spend more time on the front foot and play in the right parts of the pitch, and also makes them better on the counter because the side have a stability that gives confidence to the forwards to help execute the gameplan. Not only is Liverpool’s starting XI stronger but their bench is too, with a player such as Kostas Tsimikas pushing Andrew Robertson for his place and also allowing the Scotland captain to rest. Any manager wants healthy rivalries and when you have all your players fit, healthy and available, training improves because you have better 11 v 11s and greater competition. You can also rotate so there is more freshness to the side, which Jürgen Klopp has done. However, Liverpool may encounter problems in January when they will almost certainly lose players to the Africa Cup of Nations. Naby Keïta, Sadio Mané and Mohamed Salah are due to travel to Cameroon and no matter how good Liverpool’s squad are, any team would miss that sort of quality. They need to work out how to cope without them and Klopp could potentially dip into the loan market to cover shortcomings. Chelsea need to react to more immediate problems. I have watched all Chelsea’s games over the past month and I think they have played poorly. The pleasing part for them at Watford was that it is the poorest I’ve ever seen them but they still managed to come away with a win. I cannot hang my hat on anyone playing in the No 10 position to be clinical in creating goals, which is why they have been so heavily reliant on the wing-backs Reece James and Ben Chilwell, who is now injured, to make, and score from, chances. Romelu Lukaku is available again and Chelsea need to start playing to his strengths to get their season back on track. Currently the striker does not fit into the style Thomas Tuchel is using. Many think he is best playing with his back to goal but he is better when he is turning and driving at players. I think the service up to the Belgian has not been great; they have launched it up to him and then he has someone wrapped around his neck or two players marking him. Brentford, for instance, won a lot of second balls and made it difficult for him. Lukaku needs to get back into a rhythm but because Tuchel chops and changes the No 10s so much, maybe the team cannot find one with their attacking players. They may still be getting results but the fluidity in the frontline is not there and they need to rediscover it quickly. With European competition out of the way until next year, each club can focus on their burst of domestic fixtures. By the end of this short spell of six league games each up to 2 January, culminating in Liverpool’s trip to Stamford Bridge, we will have a better idea of where the title is heading, but each club have issues to address and the side that deal with the problems best could be celebrating in May.Just in time for the holidays, Chipotle has released its own cilantro soap. It is a joke, because cilantro tastes soapy to some people, but also it is real, in the sense that it costs $8 and is actually soap. “The perfect gift for cilantro lovers and haters alike,” the copy promises. It is a testament to the power of cilantro that it inspires this kind of passion. I am not saying it is fair. I am just saying: nobody is making gag gifts about marjoram. In the US, “cilantro” generally refers to the stems and leaves, while the seeds are coriander; in most of the rest of the world the whole thing is just called coriander. And right now, cilantro is everywhere: in ceviche and on tacos, blended into chutneys and served alongside bowls of pho. It is in the produce aisle of your average big-box supermarket. It is in the “Southwest Chopped Salad Kit” at Target, and sprinkled on top of avocado toast. It is so ubiquitous as to be invisible; to comment on the rise of cilantro is like announcing that you’ve just noticed salt. And yet very clearly there has been a change. Over the last two decades, the California cilantro crop has nearly doubled. In 1999, the state’s farmers grew 24,280 tons, according to the California Department of Agriculture’s numbers. In 2019 – the most recent stats available – it was up to 42,340. (2018 had technically been even better, at 61,471 tons, but crops are fickle. The point is, numbers are trending up.) Frank Ratto is the president of Ratto Bros, which has been growing and shipping California produce since 1905. As a veteran of the cilantro business, he says that in the past 10 to 15 years demand for cilantro has shot up to become one of their top selling items, crucially outpacing basil, a height most herbs could never hope to reach. It is the number-one selling fresh herb at Kroger, a spokesperson told me. In the last two years alone, the company has seen double-digit growth. “I remember when it was just in the small trays,” says Gustavo Arellano, the author of Taco USA: How Mexican Food Conquered America, and a Los Angeles Times columnist who has spent most of his life shopping in Mexican markets in southern California. “Now, there’s a field’s worth of it. It’s incredible how much cilantro people go through.” In the last year, the New York Times cooking pages, cultural arbiter that they are, published 105 cilantro-forward recipes, among them Yemeni zhug, Goan chicken cafreal and Moroccan saffron fish. Salt Bae, the internet sensation known for his steak theatrics, gave rise to Cilantro Papi, who could shred the herb in seconds. “Why are people putting cilantro in everything?” one cilantro hater asked Texas Monthly, miserably. Many flavors hit a natural ceiling. Take rosemary, suggests Suzy Badaracco, president of the trend forecasting company Culinary Tides. Cilantro, though, does not have that problem; it is, despite its vocal detractors, on the whole, easy-going and well-liked. “If you had a party at your house, cilantro would show up in a sexy little dress, she would bring you a fabulous bottle of wine, and she would stay and help you clean up. Whereas watercress would show up drunk, probably throw up on the carpet and take your dog on the way out.” Cilantro is used in cuisines across the globe, and is adaptable to even more. “She can be the lead singer or the backup dancer, depending on what you put her in,” Badaracco says. “It’s kind of friendly with everything.” It isn’t like there’s anything new about cilantro; if anything, the thing about cilantro is that it is very, very old. The plant comes up in early Sanskrit writings. It is mentioned in the bible. Seeds were found in King Tut’s tomb. It became a staple of Mexican cooking, South Asian and Southeast Asian cooking, Chinese and Middle Eastern cooking. Cilantro “is probably the most commonly used flavoring herb of any in the world” observed Tom Stobart in his 1982 aromatic opus, Herbs, Spices, and Flavorings, noting that it was now “catching on in the Western world”. It’s so old that when I emailed Badaracco to get her read on the cilantro situation, she’d been confused about the question. “When you brought it up, I was like, ‘why on earth would she focus on cilantro,’” she told me later, on the phone. “Nobody’s talking about cilantro. It’s like focusing on parsley.” But Americans, on the whole, have not been an especially herb-y people. We were slow on the uptake. Our herbs were minimal – you only really need six of them, Betty Crocker’s Picture Cook Book promised in 1950 – and most of them were dried. But in the late 70s – or perhaps the early 90s, depending on where in the country you were – that began to change. The food writer Bee Wilson gives Italian basil the credit. “With its soft, heavily perfumed leaves,” she writes, rhapsodically, it was “the first herb to transform modern Western cooking.” Fresh herbs fit the moment: processed food was out and the country was suddenly chef-obsessed. “When my family first came here to America in 1975, we were so happy to see cilantro at the mainstream supermarket,” recalls chef and author Andrea Nguyen, whose family settled in San Clemente, California, after fleeing Vietnam. It is a backbone of Vietnamese cooking, and there it was, bunched in the produce aisle at Albertson’s. “We felt like, ‘oh, okay, we can be Vietnamese.’” Nobody I talked to for this story could point to a single moment when it happened. “It’s not one thing,” says Gabriella Petrick, a food historian and Marie S Curie fellow at the University of Stavanger, in Norway. “It’s a bunch of things coalescing.” Between 1980 and 2000, the Hispanic population of the US more than doubled, and the number of Asian Americans more than tripled, and has, in the years since, tripled yet again. “People who might have been using cilantro dishes before were transplanting and moving around the country to different regions and bringing dishes with them,” says Lori Flores, an associate professor of history at Stony Brook University who is at work on a book about the history of Latinx food workers in the north-eastern United States. “So it’s not just about external migration from other countries. It’s also the internal movements of people who are moving to the Pacific north-west or to the north-east or to the deep south.” As Petrick puts it, “the expansion of communities who use lots of cilantro”, cooking at home, using enough cilantro that big-box chain grocers want in. And meanwhile, you also have a new burgeoning class of celebrity chefs – mostly white, generally middle-class – who are moving away from the Francophilic era of James Beard and Julia Child. “They’re the maverick generation, right? They don’t want the current continental cuisine anymore. They’re looking for the different flavors and combinations, and that’s what they bring back with them.” Before she moved to Los Angeles and opened Border Grill with Susan Feiniger in 1985 – before she became one of Too Hot Tamales on the Food Network – Mary Sue Milliken was just a cilantro-deprived kid growing up in Michigan. “When I went to chef school in Chicago, even parsley was sort of still a little green garnish on a plate. You know, ‘have a sprig,’” she says. When the pair opened their first restaurant, City Cafe, in 1981, they were using no cilantro. Then Feiniger went to study in India. “That upped our cilantro purchases – we went from zero to maybe three bunches a week.” A year after that, Milliken went to Thailand. “When I got back, we put some Thai dishes on the menu, and that upped it to maybe a bunch a day.” There was one curry in particular: red, topped with a heaping pile of cilantro. “Back then the Thai restaurants were, of course, doing that, but not restaurants run by white girls.” And then they opened the Mexican-inflected Border Grill. It would catapult them to stardom. It would also, by her estimate, at least triple their consumption of cilantro. There may not be a single moment when American food culture changed forever, but if you had to pick one, you could do worse than 1991: the year US salsa sales overtook sales of ketchup. It was a sea change in the condiment industry, one so big there is a Seinfeld episode about it. “It’s only in dollars,” Petrick says about the shift in popularity, salsa tending to be more expensive than Heinz. “It’s not in volume.” Still, it embodies a fundamental shift. “Salsa has become just ingrained in American culture as being American,” she argues. “The idea of salsa and chips just pervading American snack culture – that requires a lot of cilantro.” From there, it is only a matter of time. “Generally, it takes about a generation – 20 or 30 years – for a new food to make it into your grocery basket on a weekly basis,” Petrick says. By the USDA’s numbers, we are right on schedule. Not everyone feels positive about cilantro. There is a small but vocal minority of the population who do not experience the herb as a beguiling burst of freshness. What they taste is soap. There are lots of foods that some people like and other people don’t like – some people don’t like olives; I don’t personally care for passionfruit – but cilantro challenges the notion of a shared reality. “We fundamentally experience it differently,” explains John Hayes, a sensory and consumer scientist at Penn State University. The lovers and the haters are not tasting the same thing. “The idea is, there’s a normal mutation in the normal population,” he explains; how you feel about cilantro is – at least, to some extent – a fluke of your genes. But to say that it’s just genetic is too simple. “People try to make taste and eating behavior all about nature versus nurture,” Hayes says, “but the answer is, it’s always both.” Genetic variability does “fundamentally alter” the way we perceive stuff; researchers at 23andMe got as far as pinpointing a specific gene that seemed to correlate with distaste for the herb. But they also found that genetics seemed to be a tiny piece of a larger puzzle. “With repeated exposure and other rewards, you can learn to like things,” Hayes tells me. Even, probably, cilantro. After all, people develop tastes for all kinds of once-repellent flavors. “We know people do it in the case of beer, and we know people do it in the case of coffee, and we know people do it in the case of chili peppers,” he points out. There is no particular reason cilantro should be different. “It should be easy to study, conceptually,” says Hayes, but good studies are expensive, and “it’s really hard to convince the National Institutes of Health to give somebody $2m to spend five years figuring out why some people do or don’t like salsa.” “I definitely feel like it’s very unique,” says Milliken, who is nibbling on cilantro in her Los Angeles garden and reporting back by phone. “It’s very … fresh tasting,” she considers. “Green. It calls out for lime and chili. It’s really dancing in your mouth.”Broadly speaking, there are now two types of reality TV star gracing screens. There are those who exist only within the confines of the genre, suspended in a Groundhog Day cycle as they jump from show to show until they land on their own spin-off. And there are those who see reality TV as a stepping stone to something bigger. Increasingly, contestants are defecting to the second category. Take the breakout star of Love Island season 5, Maura Higgins, who recently left her management in order to pursue modelling and distance herself from the programme that made her famous in the first place. “She’s desperate to move away from reality TV,” an insider said. Molly-Mae Hague, a contestant from the same season and arguably the most successful Love Islander of all time, did the same. Starting out as many alumni do – as an ambassador for fast fashion brand PrettyLittleThing – she this year secured a seven-figure deal with the brand as its creative director. Her ascent corresponds with the decline in how often she mentions the show publicly. Hague explained that distancing herself from it was something she had done “from the start”, since she had “never wanted to be known as a Love Islander” in case it shut her out of other opportunities. Higgins and Hague may be on to something. It’s not necessarily easy for reality stars to escape their “lowbrow” pasts, but if they manage it, it’s lucrative, as various one-time Love Island stars have shown. Kem Cetinay and Chris Hughes became TV presenters on their departure from the show. Wes Nelson and Jack Fowler have pivoted to music. Dr Alex George is now the youth mental health ambassador at the department for education and a bestselling author. And not one of them mentions the show in their social media bio. Granted, they all left the series some time ago, but even cast members from this year’s season have already removed references from their profiles. For a period, “reality TV star” became a career in and of itself – nowadays, it is no more than a launchpad for other endeavours. It’s something we are seeing more and more; when Geordie Shore celebrated its 10-year anniversary with a reunion show, former star Vicky Pattison was nowhere to be seen. She famously distanced herself from the show, and her friends on it, to reinvent herself as a TV presenter, with her own programme Judge Geordie and a role as a Loose Women panelist. Similarly, former The Only Way Is Essex staple turned TV presenter Mark Wright and fitness entrepreneur Lucy Mecklenburgh were lambasted by fellow castmate Georgia Kousoulou for seeming to “forget where they came from” when they skipped the show’s 10-year reunion special earlier this year. It might seem harsh, brushing off the hand that fed you, but who can blame them? Regardless of how many hope to reinvent themselves, viewers have long memories. Strictly Come Dancing’s blanket ban on reality stars taking part was upheld yet again this year, a stance that appears even more harsh considering that they have relaxed their stringent rules to allow online personalities and influencers to be a part of the show. Wright took part before the ban was implemented in 2018 and Made in Chelsea’s Jaime Laing did in 2020, but only because he had already begun to make a name for himself beyond the show. Others have been equally successful. Megan McKenna (Towie, Ex on the Beach) is in the midst of rebranding herself as a country singer, at one point topping the UK iTunes chart. And most people don’t remember that Alison Hammond got her start on Big Brother. But not every reputation is as easy to shake. Joey Essex is supremely famous, but will always be so for being Joey Essex from The Only Way Is Essex. His castmate Jess Wright tried her hand at music while on the show but was never taken seriously. This was also the case for another Towie alum, Jasmin Walia, who repeatedly tried to kickstart a serious music career to no avail. In order to have a chance at a new career, total renunciation of your TV roots is required. The transition appears to be an easier one to make in the US. The American version of Strictly, Dancing With the Stars, lets in reality-show performers, too. Perhaps in the UK we are less willing to permit these pivots due to snobbery. As with class, our entertainment hierarchy is slightly more entrenched, with less potential to “transcend” one’s roots. In the US, even the elitist world of fashion welcomes former reality stars; Project Runway winner Christian Siriano has dressed Gwyneth Paltrow, Sarah Jessica Parker, Michelle Obama and Gigi Hadid, to name a few. He was inducted as a member of the Council of Fashion Designers of America, yet his acclaim didn’t stop him from returning to the show as a mentor in season 17. Supermodel Winnie Harlow was scouted on America’s Next Top Model, and the Hadid sisters made their TV debut on The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills. It’s a crying shame that the UK’s attitude to reality stars has barred us from seeing Gemma Collins take on Strictly (Craig Revel Horwood was quoted as saying he didn’t believe she was “high calibre” enough to take part in the show.) Who knows what powerhouse we could be sidelining from the world of reality TV due to our preconceptions, potentially stifling the efforts of the next Cardi B – Grammy award winner, chart-topper and, once upon a time, proud cast member of Love and Hip Hop: New York.It’s nearly Christmas, and everybody loves a good party. Even if the rules say you’re not supposed to have one. But wait! There was no party at Number 10! It was entirely fictional! The prime minister himself said so! So in the manner of a Dickensian spirit of the season, let us visit Boris Johnson in his very reasonably refurbished chamber, where we find him huddled in his Metropolitan police-issue nightcap and Bullingdon Club nightdress, and take him by the hand for a tour of properly fictional Christmas parties. A Christmas Carol by Charles Dickens Our first stop, of course, is London, behind a warehouse door, where old Mr Fezziwig and his employees will show us how a real office party should be conducted. From Dickens’s classic, of course, this was where the Ghost of Christmas Past transported Scrooge to show the miserly old goat that he did once know how to have a good time. “There were more dances, and there were forfeits, and more dances, and there was cake, and there was negus, and there was a great piece of Cold Roast, and there was a great piece of Cold Boiled, and there were mince-pies, and plenty of beer.” What’s more, the whole thing was done by 11pm, so no danger of everyone getting so drunk that they clean forgot the whole party had occurred at all. A Child’s Christmas in Wales by Dylan Thomas For more revelry, let us go west, to Thomas’s 1952 lyrical prose piece, where we find that “Always on Christmas night there was music. An uncle played the fiddle, a cousin sang Cherry Ripe, and another uncle sang Drake’s Drum. It was very warm in the little house. Auntie Hannah, who had got on to the parsnip wine, sang a song about Bleeding Hearts and Death, and then another in which she said her heart was like a Bird’s Nest; and then everybody laughed again; and then I went to bed. Looking through my bedroom window, out into the moonlight and the unending smoke-coloured snow, I could see the lights in the windows of all the other houses on our hill and hear the music rising from them up the long, steady falling night.” Little Women by Louisa May Alcott And further west, still, across the oceans, to the March household in Concord, Massachussetts, where the sisters are given a sobering prelude to their festive fun: “Merry Christmas, little daughters! I’m glad you began at once, and hope you will keep on. But I want to say one word before we sit down. Not far away from here lies a poor woman with a little newborn baby. Six children are huddled into one bed to keep from freezing, for they have no fire. There is nothing to eat over there; and the oldest boy came to tell me they were suffering hunger and cold. My girls, will you give them your breakfast as a Christmas present?” Bridget Jones’s Diary by Helen Fielding Perhaps the universal credit uplift might have helped there? But apologies, Boris, let us away to something a little less socially aware: The Christmas party at the start of Bridget Jones’s Diary, where you might find more your sort of people in Bridget’s mother and her mostly appalling – and often arse-grabbing – guests. Pure 1996: Novelty jumpers, smoking indoors, and proper snow. Oh, and the inexorable sleaze-driven implosion of the Tory party. Harry Potter by JK Rowling But let us not tarry here, let us fly to that bastion of privilege where the elite send their children to be schooled – no, not Eton, but Hogwarts, where JK Rowling’s young wizards really knew how to party in Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone: “After a meal of turkey sandwiches, crumpets, trifle, and Christmas cake, everyone felt too full and sleepy to do much before bed except sit and watch Percy chase Fred and George all over Gryffindor tower because they’d stolen his prefect badge.” We could go on, perhaps to Jane Austen’s Persuasion, and the party where “riotous boys were holding high revel”, or back to Dickens and Great Expectations, where Uncle Pumblechook behaves in the manner of uncles at Christmas the world over: “Every Christmas Day he presented himself, as a profound novelty, with exactly the same words, and carrying the two bottles like dumbbells.” But let us leave our charge in his chamber, wondering if he is a man changed by his experiences, and now knows the difference between an actual fictional party and one that you don’t want anyone to know about. See him throw open the sash window and call out to a passing urchin, “Hallo, my fine fellow! You know that big party they had at the fine house with the black door?” “I do, sir! Everyone is talking of it still!” “Well it never bloody happened! God bless us every one!”Uyghur people living in Xinjiang province have been subjected to unconscionable crimes against humanity directed by the Chinese state that amount to an act of genocide, an independent and unofficial tribunal has found. Hundreds of thousands and possibly a million people have been incarcerated without any or remotely fair justification, the tribunal’s chair, Sir Geoffrey Nice QC, said as he delivered the tribunal’s findings in London. “This vast apparatus of state repression could not exist if a plan was not authorised at the highest levels,” Nice said. The UK-based Uyghur Tribunal comprises lawyers, academics and businesspeople. It has no government backing or powers to sanction or punish China, but its organisers hope the process of publicly laying out evidence will compel international action to tackle alleged abuses against the Uyghurs, a largely Muslim ethnic group. The tribunal’s report says crimes including torture and the systematic suppression of births have occurred. Nice said China’s treatment of the Uyghurs amounted under the Geneva conventions to an intent to destroy all or part of a group physically or biologically, a judgment he said largely rested on the suppression of births. In response to the findings, a cross-party group of British MPs urged the Foreign Office to re-examine its refusal to join the Biden administration and declare a genocide in Xinjiang. Nice said that although some Uyghurs had been killed in detention, there was no evidence of mass killings, and comparisons with the Nazi Holocaust were unhelpful. Those detained were instead largely freed after reindoctrination, Nice said, as part of a central government plan, ordered at the very highest levels, to reintegrate Xinjiang province and break up every aspect of Uyghur culture. “Hundreds of thousands of Uyghurs – with some estimates well in excess of a million – have been detained by PRC [People’s Republic of China] authorities without any, or any remotely sufficient reason, and subjected to acts of unconscionable cruelty, depravity and inhumanity,” the tribunal’s report says. “Sometimes up to 50 have been detained in a cell of 22 sq metres.” The report says there is evidence that detainees have been confined in containers up to their neck in cold water, shackled by heavy metal chains and immobilised for months on end. It says some of the detained have been subjected to extreme sexual violence, including gang rapes and penetration with electric shock rods and iron bars. Women were raped by men paying to be allowed into the detention centre for the purpose, the report says. The extreme intrusive capacity of the Chinese state, including mass coerced labour assignments, intense monitoring and face surveillance, means parts of Xinjiang have become a form of open prison, the report says. The tribunal found evidence of enforced abortions, the removal of wombs against women’s will, the killing of babies immediately after birth and mass enforced sterilisation through the insertion of IUD devices that were only removable by surgical means. “Across the 29 counties with indigenous-majority populations for which we have 2019 or 2020 data, the birthrate has fallen by 58.5% from the 2011-15 baseline average,” the report says. “In those counties that are over 90% indigenous, the birthrate fell at an even greater rate, showing a 66.3% decrease in 2019-20.” Hundreds of thousands Uyghur children have been taken from their families and placed in Han-ran boarding schools, burial grounds have been bulldozed or built over, mosques destroyed, and religious practice banned, it adds. Nice said the tribunal would have been unnecessary if an international court had been asked by fearful governments to investigate the allegations, adding there was an obligation to know the falsity or truth of fellow human suffering and breaches of international human law. He insisted the tribunal had been determined to apply universal standards, act on the basis of proof beyond reasonable doubt and make every effort not to be ill-disposed to communism or the Chinese Communist party. The tribunal received no cooperation from the Chinese state, and instead some of its members have been subject to sanctions by the Chinese state, leading to their withdrawal from the process. During a press conference this week, Zheng Zeguang, China’s ambassador to the UK, said: “The so-called witnesses the organisers have put together are merely actors who have been making up the so-called persecution that never happened at all.” Zheng said he had asked the UK government “to stop the organisers from continuing such malicious behaviour”. A spokesperson for the Chinese embassy in London denounced what it called a “pseudo tribunal” as “nothing but a political tool used by a few anti-China and separatist elements to deceive and mislead the public”. The report was published the day after the US House of Representatives voted by 428 to 1 to ban imports from Xinjiang over concerns about forced labour. Responding to the vote, a Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson said that “the so-called forced labour and genocide in Xinjiang are entirely vicious rumours” and accused the US of using Xinjiang-related issues to “spread rumours under the guise of human rights and engage in political manipulation and economic bullying”. Australia, the US and the UK have declared they will mount a diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Winter Olympics next year. France has so far refused to do so.A major new windfarm project that will power millions of homes is likely to be approved on Friday, but conservationists fear for the safety of endangered birds in the area. The Norfolk Boreas offshore windfarm is due to get the green light from the government, the Guardian can reveal. The windfarm is said to be being backed by Boris Johnson who, government sources claim, is so keen on the project that he refers to himself as “Boreas Johnson” in meetings about it. The Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) source claimed that Johnson was extra keen on the project because of his love of Greek mythology – Boreas was the ancient Greek god of the north wind. It is said the prime minister hopes this can be a flagship green energy project that could make Britain the “Saudi Arabia of wind power”. The windfarms planned for the Norfolk coast – Boreas and another project, Vanguard – are estimated to be able to power 10% of UK homes – around 3.9million UK homes. Wind power contributed 24.8% of UK electricity supplied in 2020, having surpassed coal in 2016 and nuclear in 2018. To meet a net zero pledge in 2030, more windfarms need to be built, as this is currently the UK’s most significant source of renewable energy. However, the north Norfolk coast is home to some of Britain’s most significant colonies of endangered sea birds including kittiwakes, gannets and lesser black-backed gulls. There are concerns from the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds that the blades could kill the birds. On top of this the project involves disrupting the area where the birds feed, and making it more difficult to travel from the ocean to their nests. If it takes the birds too long to fly back to their young, the chicks can starve to death. An RSPB source said the site has difficulties because of the number of rare birds that feed, travel through and nest in the area. “Ultimately we need to get away from sites with unavoidable problems. Which is in the gift of the Crown Estate, as the seabed belongs to the Queen,” he said. “We are very concerned about the cumulative impact of all these turbines in one space. The secretary of state has ‘accepted’ other windfarms will impact on seabirds in this area (some globally important colonies for kittiwakes and others) – and the mitigation methods being proposed are untried and untested, so it could well be over a decade before we know if they will be successful, by which time the damage will have been done to the colony.” A source at BEIS confirmed the windfarm is expected to be approved. The windfarm, which is to be built by the Swedish firm Vattenfall, has also faced complaints from people in Norfolk, who say the vast cabling required to construct the project would be disruptive to their homes. Some 85 parish councils have written to BEIS to express opposition to the plans. The Vanguard project was recently blocked in the high court after a resident argued the joint impact of Vanguard and Boreas would be too disruptive to his home and that the secretary of state had not taken into account the effect of both. The application must now go back to the government for reassessment, according to the Planning Inspectorate. Vattenfall said in a statement: “Offshore wind will be the backbone of our energy system as we tackle climate change. By 2050, it’s estimated that renewable energy will provide 80% of our electricity needs, and much of this will need to come from offshore windfarms. “Norfolk Vanguard and Norfolk Boreas are part of the next generation of windfarms. By working with communities, the supply chain, skills and environmental experts, we have designed projects that can bring real lasting benefits – to Norfolk and the UK. “These windfarms will bring £15m of funding for local communities, and will be in place for the 25-year life of the windfarms. This is the largest funding commitment to Norfolk by an offshore wind company to date.” It argues that biodiversity is at the forefront of its plans: “Each windfarm has its own bespoke monitoring and habitat management plan, developed through the planning process with input from expert groups. “This work constantly improves our understanding of the ways in which wildlife and habitats responds and adapts to wind farms, and helps to inform our research programmes.”The online furnishings retailer Made.com has slashed its revenue guidance, as it warned that supply chain disruptions and shipping delays would defer up to £45m of its revenue into the new year. The company said industry-wide disruptions were offsetting the impact of strong demand for its products, with extended factory closures in Vietnam, congestion in global ports and extended shipping times having already delayed deliveries to customers. Made said those disruptions had “worsened in recent months, negatively impacting the timing of stock intake”. The pandemic has fuelled shipping and manufacturing delays worldwide. Ships have failed to dock at ports where there have been lockdowns or staff shortages, creating a ripple effect that has affected deliveries across the globe. That is on top of factory closures caused by reduced staffing, local Covid restrictions, or energy shortages amid record market power prices that have forced manufacturers to ration power in the run-up to the Christmas season. “Due to increased disruptions, Made now anticipates a greater proportion of revenue to be delayed to early 2022, with a corresponding higher level of deferred revenue for 2021,” the retailer said in a trading announcement on Thursday. The London-based company has now slashed its 2021 revenue guidance to £365m-£375m, saying that £35m to £45m of its sales would be realised next year when items eventually reach customers. Made has previously forecast revenues of £410m for the year. Made also said adjusted profits would also take a £12m-£15m hit in 2021, with those earnings similarly pushed into 2022. However, it assured there would be no impact on its cash position. Its full earnings for the year will be released on 6 January. The revenue downgrade sent shares in the company down more than 15% on Thursday morning to 114.2p each. The shares are trading well below a flotation price of 200p in June. This is despite Made issuing guidance for a 40% rise in annual gross sales to about £440m for the year and reporting a strong performance in the second half of 2021, including successful sales during cyber week at the end of November. Made tried to assure investors it had built up its stock of furniture, and focused on warehousing and logistics, to ensure it could get items to consumers much quicker from 2022 onwards. “Additionally, supply of goods from Vietnam has now returned to close to normal levels, with all key suppliers now operational,” the company added.The transport group Go-Ahead has postponed its financial results and is preparing to suspend trading in its shares as negotiations continue over a £25m breach of Southeastern’s railway franchise agreement. Shares plunged by 25% on Thursday after the news. The bus and rail operator was stripped of the contract to operate the commuter network in September after the government uncovered discrepancies running over several years since 2014. The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, said at the time that an investigation had found that since 2014 Southeastern had not declared more than £25m of historical taxpayer funding that should have been returned, and described this as a serious breach of the franchise agreement’s “good faith” obligation. He said the money had been recovered and further investigations were being conducted into historical contract issues related to the franchise. Go-Ahead’s results, which have already been postponed once, were due to be released on 16 December. They will not be ready until the end of January as its auditor, Deloitte, works through the accounts. The delay means that the group will miss the six-month deadline to file annual results and has to apply to suspend share trading under regulatory rules. Investors have dumped the stock despite an update that suggested the financial results could be slightly ahead of previous guidance, because of smaller than expected costs relating to its remaining UK rail operations at Govia Thameslink Railway (GTR), which runs the Thameslink, Southern, Great Northern and Gatwick Express services. Nevertheless, Go-Ahead will also be making provision for a large fine for the Southeastern breach of contract, as well as the repaid £25m of taxpayers’ money. Go-Ahead said its review of the events led by the chairs of the group and of Keolis, its joint venture partner in rail, had been shared with the Department for Transport. The group said: “Notwithstanding the complexity of the franchise agreements relating to LSER [Southeastern], the review has found that serious errors were made by LSER with respect to its engagement with the DfT over several years.” It added: “In particular, the group accepts that, by failing to notify the DfT of certain overpayments or monies due to the DfT, LSER breached contractual obligations of good faith contained in the franchise agreements. Accordingly, the group has apologised to the DfT.” The chief financial officer of Go-ahead, who was CFO at Southeastern during the affected franchise period, resigned when the scandal broke. Go-Ahead said it could not comment on whether the matter had been referred to the Serious Fraud Office. The issue was understood to relate to overpaid track access grants to pay for using the HS1 high-speed railway, which Southeastern did not declare and return until government accounting teams uncovered the “breach of good faith”. Go-Ahead also told investors that it could face further £10m costs relating to its German rail operations.The Guardian and the Observer have won five awards at the 2021 British Journalism Awards, the most won by any organisation, including the coveted news provider of the year prize. The British Journalism Awards celebrates the best public interest journalism produced for a UK audience, recognising great journalism that is revelatory and has an impact. Commenting on the Guardian winning the news provider of the year award, the judges said: “The Guardian has marked its 200th anniversary in style this year. Its Pegasus Project investigation exposed governments using technology to spy on journalists, politicians and campaigners. Its Noel Clarke investigation gave a voice to ignored victims and secured lasting change to the TV industry. The Guardian’s podcasts and innovative digital storytelling have reached record audiences. And it has all been underpinned by a pioneering business model which has made it the biggest member-funded newsroom in the world.” Marina Hyde took home the prize for comment journalism; Sirin Kale and Lucy Osborne won in the arts and entertainment journalism category for their series of stories on the actor Noel Clarke being accused of sexual harassment; Stephanie Kirchgaessner won the technology journalism category for her work on the Pegasus project; and Aniefok Ekpoudom won the Barbara Blake Hannah award for his work for the Guardian and Observer. There were commendations for the Guardian’s Queen’s consent investigation, as well as for James Tapper in the health and life sciences category. Rukhshana Media, the Afghan women’s media organisation, also won the Marie Colvin award – the Guardian partnered with them on the Women report Afghanistan series last summer. View a full list of winners here.I recently heard the story of a servicewoman in the armed forces who a few years ago was subject to an act of alleged assault by a colleague. The incident was reported to the military authorities and a wealth of evidence was provided, including pictures of bruising, eyewitness accounts and a detailed video statement. Justice has still not been served. Not only was the case reduced to a disciplinary matter in the military court system, but the alleged offender was allowed to continue his service. Sadly, this case is not a one-off. Though most of our servicewomen have fantastic, fulfilling careers, “when things go wrong [for them], they go dramatically wrong”. This was the conclusion of an inquiry into women in the armed forces by the defence select committee from earlier this year. This groundbreaking inquiry was the first of its kind, with around one in 10 female personnel currently serving in the regulars contributing. It uncovered shocking levels of bullying, harassment, and discrimination – including serious offences including sexual assault and rape – and difficulties in making complaints. Female personnel were found to be more than 10 times as likely as their male counterparts to have experienced sexual harassment in the last 12 months, with 40% of women stating that their experiences of the complaints system were “extremely poor”. Having been given a real insight into life for women in the armed forces and making several positive recommendations to improve conditions, last week we finally received the government’s delayed response to the report. Disappointingly, some of the most important recommendations have been rejected. Despite conviction rates for rape cases in the military courts being just 9%, the government has refused the report’s call to move these serious cases into the civilian system. This demand is not new. Labour has argued throughout the passage of the armed forces bill that this should happen for serious sexual offences, murder and manslaughter. The government again voted against this move only this week – despite its own review led by former judge HH Shaun Lyons making the same recommendation in 2018. Despite low conviction rates, ministers continue to claim they are confident that the military’s justice system is “capable of dealing with all offences”. But the reality is that many servicewomen are scared to even report sexual assault in the first place, for fear of the complaint being mishandled, or affecting their job prospects. One woman told the inquiry that it is “well known among service personnel that if you make a complaint there is likely to be ramifications”, while another said that they had experienced “an overwhelming culture of covering up and denying incidents of harassment”. While women in our armed forces are being silenced, the government has chosen to deliberately block positive change that could allow them to be heard. Instead, ministers have again kicked this issue into the long grass by promising a further strategy on sexual assault without saying when this will be published or how this will seek to improve conviction rates. Ultimately, their reluctance to take this issue seriously is unsurprising when they have also refused to recognise “military sexual trauma”. MST is a category that’s already widely used in the US to fully make sense of sexual assault in the military and the impact it has on its victims. The government also announced that it would be setting up a defence serious crimes unit which, while commendable in principle, puts only three out of the 20 related recommendations from its recent service justice system review into law. Time and again, ministers are refusing the opportunity to take seriously the issues of bullying, harassment and assault for female personnel, instead favouring lukewarm alternatives that miss the heart of the issue. On Thursday in parliament, there will be a debate on the findings of the defence committee’s inquiry. Labour will be demanding that the government makes the changes that we so desperately needed for our servicewomen. Our armed forces put their lives on the line for our country; the very least we can do in return is ensure they are properly protected and supported from within their own ranks. Stephanie Peacock is a junior shadow defence minister and the MP for Barnsley EastPeople who send and receive parcels are to be better protected under proposed rules to improve how companies handle complaints amid a wave of problems with deliveries. With Christmas a fortnight away and tighter Covid rules making many more shoppers reliant on parcels, the regulator Ofcom is cracking down on the sector, saying that UK consumers “should be treated more fairly”. Ofcom plans to tighten up the rules on how firms deal with complaints, make it easier for people to contact companies and bring in better protections for disabled customers. It warned that if it did not see “substantial improvements” in customer service and complaints handling, then it would consider enforcement action or further, tougher regulation. More than 10m parcels are delivered on an average day in the UK, and the regulator said its own research found that almost two-thirds (64%) of customers had experienced problems with deliveries in the past three months. Consumer groups have repeatedly claimed that the sector is rife with issues, some of which have been blamed on delivery drivers put under pressure to meet targets. In July this year, Citizens Advice called for fines for delivery companies and warned that the way parcels were delivered was “not fit for purpose”. The charity said its research indicated that 10 people had a parcel lost or stolen every minute. Commonly reported problems include: parcels being left in insecure or inaccessible places such as doorsteps and wheelie bins; the driver leaving before the customer could get to the door; people finding a “sorry you were out” card on the doormat despite being at home; not being able to get through to someone if there is an issue; and companies refusing to take responsibility for mistakes. Last month, Citizens Advice published a “league table” of firms which found that no delivery company received more than three out of five stars. At the bottom of the table were Hermes and Yodel. Ofcom said its research found that around a quarter of senders found it difficult to make a complaint or to contact the parcel company when their delivery went wrong. Two in five said their complaint was only partially resolved, while almost one in 10 were left with their complaint completely unresolved. Under Ofcom’s existing rules, all postal operators must have a simple and transparent complaints process in place. It now plans to strengthen this by saying that customers must be told who to contact and what channels they can use to make a complaint, and also what the complaint process will be and how long it will take. Consumers must also be dealt with by staff who have received appropriate training. Ofcom is also proposing a new requirement for firms to set up, publish and comply with clear and effective policies on the fair treatment of disabled customers, who are more likely to experience problems. As the so-called “universal service provider”, Royal Mail is subject to more regulation than other postal operators. The regulator said its review had found that these rules and safeguards were “generally working well”, though it continued to be concerned about Royal Mail’s efficiency performance. Citizens Advice said it welcomed the new shake-up but added that Ofcom needed to fine companies if their negligence caused problems for consumers.The death of the venerated Jamaican bassist Robbie Shakespeare at the age of 68 finally ends the incomparable partnership he forged with the drummer Sly Dunbar in the dingy nightclubs and hothouse recording studios of 1970s Kingston. Having backed virtually every reggae star and collaborated with an array of international A-listers that includes Bob Dylan, Mick Jagger, Joan Armatrading and Sinead O’Connor, as well as co-producing the career-defining hits of Grace Jones, Shakespeare was the belligerent yang to Dunbar’s yin, a brawny, chain-smoking musician whose consistently meaty bass lines belied a mercurial temperament. With his style defined by a melodiousness that referenced a love of jazz, soul, and rock’n’roll, Shakespeare leaves a vast catalogue, peppered with stone-cold classics. “At school, what I really liked was the drums,” he told me, when we met in Kingston in 1998. “I used to have drumsticks and play on a bench, and then guitar got my attention – rock’n’roll lead guitar – but when I heard the bass, the bass sound powerful and it make a difference. On one track alone, you can play a million different bass lines and that will give you a million different songs.” The son of a domestic worker, Shakespeare was raised in Vineyard Town, east Kingston, where music was a prominent feature of everyday life. During the late 60s, his older brother Lloyd was in harmony group the Emotions with Max Romeo, who often rehearsed at the family home. Robbie began playing his brother’s acoustic guitar, until he was introduced to the bass by Aston “Family Man” Barrett, whose band the Hippy Boys backed the Emotions. “Family Man started showing me the songs, so when Family Man left Hippy Boys I was the lad to come in,” said Shakespeare. “My first bass guitar was given to me by Family Man, which was a Hofner, Beatles style.” The first song Shakespeare played bass on was Errol Dunkley’s languorous cover of the Beatles’ I’ll Be Back, recorded in 1972 for producer Sonia Pottinger, when Shakespeare was still in his teens. He was soon an uncredited guest on the Wailers’ Catch a Fire, playing bass on Concrete Jungle and Stir It Up, and his propulsive presence helped Burning Spear’s Marcus Garvey to become a breakthrough sensation, just as his Fender Jazz helped create hits for Johnny Clarke and Slim Smith in the Aggrovators band. He first met Sly Dunbar at the popular nightclub strip on Red Hills Road, where Shakespeare was playing in Big Relation at a club called Evil People, and Dunbar was fronting Skin Flesh and Bones a few doors down at Tit for Tat. Their paths began crossing with greater frequency at recording studios such as Channel One, where Shakespeare played piano on the instrumental smash MPLA, and when Shakespeare was asked to assemble a band for Peter Tosh’s forthcoming tour, he drew for Dunbar. Their months on the road stimulated the uncommon approach they took for their own joint productions, with funk and soul shaping the output of their Taxi label from 1977, beginning with Gregory Isaacs’ celebratory Oh What a Feeling. Sly and Robbie then began a strong working relationship with Black Uhuru, cutting an impressive series of albums that culminated in Anthem, the first reggae album to win a Grammy. As the rhythmic anchor of the Compass Point All Stars, resident at Chris Blackwell’s new studio in the Bahamas, they helped Grace Jones to achieve international stardom, Shakespeare’s bass emphasising the sensuality of songs such as Pull Up to the Bumper and My Jamaican Guy. “Compass Point was the sweetest environment for a musician because the place is so fucking boring that you have nothing else to do but work,” Shakespeare chuckled, when we met in London in 2005. “You don’t know anyone there and you only know the studio, so you get the work done.” Sly and Robbie’s backing on Bob Dylan’s Infidels reminded that their oeuvre need not be constrained by the reggae idiom; according to Shakespeare, the sessions unfolded organically and were punctuated by a joking camaraderie. “Mick Taylor and Mark Knopfler put out the sheets with the chord changes, and we just deal with it,” Shakespeare emphasised. “When we met, Bob said, ‘I heard that you guys love to work, so I’m gonna blow you out of the ground,’ and I said, ‘Oh no, Bob, it should be the other way round!’ But Bob Dylan is the greatest writer in the universe in our time. I used to love all the Dylan songs I hear, like Seven Days and Lay Lady Lay. Bob Dylan is the man who make me start checking song lyrics.” A move to Florida and frequent touring did not help Shakespeare’s health: overweight and hooked on cigarettes, he endured a longstanding battle with diabetes, to which he has finally succumbed. At the end of our 2005 interview, Shakespeare suggested that the work he and Dunbar made together had widespread appeal because of their musical openness. “Growing up in Jamaica, we were listening to a variety of music,” he said. “At the clubs, you have to be able to play calypso, soul and funk to keep them on the dance floor, too. James Brown, country and western, rock’n’roll, Diana Ross, it was just a mixture of everything.” In channelling this range of influences, Robbie Shakespeare crafted some of reggae’s immortal bass lines – and his uncommon proficiency on his instrument allowed him to transcend the genre, too. It is that blend that puts him in the pantheon of greats.What is avian flu? Avian influenza, also known as bird flu, is a contagious viral disease in animals, caused by a virus loosely related to human influenza. Some strains of the disease have been passed to humans but this is very rare, and usually occurs only after very close contact with infected birds or animals. While all bird species and, less commonly, pigs are thought to be susceptible, domestic poultry flocks are especially vulnerable to infection. Outbreaks can rapidly result in epidemics among bird populations. Public health authorities are concerned about the potential of the virus to mutate into subtypes capable of causing human disease. As a result they warn there is always a threat of a new influenza pandemic emerging. Why is it in the news again? The UK has been hit by a record outbreak that has resulted in 500,000 captive birds being culled this autumn. An avian influenza prevention zone was declared across the UK at the start of November, requiring strict biosecurity measures and all birds to be kept indoors. What are the most dangerous strains? The NHS says there are four strains that have caused particular concern in recent years. The first, identified in 1997, was H5N1, followed by H7N9 in 2013, H5N6 the following year and H5N8 in 2016. The H5N1 form has been the cause of most concern in recent years and the UK government has said particular safety measures were put in place in parts of North Yorkshire on 21 November after confirmed and suspected cases of that strain in poultry in the area. Where has it appeared? The chief veterinary officer, Christine Middlemiss, has said there are 40 infected premises in the UK. They include 38 in Great Britain – of which 33 are in England – and two in Northern Ireland. By comparison, there were 26 outbreaks last winter. A rare white-tailed eagle found dead on Skye is among the wild birds to have tested positive, after a postmortem by the pathology unit at Scotland’s Rural College. It is thought to be the first detected case involving an eagle in Scotland. The adult eagle, from a well-established territory on the Trotternish peninsula, was found dead on 14 November. Ornithologists believe it may have fed on infected greylag geese. Some 22,100 ducks were culled at a commercial premises in Aughnacloy, Co Tyrone, while culling and an exclusion zone was also being applied to a second site in Broughshane, Co Antrim, described as a “small backyard flock”. If it just affects birds, why the panic? It doesn’t. World Health Organization (WHO) figures show that from 2003 to 2021 there were 863 confirmed cases of the H5N1 virus in humans. Of these cases, 456 people died. While transmission is rare, it has happened. So far, most of the human deaths have been in countries in Asia, in communities in which people live in close proximity to poultry. Although it does not easily infect humans, every time it does it increases the chance that the virus could mutate into a form that could be passed from one infected human to another. The WHO fears this could lead to a flu pandemic. How do you catch bird flu? It is very unlikely you will catch the virus unless you have been in close contact with infected birds or someone with confirmed or suspected bird flu. The virus is found in secretions from the eyes and respiratory tract, and droppings of infected birds. Humans can catch the virus by inhaling droplets sneezed by infected birds or the dust from their bedding or droppings. What are the symptoms in humans? They vary depending on the strain. Most infections have flu-like symptoms including fever, coughing, sore throat, runny nose, and aches and pains. Symptoms of the H5N1 subtype are more severe and frequently result in death. Other symptoms can include conjunctivitis – red, sore and discharging eyes. How does it spread? WHO scientists have said they believe it is likely the virus is carried by migrating birds. More recently the UK government has said it “spreads from bird to bird by direct contact or through contaminated body fluids and faeces”. Officials added: “It can also be spread by contaminated feed and water or by dirty vehicles, clothing and footwear … Avian influenza isn’t an airborne virus.” It can spread to humans who touch infected birds, droppings or bedding or who kill or prepare infected poultry for cooking, the NHS has said. People cannot catch bird flu by eating fully cooked poultry or eggs, even in areas affected by an outbreak, health officials have said. What measures is the UK taking? The government has said the chief veterinary officers for each of the UK’s constituent nations have “agreed to bring in new housing measures to protect poultry and captive birds from avian influenza following a number of confirmed cases across Great Britain in recent weeks”. It added: “The new housing measures, which will come into force on Monday 29 November, mean that it will be a legal requirement for all bird keepers across the UK to keep their birds indoors and to follow strict biosecurity measures in order to limit the spread of and eradicate the disease.” How do you spot the virus in birds? Symptoms in infected birds include a swollen head and blue discoloration around the neck and throat. They will also show signs of breathing problems including gaping beaks, coughing, sneezing and rattling wheezing. Poultry farmers will also notice a loss of appetite in the infected birds and a decrease in egg laying. People are advised not touch or pick up any dead or visibly sick birds they find. In Great Britain, dead wild waterfowl or other wild birds should be reported to Defra. Some will then be collected and tested to help scientists understand how the disease is distributed geographically and in different types of bird. What drug treatments are available to humans? There is no vaccine for avian flu. If a person were infected, the NHS has said they would be either told to stay at home or put into isolation in hospital. They would then be treated with an antiviral medicine such as oseltamivir (known as Tamiflu) or zanamivir (known as Relenza). Scientists have found that such treatments “help reduce the severity of the condition, prevent complications and improve the chances of survival. They are also sometimes given to people who have been in close contact with infected birds, or those who have had contact with infected people, for example family or healthcare staff,” the NHS said.Almost two-thirds of the hundreds of mollusc species that live in the deep sea are at risk of extinction, according to a new study that rings another alarm bell over the impact on biodiversity of mining the seabed. The research, led from Queen’s University in Belfast, has led to 184 mollusc species living around hydrothermal vents being added to the global red list of threatened species, compiled by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN). While researchers only studied molluscs that were endemic to the vents (hot springs on the ocean floor), they said they would expect similar extinction risks for crustaceans or any other species reliant on the vents. More than 80% of the oceans remains unmapped, unobserved and unexplored, and there is increasing opposition to deep-sea mining from governments, civil society groups and scientists, who say loss of biodiversity is inevitable, and likely to be permanent if it goes ahead. “The species we studied are extremely reliant on the unique ecosystem of hydrothermal vents for their survival,” said Elin Thomas, the lead researcher. “If deep-sea mining companies want all the metals that form at the vents, they would remove all the habitat that the vent species come from. But the species have nowhere else to go.” The International Seabed Authority (ISA), a UN body, is meeting in Kingston, Jamaica, to agree a route for finalising regulations by July 2023 that would allow the undersea mining of cobalt, nickel and other metals to go ahead. There are at least 600 known hydrothermal vents worldwide, at depths of 2,000-4,000 metres, and each are roughly a third of the size of a football pitch. They act as natural plumbing systems, transporting heat and chemicals from the Earth’s interior in massive geysers, and they also help regulate ocean chemistry. In doing so, vast – and valuable – mineral deposits accumulate at the fissures. The heat from them, on the otherwise cold seabed, also makes them biodiversity hotspots, akin to coral reefs or tropical rainforests. The paper was published in Frontiers in Marine Science and supported by Ireland’s Marine Institute. The scientists examined the regulatory framework and regional management objectives at each site, as well as exploratory mining licences. Of the 184 species assessed, 62% are listed as threatened, many in the territorial waters of countries that have granted deep-sea mining licences, such as Japan and Papua New Guinea. Only 25 species are fully protected from deep-sea mining by local conservation measures, such as in the Azores and Mexico. The extinction threat was worst in the Indian Ocean, where every species was listed as threatened and 60% as critically endangered, and where many mining exploration licences have been issued by the ISA.Steve Bronski, a founding member of the influential British synth-pop trio Bronski Beat, has died, a source close to the group has confirmed. The BBC reported his age as 61. No cause of death was given. His bandmate Jimmy Somerville described him as a “talented and very melodic man”. “Working with him on songs and the one song that changed our lives and touched so many other lives, was a fun and exciting time. Thanks for the melody, Steve.” Bronski, AKA Steven Forrest, formed the band alongside Somerville and Larry Steinbachek in 1983. All three members of the band were out as gay and sought to counter what they perceived as the inoffensive nature of the era’s gay performers by embracing explicitly political themes in their music. America’s Spin magazine described them as “perhaps the first real gay group in the history of pop”. Bronski was raised in Castlemilk, Glasgow, on what he described to Smash Hits as “the largest council housing scheme in Europe”. He left home “various times”, working as a stage hand, a labourer and a stock controller in Harrods, as well as playing bass in a country and western band. He moved to London in 1983. In 1984, he told Melody Maker of his frustration that his family wouldn’t acknowledge his sexuality. At Bronski Beat’s first gig, at the Bell pub in King’s Cross in autumn 1983, they performed six songs – and were given six encores. “The audience was so enthusiastic I just knew something was going to happen,” Bronski told Smash Hits. “Mind you, I knew the group was going to go well as soon as I heard Jimmy singing.” They rejected Paul Morley’s invitation to sign to his label ZTT. His “idea was to have us wear and market T-shirts that basically said that we were gay, because they’d have words like ‘QUEER’ or ‘POOF’ printed on them”, Somerville told Electronic Beats. (Morley signed Frankie Goes to Hollywood instead.) Bronski Beat’s debut single, 1984’s Smalltown Boy, tells the story of a gay teenager leaving his family and prejudice in his hometown for an uncertain life in London. The record’s inner groove was etched with the number of the London Gay Switchboard. It peaked at No 3 in the UK singles chart and has become one of the era’s defining hits and a canonical queer pop song, regularly soundtracking contemporary TV shows (Euphoria, Russell T Davies’ Cucumber) and films (Joanna Hogg’s The Souvenir, French Act Up drama BPM). The trio’s debut album The Age of Consent, also released in 1984, listed the ages of consent for gay sex in countries around the world. The album peaked at No 4 in the UK. That December, Bronski Beat headlined the Pits and Perverts concert at the Electric Ballroom in London to raise funds for the Lesbians and Gays Support the Miners campaign, a performance depicted in the 2014 British film Pride. Somerville left the band in summer 1985 owing to tensions within the group. He went on to have a successful career with the Communards and as a solo artist; Bronski Beat continued with new frontmen. They released two more albums, Truthdare Doubledare (1986) and Out &amp; About (1987), and then paused until 1995’s Rainbow Nation. Bronski continued to produce and record, including collaborations with Jayne County, Darryl Pandy and members of Strawberry Switchblade. He spent much of the 2000s living in Thailand. Steinbachek died in December 2016, shortly after being diagnosed with cancer. In 2017, Bronski spearheaded the recording of a revamped version of The Age of Consent titled The Age of Reason, with vocalist Stephen Granville. “We should be living in an age of reason,” Bronski told Pennyblack Music. “The trans community should not live in fear, and gay kids should not be bullied. We have come a long way, but there is still a long way to go.”Rape “scorecards” published for the first time reveal that the Crown Prosecution Service will miss performance targets dictated by the government after a collapse in prosecutions for the crime. The scorecards, seen as a measure to increase transparency and improve the performance of police and prosecutors, show that while the police have made progress in increasing the number of referrals for rape, the number of charges made by the CPS has only risen slightly. In the spring, government ministers issued an extraordinary mea culpa about the criminal justice system’s failure of rape victims when it published its long-awaited rape review, after the number of alleged rapists being prosecuted fell by 60% in four years to historic lows. It pledged to return the volume of cases prosecuted to 2016-17 levels by the end of this parliament. The scorecards, published on Thursday, show that police referred 639 cases to the CPS in the first quarter of 2021 and 622 in the second quarter, up from a quarterly average of 461 in 2019 but still some way off the 766 quarterly average of 2016. The CPS charged 206 people in the first quarter of 2021 and 292 in the second quarter, up from the 2019 quarterly average of 244. In 2016 the quarterly average number of charges was 538. Andrea Simon, the director of the End Violence Against Women coalition, called the change of pace “unbearably slow”. She said: “The first set of rape scorecards shows that victims of rape will be waiting decades before the number of cases prosecuted reaches the CPS’s own target of returning to prosecution levels from just five years ago.” The scorecards, which are replicated across the criminal justice system for all crimes, come as the government revealed that prosecutors could be made to meet victims of certain crimes – which is thought to include rape and other serious crimes – before making a charging decision, under new proposals as it launched a consultation on a landmark victims’ law. Other measures proposed in the consultation include a duty on the CPS or police to tell victims about the “right to review” scheme, which allows them to challenge decisions not to charge; new community impact statements to show the “collective impact” of an offence; and increasing automatic victim surcharges paid by offenders to a minimum of £100, which would be put towards victim support services. Emily Hunt, an independent adviser to the government on victims, said the scorecards and new legislation would provide accountability. “In most organisations there are consequences for repeated failures,” she said. “This ethos should exist across the criminal justice system, but it doesn’t. At the moment victims are not told what to expect and if their rights are ignored, nothing happens – that needs to change.” The government also confirmed that victims of sexual and modern slavery offences would not have to give evidence in court with the national rollout of a scheme allowing them to give pre-recorded evidence, known as section 28. The move and consultation was welcomed by the victims’ commissioner, Dame Vera Baird. “We know that we must drastically improve how this country polices and prosecutes rape,” she said. “The national rollout of section 28 will mark a huge leap in the right direction, helping to reduce unnecessary stress and trauma for victims.” Dominic Raab, the justice secretary, said there was a “moral duty” to do better for victims, and support would bring more criminals to justice. “Our plans will give victims a louder voice, a greater role in the criminal justice system, and make criminals pay more to help victims recover,” he said.Frank Hardy, faith healer, was too brainy to be a true artist, his manager thought. And in Aidan Gillen’s portrayal of the itinerant healer in Brian Friel’s celebrated play, Frank’s questioning intelligence is never in doubt. Rumpled, weary and swamped by his overcoat, Gillen delivers the first of his two monologues with an air of analytical abstraction, as Frank looks back, trying to make sense of his healing gift. Returning to the Abbey theatre, where he directed the Irish premiere of Faith Healer in 1980, Joe Dowling brings an affectingly sombre tone to this production. Designed by John Lee Beatty with an unspecific brown, slatted, wooden set, the barn-like stage is somewhat underused, with only Gillen, in his climactic return, swivelling through the whole space, mercurial and mysterious. Perhaps reflecting our current atomised times, a heightened sense of isolation pervades, with the gulf in understanding between the three characters emerging through their separate, unreliable monologues. Frank’s is the first version we hear of the story of how he, his loyal wife Grace (Niamh Cusack) and his rackety manager, Teddy (Nigel Lindsay), traversed rural Wales and Scotland in the 1950s. Setting up their banner in church halls, they waited for the afflicted to arrive in the hope of being cured. Very occasionally, cures did occur during Frank’s “performances”. These were the nights that stood out in hindsight, although each character remembers them in contradictory ways. After 40 years, Friel’s theme of the sources of creative inspiration still resonates: how did Frank do what he did; where did his talent come from; how was it that it struck sometimes but not others? Frank was an artist, Grace asserted, and in Cusack’s emotionally raw performance, this is the faith to which Grace clings, to assuage memories of Frank’s casual cruelty. For all his showbiz patter, Teddy, too, is troubled by the same questions about Frank’s art. Balancing chirpy anecdotes from his old fit-up days with bleak recollections, Lindsay’s portrayal of vulnerability adds a rich note. It suggests a deep, complicated love and dependency between all three characters; a need to believe in something since they have no faith in themselves. At Abbey theatre, Dublin, until 22 January.Summer 2020 was a rough year for Hope Well Wine’s owner, Mimi Casteel. Wildfires spread throughout Oregon, not far from land that she leased to grow more than 20 acres of grapes. The smoke was so bad she had to disable the fire alarms in her home. A gray cloud loomed in the distance for days. “The fires were not super close but were severe enough, burned long enough that we were in very thick smoke for more than a week,” Casteel said. At the time she was selling about 80% of the fruit she grew but last year’s wildfire caused smoke taint – where grapes absorb smoke, affecting the quality of wine they produce. She lost all of her big clients, she said – “they walked out on their contracts”. Casteel had no smoke insurance to cover these losses, which she estimated to amount to about $300,000. In the 1960s, when Oregon’s wine industry started to grow significantly, the historically temperate state seemed like the ideal place for growing grapes for a variety of wines, such as chardonnay and pinot noir. But, said Casteel, “almost as soon as that identity was starting to be recognized … we were facing a loss of that”. The impacts of the climate crisis are making the industry much more precarious. The total area burned during the 2020 wildfire season was among the largest in Oregon’s recorded history, according to the Oregon climate assessment published in January. The report projected that temperatures would continue to increase and wildfires would get bigger. It’s a story that’s playing out globally. Grapes for wine making are grown across the world including countries in Europe, South America and Africa. But as the climate crisis intensifies – bringing increasingly severe wildfires, warmer summers, milder winters as well as unpredictable frosts and rainfall – it is changing wine production. Grapes are among the most sensitive crops to climate changes. For some producers, warming temperatures have been advantageous, at least in the short term. Changing rain patterns, earlier springs and droughts are starting to push wine production towards the poles. There are vineyards as far north as Norway’s Flatdal region. And vineyards in countries such as England have been thriving as Europe experiences warming temperatures. However, for many wine growers the climate crisis is making life much harder. If temperatures rise too quickly, grapes will ripen faster than usual affecting the flavor of the wine. If temperatures plunge, it can devastate vineyards – destroying buds, reducing yield and even killing the vines. Premium grapes for high end wine, in particular, flourish in a very narrow range of weather conditions. Nenad Trifunović, the director of business development at Croatian wine and beer retailer The Wine &amp; More, said making wine is part of his region’s cultural heritage – the Balkan peninsula has been producing wine for more than 2,000 years. Growers used to rely on regular seasonal changes and rainfall patterns but that’s changed, Trifunović said. This past summer countries across the Balkan peninsula, including Croatia, experienced heatwaves that lasted longer than they have historically. The climate crisis will also increase the frequency of droughts in Croatia, according to a 2021 study, which Trifunović says is a challenge as growers in the country scramble to work around changing precipitation patterns. “Even the oldest of vineyards are struggling with an abundance of heat and lack of rain,” he said. Diana Snowden Seysses is based in Burgundy, one of France’s most well-known wine growing regions, where she works with her father-in-law making wine at Domaine Dujac. Her family also owns and runs Snowden Wines in Napa Valley. Last year, her family’s vineyard in California lost about half of its production to smoke taint caused by wildfires in the area. And producers in Burgundy saw an early spring that was followed by unseasonable frosts that damaged grapes on the vine. Domaine Dujac also lost some of its grape crop to the frost. Wine production in France is expected to drop by almost 30% this year. Snowden Seysses estimated that some of the vineyards around her lost about half of their grapes to the frost. The frost was “an agricultural disaster [and a] natural disaster”, she said, adding: “So it’s not just heat; it’s erratic weather patterns”. Winemakers in the region are considering making changes in how they work with vines in the hope of saving future harvests, said Snowden Seysses. She described how some growers let a long shoot grow on the vine and once growers know that spring has officially started and the frost won’t come back, the top of the shoot is cut off. This method can slow down the vine’s growth so that fewer potential buds are lost to the frost. Snowden Seysses also said that Domaine Dujac is looking to plant fruit trees to provide better shade and humidity to protect grapes during unseasonably hot days, but there are challenges to implementing that method. “[Burgundy’s] vineyards are Unesco protected,” said Snowden Seysses. “We have to ask for authorization for every single tree because it was not there before the Unesco protection. But historically there were fruit trees.” In Oregon, Casteel has changed her setup, too. She has downsized the vineyard to only two and a half acres to ensure that the work needed to grow and then harvest the grapes can be done quickly. She has also invested in smoke insurance. After seeing how vulnerable pinot noir grapes are to smoke taint, Casteel plans to turn her efforts towards white wine varieties. “The scale of the business is just altogether much smaller,” she said. Climate focused wine groups have sprung up in recent years to help producers in the industry navigate climate issues. The Porto Protocol, an international non-profit that aims to make the wine industry more sustainable, gives its members access to resources for tackling climate problems. Members can also learn from others, said Marta Mendonça, the manager at Porto Protocol. Those living in areas which have long experienced dry seasons and water scarcity, for example, can advise on irrigation methods or varieties of grapes that can thrive with less precipitation. “There is no time nor resources to lose when it comes to fighting climate change. We have to fight as an industry collectively and collaboratively,” Mendonça said.In a big, bright rehearsal room at Southwark’s Unicorn Theatre, Le Gateau Chocolat is giving feedback to the new cast of his revolutionary children’s production, Duckie. His fingernails, painted an iridescent shade of blue, flash in the sunlight as the cabaret star, opera singer and all-round entertainment powerhouse praises his tiny team and smiles. First imagined in 2015 – in part to offer comfort to his young niece, who had recently moved to the UK from Nigeria and was struggling to settle in, and in part upon realising that a drag queen’s natural audience is a gaggle of excitable kids – Duckie is a radical reimagining of Hans Christian Andersen’s The Ugly Duckling. Following acclaimed stints everywhere from London’s Southbank Centre to the Fringe World festival in Perth, Australia, Gateau is now stepping down from the lead role for its festive run at Manchester’s Home theatre. Instead, it will be shared by two young actors, both non-binary and one neurodiverse, with aspects of the part adjusted accordingly. “We’ve been talking about how the pronouns work – does it hold their identities?” asks Gateau, who is evidently thrilled not just to be passing on a role that means so much to him, but also by the idea of taking his actors’ lives into consideration. “As opposed to a normal rehearsal process, we’re actually devising first, asking: ‘Where does this sit for you?’” Born George Ikediashi in west London, Gateau was raised in Nigeria, where he soaked up the sounds of his parents’ diva-heavy record collection, fostering early obsessions with Whitney Houston and Dolly Parton. Returning to the UK to attend secondary school, it was another obsession – US TV shows such as Ally McBeal – that saw him apply to study law at Sussex University. By week two he was already over it: “I thought, ‘This is hell!” But he persevered until graduation. Thankfully, something of an escape route had showed itself, via a fabulous weekly disco and cabaret night in Brighton by the name of Dynamite Boogaloo. Slowly morphing from punter to performer, it wasn’t until he was in his 20s that Gateau made his drag debut, but he had been honing the art of being someone else since he was a child, hiding his queerness from his religious family. “I’d thought: ‘What does this room need me to be?’ If I’m a jester, they won’t notice that I’m effeminate,” he says. “My drag isn’t about female impersonation, but about being chameleonic and shapeshifting in a way that’s protecting myself” Ahead of his 40th birthday next year, he feels this has morphed again, this time into something more liberating: “Today my drag isn’t about [being] something else, it’s a magnification of me.” Le Gateau Chocolat’s unique brand of performance couldn’t be contained by the Brighton underground for long. Since his early appearances in and around the city’s cabaret scene he’s performed everywhere from Shakespeare’s Globe – where he dazzled as Feste in Twelfth Night after an audition which involved crooning Creep by Radiohead for artistic director Emma Rice in the back of a cab – to Glyndebourne. For the past decade he’s been one of the busiest names in theatre; just this year there’s been a stint at the Old Vic in Rice’s adaptation of the 1987 film Bagdad Cafe, as well as Gateau’s own directorial debut with the song cycle Liminal at the Kings Head, Islington. Next he’ll be bringing Now That’s What We Call Musicals to Soho Theatre alongside fellow drag queen Johnny Woo, the follow-up to their raucous sing-along show, A Night at the Musicals. “I’ve always, always been a clown. The show is rooted in our friendship in a wonderful way, but is also really, really, really stupid,” explains Gateau. He’s not wrong: the original production opened with a number from The Phantom of the Opera with Gateau as Christine and Johnny as the Phantom, albeit one dressed as Darth Vader and wielding a lightsaber. “We seek to make people really happy and I think that’s always landed … Until we went to South Africa,” he says with a wince. In 2019 Gateau and Johnny took their daft but delightful sing-song to Johannesburg and were met with a stony response. “We thought we were going on a summer holiday but what it really was, was an education,” he says. “We had completely underestimated what the implications of us standing on stage would look like.” A black and a white drag queen on stage together, singing the best of Andrew Lloyd Webber, was too much for some; Gateau recalls one man who turned his head away for the entirety of the show. “They just didn’t want it, like it or get it. Apartheid ended in 1994, which, culturally and politically speaking, is still yesterday,” Gateau says. “But I mean, Johnny and I were in bathing suits in the poster! What we were doing shouldn’t have been a surprise!” The trip was meant to offer a little light relief after Gateau’s harrowing experience two weeks prior in Germany, where he had been involved in a production of Tannhäuser at long-running Wagnerian celebration, the Bayreuth festival. Before the opera had even began Gateau was on edge after discovering that Hitler had been a regular visitor to the venue. Proceedings took on an extra air of menace when he was booed at the first performance; Gateau later wrote of the “tremendous vitriol and racism” he had endured there. “It was the most extraordinary thing because what I wrote went a little bit viral,” he says. “Viral enough for me to receive lots of hatred from a lot of Nazis and a lot of gaslighting from journalists who weren’t there.” He felt marooned and abandoned: “The way opera works, as soon as your opening night happens, their creative team move on. There was no support at all.” But at home in the UK, Le Gateau Chocolat remains a powerfully positive force, not just when he’s on stage airing his graceful baritone, but when he’s skewering homophobia, misogyny, racism and male aggression on social media and engaging with those who peddle it. “I think it’s really important that I start to share these messages so that people understand I’m not a cartoon,” he says. “I engage with social issues, social justice and conversations about women’s rights, feminism, trans rights and the LGBTQ community. Because they are who I am – not because of some kind of agenda.” Duckie is at Home, Manchester, 15 to 23 December; Now That’s What We Call Musicals is on at Soho theatre, London, 13 December to 22 January 2022.In a dramatic rescue attempt on Wednesday, a US coast guard diver braved the frigid rapids where a car had become submerged in water near the brink of Niagara Falls, only to find it was too late to rescue the person trapped inside. The diver was lowered from a hovering helicopter, climbed into the car and pulled out the body of its lone occupant, a woman in her 60s, officials from New York’s state park police said. Video and images on social media shows the coast guard diver, petty officer second class Derrian Duryea, in an orange suit and a helmet, fighting against strong wind and water to enter through the passenger side of the black car, which appeared stuck near the edge of the falls. Duryea said he was entirely focused on the vehicle as he was being lowered for the rescue attempt. “As I was coming down I was just really focused on how am I going to get in this car when there’s, you know, pretty much rapids coming over the car right next to Niagara Falls,” Duryea told KTLA. “My sole focus was which window or door am I going in. “Luckily, the car was unlocked and I didn’t have to break out any windows and I was able to open up the passenger side door and push it up against the current,” Duryea said. Kathy Hochul, the governor of New York, tweeted that she was “saddened by the tragic loss of life” and praised the “swift and heroic actions” of emergency crews. Park police Capt Christopher Rola later called the coast guard’s work “incredible”. The rescue was also made perilous by the icy wind coming off the falls. Helicopter pilot Lt Chris Monicelli told KTLA: “A lot of bigger planes have deicing capabilities, but we don’t”. As a result, crews train for exactly such rescue attempts, “because if you do accumulate enough ice on the helicopter, it will fall out of the sky”. It was unclear how the car got into the Niagara River. Witnesses reported seeing it floating near a pedestrian bridge, where it was believed to have gone in. Roads in the area were slippery as a light snow fell. The car appeared to be almost completely submerged with only part of the roof and open trunk hatch visible through the rapidly flowing water. Police used a drone to determine it was occupied. Authorities said the woman lived in the area. Her name was not released pending notification of her relatives. After the recovery, the vehicle remained about 50 yards (45 metres) from the brink of the American Falls, one of three waterfalls that make up Niagara Falls. Onlookers watched as emergency crews prepared to try to pull the vehicle from the water. Rola said the state park department’s swift-water rescue teams had been unable to get to the car because of its location. Niagara Falls, located at the border between upstate New York and Canada, has a history of attracting both daredevils who try to cheat death by plunging over in homemade contraptions, and those driven by suicide. Emergency crews, however, had never been called for a vehicle so close to the edge, Rola said. He said investigators would try to determine whether the vehicle wound up in the water by accident or intentionally. • This article was amended on 9 December 2021. An earlier version said that Niagara Falls was located entirely within the US.Energy companies face deepening scrutiny over their response to Storm Arwen after the opening of an official investigation into their handling of the crisis, which left almost a million homes without power for up to 12 days. The government’s review into the “unacceptable” power cuts, which followed the storm, aims to identify any issues with the resilience of the electricity network companies worst affected, and how they communicated with households after of the outages. The electricity network companies operate as regional monopolies funded by home energy bills and already face a review by the industry regulator, Ofgem, which said it was prepared to take action against any firm that breached rules in their response to the storm. Storm Arwen caused the most severe disruption to power supplies since 2005, with winds of up to 100mph combined with rain, snow, and ice. It left almost a million households without power across the north of England and parts of Scotland, thousands of which were still without electricity more than a week later. The business and energy secretary, Kwasi Kwarteng, said: “While I’m pleased all affected customers are now back online, it is completely unacceptable so many were left without power for so long. “There is an urgent need to identify and resolve a number of issues which came to light during the Storm Arwen response, and the review I’ve commissioned, alongside Ofgem’s, will ensure any failings are addressed. Kwarteng wrote on Monday to the bosses of five energy network companies affected by storm – Electricity North West, Northern Powergrid, SP Energy Networks, SSE and Western Power Distribution – to warn against any delay in paying compensation to households affected by the “simply unacceptable” outages. The separate investigations are likely to pile political pressure on the companies, which have faced criticism in the past for making large profits while claiming up to a quarter of home energy bills to cover the costs of running their networks. David Smith, the chief executive of the Energy Networks Association, which represents the companies, said it would fully support the reviews announced by Ofgem and the government. “It’s important that we learn from Storm Arwen, particularly as the intensity and frequency of storms increases with climate change,” Smith said.Labour MPs and unions have criticised the government’s decision to outsource the administration of the Turing student exchange scheme to Capita, saying it risked “profiting off students’ aspirations”. The Guardian revealed on Wednesday that Capita had been awarded the contract for the £110m Turing scheme after it outbid the British Council, which has been administering the scheme and its predecessor, Erasmus, since 2007. Matt Western, the shadow universities minister, said: “The Conservatives’ plan to farm out the Turing scheme to the private firm Capita risks selling students short. With the firm’s history of mismanaged contracts, students will clearly fear this government does not have their interests at heart. Since the prime minister broke his promise to keep Erasmus membership, ministers have cut corners, showing a lack of ambition to make study abroad a serious part of global Britain. Ministers must now guard against providers profiting off students’ aspirations.” The Turing scheme was announced by Boris Johnson in late 2020, after the government broke its earlier pledge for the UK to remain a member of the Erasmus scheme after Brexit. The British Council ran the new scheme from launch, but its involvement will end after the Department for Education (DfE) put the administration out for tender. Jo Grady, the general secretary of the University and College Union, said: “Outsourcing the scheme to Capita – which has a shocking record of failure on a range of other government contracts – is a terrible decision from the DfE, which will further diminish the quality of student exchange programmes. “The British Council has important expertise in the running of student exchanges, and cutting them out of the process in favour of a profit-making private company is shameful. “The Turing scheme is still finding its feet, and the priority must be delivering quality for students, not a race to the bottom. This continued, ideological outsourcing drive from the Tories is bad for students and bad for ordinary people.” The DfE said the awarding of the contract to Capita was the result of a competitive procurement process and rigorous evaluation of tenders. The news does not come at a good time for the British Council, after it was revealed that nearly 100 of its former staff in Afghanistan remain in hiding, having been refused the right to come to the UK. Most had been employed to teach English language and British culture as part of the council’s operations in Afghanistan. The council has also been forced to close 20 offices around the world because of budget cuts by the Foreign Office and falling income from language tuition and exams during the Covid pandemic. Capita is to take over in March 2022. It is likely to be aided by several educational organisations, including the Confederation of School Trusts, the Sutton Trust and the Association of Commonwealth Universities (ACU). Joanna Newman, the secretary general of the ACU, said: “Widening access to mobility, particularly through short-term options, has long been a strategic mission of the ACU, and the Turing scheme’s focus on widening participation and social impact resonates strongly with our values. “The ACU will be supporting with the applications and assessment of mobility projects, drawing on our global networks and building on our extensive expertise in delivering renowned international mobility schemes, including managing the UK government’s Chevening, Commonwealth and Marshall scholarships, and the multilateral Queen Elizabeth Commonwealth scholarships.”How did you get inside the TV? Aisha, 3 Good question, Aisha, and one I’m asked many times. Quite a lot of people I meet are quite surprised at how tall I am and wonder how I manage to fit into the television. Well, we film using cameras which capture our performances and then beam the signal through the air into your television. I met a family at a festival a few years ago and their daughter said to me: “Justin, I never thought you were part of our world,” which I thought was fantastic. Your comic timing with Robert the Robot [on CBeebies show Justin’s House] always reminds me of Laurel and Hardy – who inspires your characters? lime7 When I was young I was inspired by Laurel and Hardy, Harold Lloyd and Buster Keaton. I used to watch their slapstick routines over and over again. I was also a big fan of Ronnie Barker and David Jason. The chemistry between them in Open All Hours was amazing. And who can forget the wonderful moment when David Jason falls through the open bar on Only Fools and Horses? Comic timing is very important in visual and verbal comedy and the more effortless it appears to your audience, the better. Slapstick comedy has such a wide appeal. It’s a timeless format and you cannot beat the sound of belly laughter coming from the audience – children and adults alike. Can you fly? Teddy, 2 Unfortunately I cannot fly, Teddy, but wouldn’t it be wonderful if we could? I was on a coastal path recently, watching sea birds hovering in the wind. It was a great sight. Since having a kid last year, I’ve been super impressed with the level of what I call “face work” in your performance. The degree of control you have over your face muscles to sell an idea/emotion/joke to kids is amazing. To what extent this is instinctual? Or are you thinking when you’re performing about what best to do with your face in each particular moment? Antzudan Performing facial expressions in comedy sketches is very important. Some performers use minimal facial expressions, like Buster Keaton. I think Rik Mayall had an amazing range of facial expressions and I picked up a lot of tips from him as I developed my own comedy characters. When filming a show like Gigglequiz, as well as thinking about my own physical characterisations, it’s also one of the most technically ambitious shows that I have been involved in. I play five characters on screen at the same time so I have to film each character individually and also remembering how they interact with each other in each take. We have a great technical team who are able to edit all the footage together to give the illusion that we are all performing at the same time in the same set. Did you go to the Oscars for Farmageddon? Would you have liked to? Would you like to do more adult acting? bumble1 I would love to have gone to the Oscars but due to the travel restrictions in place at the time, it wasn’t possible. However, I was thrilled to hear that the film had been nominated. I took a three-year acting course in Guildford and shortly after I graduated, I managed to secure a part in a play about the life story of Sid Field called What a Performance, with David Suchet in the title role. Sid was a music hall comedian and I played various characters in the piece. During rehearsals I received some training from Jack Trip, who was a master of physical comedy. More recently I appeared as Mr Perks in the London production of The Railway Children, which was staged in a popup theatre at Kings Cross. That was a big role for me and something very different from the roles I had played on television. I have always seen myself as a character actor. I had no experience as a presenter when I started to become involved in television, so had to learn that skill as I went along. Would you rather drive a train or be a ticket collector? Laurie, 4 I think I would like to be a ticket collector. You would then get to meet all of your passengers and maybe have a sing-song in the carriages every now and then! What’s your daily schedule like? I have the impression that you are a total workaholic! How do balance that level of hard work with the playfulness of your characters? TimDelaney I have a very large old-fashioned A4 diary! This contains all of my schedules for my TV and theatre commitments. I like to work hard and keep myself busy. When not performing, I like to come up with new formats and characters for both TV and theatre. When I write new material I always start by listening to film music. It has always been a big part of the creative process. One of my favourite composers is Erich Korngold, who was an Austrian composer, and I particularly like his scores to Errol Flynn films such as The Adventures of Robin Hood and The Sea Hawk. John Williams is another favourite of mine; in some of his scores I think you can hear influences from the work of Korngold. I learned a lot about the history of film while working at the Museum of the Moving Image on the South Bank and attended many silent movie seasons there, as well as the Guardian interviews with various film directors across many genres of production. I think that is why I have a keen interest in all aspects of production, in television and on stage. I like to know how each department works, which I think is a good thing for an actor to have an understanding of. What’s the best animal in the world? Zoe, 3 I love wildlife. I remember filming with giraffes once and thought they were the most graceful animals with beautiful markings and incredible eyes. How much fieldwork do you do voicing Timmy and Shaun? How realistic do they have to be? bumble1 Providing the voices for Shaun and Timmy is a real joy. I remember auditioning for the part very well. I had voiced other animal characters in the past: Doodles the dog in The Tweenies and Timmy the dog from The Famous Five animated series, but had never provided the voice of a sheep! Richard Starzak and Mark Burton auditioned me, and I remember the piece of footage I was sent to voice: Shaun being pulled across a garden by a lawnmower with his cheeks wobbling, which was very funny. I provided a wobbly sounding bleat to accompany the footage. We then worked on different scenes for another two hours. A few days later the phone rang and it was my voiceover agent. She said: “Could I speak to Shaun, please”? I was beaming as it had been an ambition of mine to work for Aardman. Both Timmy and Shaun have a range of emotions and I enjoy the challenge of creating the sounds as each scene is played back to me on a monitor in the studio. It is amazing how immersed in the characters you become. I have been lucky enough to visit the Aardman studios a few times and meet the animators. They work tirelessly, filming one frame at a time to create the wonderful model animation that you see on the screen. How does the Tumble Tap work? Romy, 4 In the first few series of Something Special, we didn’t use the Tumble Tap. Instead we used framed pictures of the three items that we needed to look for in each episode. But as technology changed and small computers with touchscreens had come along, we decided to use a screen instead. It’s quite easy to use. There are three circles, each a different colour and the three items to look for are hiding behind them. The children tap on the circles to make the items appear. Where and when did you learn sign language? Squelly When the programme Something Special was being developed about 20 years ago, I was asked to present the first four episodes. The programme uses Makaton, a signing system that was created over 40 years ago. I learned about 300 signs initially. Now, in preparation for each series, I learn a new set of words. It’s wonderful to be able to sign with so many families during the filming of each show. Makaton is an incredibly important communication tool that helps so many people. As well as filming in the studio we travel all over the UK and get to meet so many new friends. The Tumble Family seems to grow each year as well, with new characters providing an opportunity to develop new storylines for the Tumble segments in the show. Do you prefer building sandcastles or snowmen? TheShiftyShadow Snowmen are great fun to build. We built a Lord Tumble Snowman once. He had a top hat, scarf and a spotty cravat. Do you find it impossible to go anywhere in public without having to “Tumble up” as it were for any kids who spot you or do grateful parents follow you around with heartfelt thanks for entertaining their little ones? Thanks for all your thoughtful, funny output. mattpointblank It has always been quite easy to travel around and about. I enjoy meeting our friends when I perform in theatres and at festivals. I have been working in children’s television for over 25 years and we’re now starting to welcome parents who grew up with me when they were young. I remember filling the car up at a petrol station once and asking for a small box of tissues at the counter. The man who served me, with a very matter-of-fact approach said to his colleague: “Dave, can you pass me some tissues for Mr Tumbles.” That is all he said! That tickled me and I left with a smile on my face. People often come up to me and tell me about their favourite characters and sometimes put forward ideas of what they would like to see on the programmes. I love that kind of feedback. What is your favourite dinosaur? Jaxon, 5 It has to be the brontosaurus. Wouldn’t it be amazing to be able to see one of those again in the wild? They really are gentle giants! Do you miss having the live audience for Justin’s House? Flashbleu Yes, very much so. Having a live audience is the heartbeat of the show. The reaction we receive from the children and their teachers when we start each show is wonderful. Due to the Covid situation, we were unable to film the current series with a live audience. So we adapted it and we filmed it more like a sitcom. We have expanded the size of the house and – in addition to the regular characters Justin, Robert the Robot, Cat our nextdoor neighbour and Little Monster – we have introduced some new characters, such as Cherry the baker, and Tom the dogwalker, plus a host of special guests who appear throughout the series. We also created some new locations, such as the garden area, Robert’s workshop and Little Monster’s den. The new format is being received well and I think, when we are able to have a live audience back, they will love the new additions to Justin’s House. What are your favourite kids’ shows? LeaderOfTheFree As a child I used to watch Play School with Johnny Ball, Derek Griffiths and Floella Benjamin, and loved acting out the stories. At drama school, I was inspired by Phillip Schofield and Chris Jarvis in the CBBC Broom Cupboard and thought I’d like to perform in some family theatre and children’s television. I put a showreel together and managed to secure an audition for the theatre tour of Playdays, the show that took over from Play School. I landed the part of Mr Jolly. That was the very first part I played, which started my career in family entertainment. Can you do magic tricks? Imran, 6 I really like to watch magic being performed and I am working on a new live theatre tour at the moment. We are putting two big magic tricks in the show and I am really looking forward to learning how to perform them. I’m quite sad that my children have grownup and away from CBeebies. I used to enjoy watching your shows as much, if sometimes not more than they did. My favourite character was Keith Fitt from Gigglebiz (the trampoline sketch is comedy gold). Who’s your favourite and least favourite character to play? Gin007 I love playing all of my characters. But one of the hardest characters to play is Wizard Tripwick, as the costume is incredibly heavy and I quite often trip over the beard, as it is over a metre long! I have worn a smaller beard recently playing the part of Father Christmas in this year’s CBeebies Christmas show, The Night Before Christmas. We were lucky enough to be able to film this in front of a small audience. I flew in on a spectacular sleigh, which got a great reaction from the children. Mr Tumble is definitely my favourite because of the impact that the character and the programme has had on so many people over the past 20 years. We have received so many wonderful letters and emails letting us know how the programme has helped them. What is it like to be back on stage performing? I started performing again last summer, which was quite an emotional experience. One of my first performances was at Camp Bestival, at Lulworth Castle in Dorset. It was my 14th year there and the atmosphere was incredible. To be performing on the main stage after such a long time was awesome. I am currently performing in pantomime at the Hexagon theatre in Reading after a one-year absence and I’m thoroughly enjoying working on a theatre stage again. Where did Grandad Tumble learn to be a mega DJ? We love his dancing! Bettyspagbols Grandad Tumble is such a fun and endearing character to play. He tries to pass down his wisdom and knowledge to Mr Tumble, but it never seems to go to plan. The DJ scene was great fun and filming it is his shed was a clever idea. He is a very engaging and warm character that you can place in almost any situation. Do you like rainbow unicorns? Evelyn, 5 Of course. Who doesn’t? • The CBeebies Christmas Show: The Night Before Christmas is in cinemas now. Shaun the Sheep: The Flight Before Christmas is on BBC One at 6pm on 24 December and 11.25am on 25 December.Black children are the least likely to be physically active, according to Sport England, which found that the pandemic continues to have a negative effect on children’s engagement with sport and physical activity. In its latest survey of activity levels among children and young people, 36% of black boys met healthy guidelines for physical activity, compared with 45% of all boys. This was mainly because they are twice as likely to come from less affluent families living in deprived areas with less access to outdoor space, the report says. For the first time, boys’ activity levels overall dropped to the point where they were in line with girls’, mainly as a consequence of restrictions on organised sport owing to Covid. There were, however, faint signs of improved participation among girls, who may have preferred going for a lockdown walk rather than participating in organised school sport. Overall there was no change to activity levels compared with last year’s data, which already reflected the damaging impact of Covid, but inequalities in participation have widened and there were 94,000 fewer active children and young people in England in 2020-21 compared with before the pandemic. “Across the year as a whole, activity levels have fallen compared to pre-pandemic (2018-19) for children and young people from the least affluent families (down 3.4%), while remaining unchanged for those from the most affluent families – widening the gap between the two,” the report states. The Active Lives Children and Young People Survey found that 44.6% of five- to 16-year-olds (3.2 million) met the chief medical officer’s recommended guidelines of taking part in sport and physical activity for an average of 60 minutes or more every day, but 32.4% (2.3 million) did less than 30 minutes. Different age groups have fared differently. Activity levels among five- to seven-year-olds have recovered to levels seen two years ago, and remain down among seven- to 11-year-olds after a decline at the start of the pandemic, but have fallen further among secondary-age children compared with 12 months ago. Responding to the findings, Youth Sport Trust’s chief executive, Ali Oliver, said: “It is incredibly sad that millions of young people in England are missing out on the fundamental role that physical activity should play in their education and development. “In the face of a global physical and mental health crisis, we are worried that this is still not being treated as a core priority of our national recovery. From families and schools through to sports organisations and government, a concerted national effort is now needed to get young people active.”After Catholic protesters prevented Swedish musician Anna von Hausswolff from performing in a church in Nantes on Tuesday, the Paris church Saint-Eustache has cancelled her planned 9 December concert, citing concerns over security. On Tuesday, a group described by Nantes’ deputy mayor, Bassem Asseh, as “intolerant radicals” blocked the entrance to the church Notre-Dame de Bon-Port ahead of von Hausswolff’s show, reportedly accusing her of making “satanist” music, despite the show being organised in accordance with the Nantes diocese. French media, including Ouest-France, said the protesters sang: “Saint Mary, mother of God, pray for us poor sinners.” Von Hausswolff’s primary instrument is the pipe organ, largely found in places of worship. British music publication the Quietus described the Swedish Grammy nominee’s output as exploring “unmapped territory where post-rock, prog, doom metal, modern classical and high church music all coexist in uneasy alliance”. Her lyrics have touched on gothic themes. “Yesterday night the far-right Catholic integralism won over art, but not over love,” Von Hausswolff wrote on Instagram, alongside a photograph of herself sitting in the empty church “while listening to about 50-100 integralists chanting and screaming outside the church’s doors, blocking the way for almost 400 people”. She described it as a “scary, tense and sad situation” and that “there was nothing for us to do but cancel – we had too little security”. She said she and the church were “working together and not against each other” and praised her fans for waiting “peacefully and patiently”. “I loved that you remembered these things will never be solved by violence.” When contacted by the Guardian, she declined to comment further on the matter. Eli Commins, director of le lieu unique, the cultural centre that promoted the Nantes show, said in a statement that the forced cancellation was unacceptable and “an attack on the freedom of creativity and expression”. “At 21.10, after many unsuccessful attempts to find a favourable outcome, we had to take the decision, in agreement with the artist, to not open the doors in order to protect the security of everyone present.” Commins said le lieu unique strongly refuted “unfounded accusations of desecration” that had been levied at Von Hausswolff. He added to newspaper Ouest-France: “There is no religious inspiration, no violence! She just plays the organ, and organs are found in churches. It’s post-metal-influenced music.” Aymeric Seassau, deputy for culture to the mayor of Nantes, expressed solidarity with le lieu unique and Von Hausswolff, and said the incident strengthened “the idea that in the face of obscurantism, we need the light of the arts and culture more than ever. Nantes will remain a city open to all cultures and artistic styles.” Asseh said: “This is not our idea of a vision of society founded on dialogue and cultural openness.” Yves Trocheris, curate of Saint-Eustache in Paris, told the Guardian he had made the “difficult and serious decision to cancel Von Hausswolff’s 9 December concert “to ensure that public order was maintained at the gates of the church”. In a second statement, he said he had received many hostile messages from the public that had prompted him to cancel the event, also taking into consideration the nightly meal that church organisation la Soupe offers to those without means directly outside the entrance. He added: “Let’s make something clear: Anna von Hausswolff is not satanist. Her work derives from her own imaginary artistic universe. She explores the world of the organ and plays the instrument in a singular fashion. Her music defends contemporary issues such as those facing women and the plight of the climate.” Trocheris said Saint-Eustache would remain a place open to artistic creation. “This intention is founded on the fact that the gospel itself commands love and condemns hate.” Von Hausswolff posted on Instagram that her team was looking for a new venue for her Paris date. The cancelled shows come towards the end of a tour promoting Von Hausswolff’s 2020 album, the instrumental piece All Thoughts Fly, which was made up of more than 20 dates, including performances in European churches and cathedrals, among them London’s Union Chapel. Von Hausswolff said that thousands of people had seen this tour, “and there has been nothing but love and affection in the air, both from my audience and from the church. When different people try to overcome differences and barriers, that’s when true healing begins,” she wrote.There were a little under eight hours until kick-off and Joan Laporta had come from Munich cathedral. “You have to have faith,” he said, heading into the Käfer restaurant and out of the snow, but faith is not enough. And although they had always suspected as much, it still hurt when the inevitable happened. Barcelona’s president had asked his players to show “pride” and “dignity”, to demonstrate “who they are”. As it turned out, who they are is a team no longer able to compete with the best. “That’s our reality and it really pisses me off,” Xavi Hernández said. Maybe that’s been the case for a while. Theirs feels like a footballing obituary written many times before, a chronicle foretold if not always heeded and not always finished. Each episode emerges from the last, The End not actually the end, always further to fall: their former coach Ernesto Valverde refers to how “the disaster of the previous year returned” at Anfield in 2019 and five years of Champions League elimination presents a list in crescendo: Barcelona beaten 3-0 in Turin, 3-0 in Rome, 4-0 in Liverpool, 8-2 by Bayern Munich and 4-1 by Paris Saint Germain. This is different in not being a moment’s collapse – those weren’t either, not entirely – and may not be so immediately traumatic, given that it’s the hope that kills you and that beneath the surface optimism there wasn’t too much of that. Yet it “hurt”, Sergio Busquets said, and it’s not going away. Ronald Araújo called it “a pity” and it may be the worst of the eliminations, the final point in a relentless regression. In terms of where they actually are, it certainly is the worst and they recognise that now, which is at least the first step. Many more remain. For the first time in 20 years, Barcelona have not qualified from the Champions League group stage. They have been beaten twice by Bayern, 3-0 each time and without the German club turning the screw. “If we had pressed, we could have scored more,” Julian Nagelsmann said, a little apologetically. “It was fun,” Leroy Sané said, which seemed to say a lot. “It was a big margin and it could have been bigger,” Araújo admitted. Laporta said the players had given “everything they had, and more”. The worrying thing is that he is probably right. When they were beaten by Bayern in the first game, lining up in a way that appeared aimed only at limiting the damage, the then coach, Ronald Koeman, had talked about being realistic. Afterwards, Gerard Piqué had used the phrase repeated ever since: “Es lo que hay.” It is what it is. “We are who we are,” he had added. He insisted the line had been taken out of context, that he had been referring to the absentees – Ansu Fati, Sergio Agüero, Ousmane Dembélé – but it stuck, a judgment on the whole thing. Koeman’s realism slipped into fatalism, serving to undermine his team, perhaps even providing an excuse to hide behind. His replacement, Xavi, had consciously sought to break from that discourse, offering optimism instead; offering a different approach too, one projected as a search for lost identity but one that has not had time to take shape and may not have the materials to do so fully. Wednesday night, though, echoed what came before. “It’s our reality and we have to face it with dignity,” he said. It is inescapable, after all. This was just another watershed moment among so many; the hope will be that it can be the last. It is not just, or not even, that Barcelona had been beaten twice by Bayern. That can happen. It is that they were so comfortably beaten, that in Xavi’s words they had not competed, that they conceded six and didn’t score, and that they failed to get out of a group that also included Benfica and Dynamo Kyiv, that it is 20 years since they were knocked out this early. That they are 16 points off the top domestically. This is a result from another age, another reality. Over the past decade Barcelona have scored 11, 16, 15, 15, 20, nine, 14, nine and 16 group stage goals. This time they scored two. Twenty-seven players have scored more and three times as many goals have come from players not even trying to score, own goals more common than theirs. The 27 include Lionel Messi and Antoine Griezmann, both of whom they lost, a crisis with very real tangible consequences. Messi has five in this season’s competition, Griezmann four. Messi scored 38 last season, 219 over five years. Before them Luis Suárez and Neymar departed too. What is left, to use Piqué’s words, is what there is and who they are, a gradual diminishing of a team that were great once. Yet goals are just one, simplistic measurement of what is wrong, of where they are. Of their reality. So is the team list which, while it contains expensive and unproductive players they can ill afford, still includes significant talent and an emerging generation that excites. If their strongest XI is not that good, nor should it be that bad. An analysis was offered by their opponents – Thomas Müller said Barcelona had the technique but not the intensity to play at the highest level; Nagelsmann noted “a pile of debt that drags them [down]” – and there are multiple elements to the equation, although finances stand at the centre. “We got ourselves into this mess,” Busquets said. “There are lots of factors that lead us to this. We all know the situation at the club.” This is a club slowly broken from the top, the previous president, Josep Maria Bartomeu, building a portfolio of failures that could fill many pages, the new administration inheriting a profound crisis at almost every level that has just got deeper. A crisis that, for all the doubts about the new regime’s handling of it on the one hand or all the optimism on the other, has no easy fix. For all that Xavi comes with clear ideas, credibility and a determination and authority to act that deepened on Wednesday night, a long road lies ahead. Stories of big, transformative signings, to cite the simplest example, are largely something to laugh at. All the more so now. Barcelona had budgeted for Champions League progression: missing out on the last 16 costs them €9.6m, missing out in the quarters a further €10.6m, money they can’t afford to lose. Even if they were to win the Europa League, it would be worth only €14.9m. And, beyond the fact that Xavi said they had to return the club to its rightful place “and that’s not the Europa League”, beyond debates about whether dropping into the continent’s second competition could be good for them and their best chance of returning to the Champions League, who says this team would win it? There are already three better teams in the competition – and that’s just from Spain. “A new era starts here,” Xavi said. What it holds, who knows, but an old one finally ended here too, if it hadn’t already.GPs have begun offering booster vaccines to patients under 40 against official NHS guidance. People in their 30s who are not in high-risk groups in England are being sent text messages and emails by family doctors inviting them to book their top-up jab. Some have secured slots for appointments just 36 hours later. This contrasts sharply with the current policy of the NHS, which has not yet asked those under 40 to come forward and book their booster jabs. Doctors say they are keen to accelerate the rollout as fears grow over the Omicron variant. But the move has prompted concerns over a postcode lottery because the national NHS booking system does not allow adults under 40 to schedule a booster shot. Further confusion has arisen over evidence suggesting some patients under 40 have been able to get a jab by trying their luck at a walk-in Covid-19 vaccination site. Many are using social media platforms such as Twitter, Reddit and WhatsApp to share live information about which centres are offering booster jabs to younger adults. At the same time, some people over 40 who are eligible for a booster vaccine have reported being turned away because it is not six months since their second dose – even though the NHS has cut the qualifying time from six months after a second dose to three. Boris Johnson announced last week that every eligible adult in the UK should be offered a booster by the end of January to increase protection against the Omicron variant. The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) said: “Booster vaccination eligibility should be expanded to include all adults aged 18 years to 39 years.” However, since then the NHS national booking system has only been amended to allow people aged 40 and over and those in high-risk groups to book a booster jab appointment for three months after their second dose, instead of the original six months. Healthy adults aged between 18 and 39 cannot yet book their booster via the NHS national booking system. Yet some people under 40 have this week received invitations from their GP surgery with a personalised link to a website where they have been able to secure a slot for their booster vaccine. Some health professionals working at Covid-19 vaccine sites say inviting younger patients before a national announcement is made only helps protect their local population more quickly, especially amid concerns over the rapid spread of the Omicron variant. However, others have expressed frustration, saying it risks causing confusion and unequal access to the booster vaccines. Ruth Rankine, director of primary care at the NHS Confederation, said: “While the NHS’s focus remains on offering boosters to eligible people aged over 40 before the national booking system opens up more widely next week, we are aware that some primary care sites have begun to offer boosters to eligible people aged under 40 where they have spare appointments that have not been filled by the current cohorts and where they have sufficient vaccine stock. The national guidance on the gap between doses is clear and that people should wait to be contacted by the NHS for their booster shots.” Prof Martin Marshall, the chair of the Royal College of GPs, said vaccines were “our most important tool in protecting people from the virus”, adding, “We need to get as many jabs into as many arms as quickly as possible.” “It’s important that at-risk groups are prioritised so people should wait to be contacted before trying to book their booster,” he said. “However, it’s possible that some regions will be going at a quicker pace than others for varying reasons to do with capacity and workload and GPs will use their judgment in the best interests of their patients and the wider public’s health. “GPs and their teams are working incredibly hard to deliver the vaccination programme, as well as continuing to deliver essential care and services to patients, and we’d urge anyone who is offered the booster to have it.” An NHS spokesperson said: “NHS sites are expected to vaccinate those most at risk from coronavirus first in line with JCVI guidance, which at present is people aged 40 and over, as well as those with health conditions and healthcare workers. The NHS is rapidly mobilising to ensure people are offered lifesaving protection as quickly and as safely as possible so when you are called it is strongly advised you to get your booster jab.”If you spoke to most Conservative backbenchers during 2018, most would say Boris Johnson would never be prime minister. His time as foreign secretary was unimpressive; he was unserious, a liability. That changed dramatically over the following year, with the party in turmoil over Theresa May’s premiership and reeling from parliamentary Brexit rebellions. Johnson wooed MPs carefully, many over dinners hosted by Jacob Rees-Mogg. Over the course of the leadership election, he caught the momentum as the man who could get Brexit done and who could end the chaos. After the 2019 election, he was widely held as an electoral genius – although Dominic Cummings would have it that it was the strategy, not the man, that won it. But none of those factors ever really changed the doubts that many Conservative MPs had about Johnson. They support him because he is a winner, and only while he is. There have been moments in the pandemic that caused widespread discontent. Most MPs will cite the row over free school meals with Marcus Rashford, the disastrous algorithm that predicted exam results, the last-minute cancellation of Christmas, as some of the most embarrassing. But Johnson kept his party high in the polls, oversaw a successful vaccine rollout and won crucial byelections such as Hartlepool, and Old Bexley and Sidcup. However, since the Owen Paterson debacle and the attempt to make changes to the standards system that many MPs suspect were in order to save Johnson himself from a probe by the standards commissioner, the mood has notably darkened. The embarrassment of the No 10 Christmas party and the move to plan B within hours – seen by many as a diversion tactic – has turned grumblings to fury. It is not only sleaze. Over the past few months, Johnson has managed to enrage almost every wing of the party. Tax rises upset shire Tories; penalising poorer northern homeowners for social care funding upset MPs in the red wall; there have been rebellions on universal credit; internationalists were aghast at the chaos of the Afghanistan withdrawal – and there is widespread mutiny from libertarians over the move to plan B and Covid passports. Johnson could be left relying on Labour votes to push through the new measures. But is Johnson still ultimately a winner? One of the most immediate tests is the North Shropshire byelection next week, prompted by Paterson’s resignation after the fallout from his sanction for lobbying by the standards commissioner. The Liberal Democrats believe they have a strong chance of taking the seat, though Labour has also begun to campaign more in earnest, with local activists there affronted by suggestions that they should keep quiet in favour of the Lib Dems. A Lib Dem source said the party issue was coming up repeatedly on the doorsteps. “Many people in North Shropshire, including lifelong Tories, are furious about the No 10 Christmas party. “It is turning into a perfect storm for Boris Johnson, along with the NHS ambulance crisis, farmers being let down and rural communities feeling taken for granted. We were already closing in on the Conservatives in North Shropshire, but this has put rocket boosters under our campaign as we enter the final week.” Paterson’s majority was almost 23,000. The most likely scenario is that angry Tories stay at home in protest and give the Tories a reduced majority win. Most of Johnson’s colleagues will then move on and think “a win’s a win”, though doubts will linger. But if there is an upset like in Chesham and Amersham, Johnson could find himself at serious risk.A few years ago, a popular pub quiz question involved naming 10 famous Belgians. The answers often revealed more about British cultural ignorance than Belgium’s ability to produce international celebrities, given that the fictional Tintin and Hercule Poirot were the best many could come up with. The game has got easier since the rise of Angèle, a stridently feminist Belgian pop singer-songwriter who shot to fame in 2016 after posting short clips singing covers and playing the piano on Instagram. She was young, talented and not afraid to make fun of herself, pulling faces and sticking pencils up her nose. Her 2018 debut album, Brol, sold a million copies; by 2019, she was a face of Chanel. “I’d always wanted a career in music, but I was thinking more of working as a piano accompanist,” she says, folding into an armchair at a five-star boutique hotel near the Paris Opéra. “I really didn’t expect it to happen like that.” If Angèle, 26, is known in the UK, it is for her duet with Dua Lipa on the British singer’s 2020 song Fever (“There’s something very natural between us,” Angèle says), but in France and Belgium she is a household name performing to packed arenas. She has just released her second album, Nonante-Cinq (95, after the year she was born), 12 introspective disco-pop tracks with deceptively naive, childlike vocals. It follows a Netflix documentary about her life. “The success came from nowhere, almost from one day to the next,” she says. “It was very rapid and intense. I was very surprised by it all. I still am.” This intensity ramped up in 2017 when she agreed to talk to Playboy. Despite being asked not to, the magazine used a photograph of Angèle topless and holding two peppers in front of her breasts. Feeling humiliated and betrayed, she says she cried for a week. “They didn’t even write about the music I was doing, but just the fact that I was sexy,” she says. Amid the fallout, “I was also reduced to being a woman who wanted to draw attention to herself by sexualising her image, as if that wasn’t something good, while being sexy and sexual shouldn’t be a problem”. Playboy breaking her trust, she says, “was a hard lesson”. Her response was Balance Ton Quoi (Squeal on What), a song that played on the French #MeToo phrase Balance Ton Porc (Squeal on Your Pig) and instantly turned her into a feminist figurehead. “As a girl and young woman, I have suffered lots of sexist aggression, like the majority of women. There’s the harassment in the street and in relationships and there are sexist remarks and behaviour in the [music business],” she says, adding that it was seeing the lack of reaction to her brother, the rapper Roméo Elvis, performing shirtless that hammered home the sexist double standard. “Nobody remarks on it when he does it, but if there’s a topless picture of me in Playboy the discourse is pejorative. People don’t say: wow, isn’t that great and isn’t she lovely; they think it shames me.” She wrote Balance Ton Quoi “because I knew what these women were talking about from my own experience. This song suddenly became a feminist hymn at protests – I found myself a bit of a feminist icon at 23 years old when I still had many things to learn.” Belgium and France, she says, “are still behind on sexism. Violence against women is still treated as a taboo subject and one that’s difficult to address and is minimised.” The video that accompanies the song is lighthearted but loaded, with Angèle running a courthouse and an anti-sexism academy. “We wanted to show what we have to fight if we are feminists and we want to combat the patriarchy, but we also wanted it to be beautiful, accessible and light and funny, because I prefer to pass these messages with humour; I think it’s the way to get even the hardest message across.” On a similar note, the cover of Brol shows a young Angèle missing a front tooth. “I think it’s super-important to make fun of oneself. It’s the best of weapons. In the end, it’s a way to stop the hurt, because there’s a certain power in mocking oneself before others do it.” Angèle understood the importance of taking control of her identity even before the Playboy violation. She was born Angèle Joséphine Aimée Van Laeken, the second child of famous parents – her mum is the actor Laurence Bibot and her dad is Serge Van Laeken, AKA the singer Marka. She says she had a “lovely childhood”, but her answers suggest a certain tension. Being “the daughter of” well-known parents and later “the sister of” Roméo Elvis has evidently rankled at times. “It wasn’t my parents who encouraged me to be a [professional] singer – in fact, I kept them in the dark about what I was doing, because I didn’t want them to interfere. I didn’t want them to take all the credit, either,” she says. “I don’t think they’d have discouraged me, but they’d have been afraid, because it was so far above what they had done in their careers, and it was so huge and out of control at one point that they would have worried. Also, they would probably have wanted to help and it would have been complicated to say no.” Given her parents’ fame, she must be used to being recognised in the street, I say. She quips: “When we were young, my parents were recognised, but only about once every month. Now, I’m recognised every day.” She was upset when a French television presenter outed her as bisexual before she could tell her parents and grandmother, but she can shrug about it now. Even in her “open family”, she says her parents were “very surprised” when she brought a girlfriend home. “And my mother’s in the theatre surrounded by loads of LGBT people! If I had said to my parents: I think I like girls, then it would have been fine, but I didn’t warn them, so it was a shock for them. I think I always knew even when I was young, but when I was 15 and at school it really wasn’t cool to be bisexual. It was even a bit shameful.” Today, she says she is single, but she admits she probably wouldn’t say if she wasn’t. “I have understood that I must be vague about these things to protect myself and protect my friends.” She experienced a social media backlash when Roméo Elvis was accused of sexually harassing a young woman, for which he later apologised. “I found myself in the middle of a story that was nothing to do with me,” Angèle says. “People turned it around and said: ‘You’re feminist and your brother did that?’ Well, what can I say? “Was I angry with him? That was something else between us, but I was angry about how people tried to make me responsible, who looked to blame someone female. To me, it was proof once again that, when we speak about feminism, people are afraid and they seek to discredit that fight. I don’t know if I was attacked more than him, but I was attacked without reason – and really violently on social media.” Fame, then, has been a steep and not entirely pleasant learning curve – the French newspaper Libération described Nonante-Cinq as “listening to a friend who thinks you’re their psychologist and has the disagreeable habit of calling you at all hours to talk about themselves” – but Angèle says she is bien dans sa peau (happy in her skin) and not too bothered about becoming an international star. “I’m very happy to be able to go to England and walk in the street and nobody knows me,” she says. “I like to be able to do concerts from time to time and have a big audience, but I am happy to not be that well known.” British pub quizzes be damned: “In Belgium and here in France, that’s fine for me for the moment.” • Nonante-Cinq is out now on Universal/Angèle VL Records“Beginning of the end for Boris?” The strapline across the front of his own Daily Telegraph answers its own question. His end was always contained in his beginning: his fatal flaws were always destined to destroy him. The questions are when, and how? Can he prolong the inevitable and defy gravity yet again? He was not elected for his gravity. Quite the opposite, pollsters say: he was elected as the party man to lift the country’s spirits, so it is little surprise that he and his wife run a party house with showstopping £850-a-roll gold wallpaper. New babies are part of the fun: how many – seven or eight, who cares? There is a lobe in voters’ brains that likes to vote for fun: whose gang would you choose, whose party would you go to, who would you drink with in the pub? David Cameron and his gang had it: those pictures with Samantha on holiday in Cornwall, their glamorous aristocratic circle, chillaxing with video games and country suppers – and yes, let’s face it, the sheen of Eton. Why else would we elect 20 Old Etonian prime ministers? Miserable Theresa May had not a drop of fun, and plummeted. Boris Johnson has it in spades, but how much is too much? Stories tumbled out today. Forget decorous wine and cheese, the words used to describe the alleged Downing Street party were “rat-arsed” and “raucous”; after the quizzes, secret santas and novelty Christmas jumpers, the affair reportedly went on until 2am, just yards from the PM’s office, including some of his most senior aides. No one believes the party man didn’t know, though he has denied it time and again. The Times lists six other alleged parties which took place in Downing Street while the country was under severe restrictions. Over at CCHQ, a party with Christmas hats and dancing reportedly “got so rowdy that a door was damaged”. Nothing to see here, says the Metropolitan police. That reported “mother of all hangovers” is what the Tory party is now suffering from. Voters can be contrary, and while they like a bit of fun in their politics too, they were always wiser than this reckless crew, with an instinctive precautionary principle which seems to be alien to the prime minister. For the first time a Labour slogan has landed on every lip because it’s so patently true: “One law for them, and another for the rest of us”. Even the Tory press uses it now. At a Wednesday night focus group in Stevenage conducted by Keir Starmer’s director of strategy Deborah Mattinson, that was also the sentiment among those who voted Tory in 2019. They talked of the sacrifices they had made, of obeying the rules, being outraged at the Downing Street shindigs – at being taken for fools. Polling firm Savanta ComRes found that 83% of those questioned say that the public has been let down. With Labour’s new frontbench of hardhitters such as Yvette Cooper, Wes Streeting and Lisa Nandy joining an increasingly pugnacious Rachel Reeves, they start to look formidable, and are beginning to win back credibility, according to the polling. They feel they are on a roll for the new year. Meanwhile the Conservative backbenches rage at the Downing Street disgrace, and the usual suspects rail against the new Omicron-prompted regulations, even though they are mild compared to last winter. For the Tories, the worst is yet to come. Voters are well aware they will be hit by the national insurance rise in April, while the NHS it’s meant to revive is on a trolley in A&amp;E as waiting lists rise sharply. The cost-of-living crunch will deepen through the next months. Rishi Sunak seems not to know a crucial fact that Mattinson found in her research: between a third and a half of working-class voters who turned Tory in those fragile red wall seats are on universal credit, taking that £20-a-week hit. No wonder their new Tory MPs are so angry and restive, unwilling to contaminate themselves by defending Etonian revelries, lobbying corruption, crony contracts or the rest of Boris Johnson’s decadent follies. The long-held Tory fortress of North Shropshire may not fall, but MPs will anxiously count the votes likely to be lost next week against their own slender majorities. So is this the end? Most think Johnson will limp on. The Tories are ruthless in slaughtering their own, but he still looks to most pollsters and professional observers like a better bet than Rishi Sunak or Liz Truss. And privately, Labour would rather face one of them in the next general election than have another attempt at the slippery liar who brushes up his outrageous promises so well in any campaign. Ben Page, head of Ipsos Mori, is always ready with a bucket of icy reality. The liar’s lies were always priced in: that’s who they voted for. He says in Ipsos’ annual veracity index, distrust in politicians is at much the same low level as a year ago, no worse. Labour is neck-and-neck on voting intention now, but at the same point in 2012 Labour was 12% ahead and still lost three years later. The Tories still lead on the economy and competence, and these are the two essential metrics for victory. The country seems not to be too distressed by the high Covid death rate, full of blitz spirit, though more people have died as a result of Covid than the number of civilians killed in the blitz. And yet, the truth of “one rule for them” has bitten hard and deep, and it’s possible people may reject the new regulations as a consequence. The PM’s ratings have slid a long way, and Keir Starmer is gradually making gains, as is Labour’s economic credibility. No one knows what his tipping point would look like. Page always says it’s like going bankrupt: it happens slowly, and then suddenly. No one wise predicts when that suddenly might be, but Labour is in a stronger position with each new self-induced calamity that crashes out of Downing Street. Johnson’s had more than nine lives, but he’s not done quite yet. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistWith one week to go before voters head to the polls in the North Shropshire byelection, the Downing Street Christmas party scandal has prompted some last-minute doubts. “Boris has let us down, hasn’t he,” said Wendy Young, 72, who along with her husband has long voted Conservative in general elections. “I’m not sure who I’ll vote for now, but I am considering switching.” On the other hand, her husband, 75-year-old Dian Young, was unmoved by the issue and said it hadn’t affected how we would vote at all. “My opinion is it happened 12 months ago; forget it. There’s a lot of things we need to sort out now with regards to Covid and that should be the priority,” he said, as he drank coffee in Oswestry’s Festival Square on Thursday morning. “I don’t believe the prime minister knew anything about it. It was going on behind the scenes.” The couple were typical of the split opinion across the town as voters weighed up the significance of the scandal engulfing the Conservative party. Reports of a string of staff parties over the festive period last year have prompted an investigation by the cabinet secretary, and Boris Johnson is facing calls to resign if he is found to have misled MPs about the gatherings. Last week the prime minister joined the campaign trail in North Shropshire in the run-up to the byelection, which has been prompted by Owen Paterson resigning in the wake of Johnson’s disastrous attempt to save him from punishment over a serious breach of lobbying rules. One Oswestry local who asked to remain anonymous said she and her husband had voted Conservative for the first time at the last general election, but were considering switching back to Labour after reading the news this week. “We didn’t see our family last Christmas because we weren’t allowed, were we?” she said. There were still many holding back anger as they talked of the sacrifices they and their family members had made to follow the rules. “I spent Christmas alone last year. It feels like one rule for them,” said 49-year-old Julie Owen. “I think people are losing confidence in the Conservatives. And any new Covid rules that are brought in, I think people will just ignore them.” “I’m not surprised, and not really that shocked either, we’ve come to expect this kind of thing. I can totally understand why people are angry though,” said 35-year-old Alex Dempster, adding that he probably will not vote in the upcoming election as he doesn’t feel it will make any difference in a historically safe Tory seat. North Shropshire past election results “People are just appalled because of what they had to go through at the time. I know somebody who had to watch his father’s funeral over video. It seems like they were ignoring the rules and enjoying themselves while everyone was going through hell,” said Mike Coppock, 60, a former independent town councillor who runs a local gift shop. He plans to vote for the Green party, which he anticipates will be the surprise success of the election, but doubts whether anything will be enough to stop a Conservative win in a constituency that has returned a Tory MP ever since it was created. “I think that many people who usually vote Conservative will not bother going out to vote,” he said. “But it’s a shame we don’t have a single opposition candidate, because the vote will be so split.” The Liberal Democrats are predicted to be the main contenders in the byelection, with some bookmakers placing them as the favourite to win following the Christmas party backlash, and the Lib Dems are feeling more confident with each passing day. “There’s no doubt the past 48 hours have really depressed the Conservative vote,” said Jack Haines, a Lib Dem campaigner. “It’s definitely too close to call. What will be key is Conservative voters getting very angry, and those true blue voters who probably would never switch their vote, but they definitely might stay at home and not vote.”A review into government staff parties in defiance of Covid rules has been widened to look at more events, including one that Boris Johnson is believed to have attended. The investigation by Simon Case, the cabinet secretary, was initially unveiled on Wednesday as only looking into a party inside Downing Street on 18 December last year, following the release of video footage showing No 10 staff joking about it. But responding to an urgent question in the Commons, the Cabinet Office minister Michael Ellis said it would also examine another Downing Street event on 27 November last year – reported to be a leaving event for a staff member at which Johnson spoke – and one in the Department for Education on 10 December. “As with all internal investigations if, during the course of the work any evidence emerges of behaviour that is potentially a criminal offence, the matter will be referred to the police and the Cabinet Office’s work may be paused,” Ellis told MPs. “All ministers, special advisers and civil servants will be expected to cooperate with this investigation.” Asked why the remit had expanded beyond the 18 December event, Johnson’s spokesman said this had been up to Case: “The prime minister asked him to look into that particular instance, and … the cabinet secretary has the ability to look into areas he feels are relevant or appropriate.” Johnson announced the inquiry at prime minister’s questions on Wednesday, saying he had been “shocked” by the video of his then press secretary, Allegra Stratton, joking with colleagues about the party, four days after it allegedly happened. His spokesman clarified on Thursday that Johnson’s shock was not because he believed a party had happened, only about the comments. Asked what was shocking in joking about an event which did not happen, the spokesman said: “The prime minister has talked about the impression it would have given to the public, but I don’t have anything to add beyond that.” Details have also emerged about another social event amid the lockdown last December, in the offices of the team running Shaun Bailey’s bid to be mayor of London. Staff danced and drank wine at the event on 14 December 2020, the same day the then health secretary, Matt Hancock, announced the capital was going into tier 3 restrictions. At the time, social mixing indoors with anyone from another household was already banned. The event was held in the basement of the Conservative Campaign Headquarters (CCHQ) on the floor from where Bailey’s campaign was being run. It was attended by people from the campaign, as well as other Tory staffers working on another floor. One of those there, the Guardian understands, now works in No 10. Bailey attended and was given a Lego set as a Christmas present. A few days before the party, he had visited the Lego section of a John Lewis store on Oxford Street. According to one of those present at the event, it was not a raucous affair but “a fairly standard office Christmas party”. But CCHQ bosses were said to be absolutely furious afterwards and gave attendees a “bollocking”. As punishment, those on the Bailey campaign who were at the party were barred from the building on Matthew Parker Street for some time. The Times also reported a door was damaged during the event. Johnson is facing calls to resign if he is found to have misled MPs about the gatherings. Tory MPs vented their frustration in the Commons. One, Philip Hollobone, said: “My constituents are very angry indeed about reports of Christmas parties in Downing Street during what was a very large second wave of Covid, and the behaviour was totally inappropriate and possibly criminal.”Covid cases in South Africa have surged by 255% in the past seven days but there is mounting anecdotal evidence that infections with the Omicron variant are provoking milder symptoms than in previous waves. According to a South African private healthcare provider, the recent rise in infections – which includes the Omicron and Delta variants – has been accompanied by a much smaller increase in admissions to intensive care beds, echoing an earlier report from the country’s National Institute for Communicable Disease (NICD). On Thursday, Marco Cavaleri, the head of biological threats to health and vaccines strategy at the European Medicines Agency, said the situation in Europe remained “extremely worrying”, primarily due to the spread of the Delta variant, while preliminary data on Omicron suggested it may be more transmissible than Delta but cases appeared to be mostly mild. “However we need to gather more evidence to determine whether the spectrum of disease severity caused by Omicron is different to that of all the variants that have been circulating so far,” Cavaleri said. “Only time will tell.” He said it appeared that the currently approved Covid vaccines were considerably less effective in neutralising Omicron, but “we need to gather a more precise picture around the level of immunity that can be retained”. The World Health Organization said Africa currently accounted for 46% of reported Omicron cases globally. South Africa’s president, Cyril Ramaphosa, has said that despite the global concern over Omicron, it was still unclear whether it was more transmissible or caused more severe disease, and he criticised western countries for imposing a travel ban on the country. South Africa’s biggest private healthcare provider, Netcare, said data from its facilities indicated less severe Covid symptoms in the current fourth wave than in previous waves. “Having personally seen many of our patients across our Gauteng hospitals, their symptoms are far milder than anything we experienced during the first three waves,” Netcare’s Richard Friedland told the Daily Maverick on Wednesday. “Approximately 90% of Covid-19 patients currently in our hospitals require no form of oxygen therapy and are considered incidental cases. If this trend continues, it would appear that, with a few exceptions of those requiring tertiary care, the fourth wave can be adequately treated at a primary care level.” Friedland said that in previous waves 26% of Netcare’s Covid patients were treated in high care and intensive care units. Friedland’s comments echo earlier analysis from Dr Fareed Abdullah, of the South African Medical Research Council, who said many of the patients diagnosed with Covid in hospitals in badly hit Gauteng province and elsewhere were often “incidental” identifications in patients presenting with other conditions. “The main observation that we have made over the last two weeks is that the majority of patients in the Covid wards have not been oxygen dependent. Sars-CoV-2 has been an incidental finding in patients that were admitted to the hospital for another medical, surgical or obstetric reason,” Abdullah said. “A snapshot of 42 patients in the ward on 2 December reveals that 29 (70%) are not oxygen dependent. These patients are saturating well on room air and do not present with any respiratory symptoms. A significant early finding in this analysis is the much shorter average length of stay of 2.8 days for patients admitted to the Covid wards over the last two weeks, compared to an average length of stay of 8.5 days for the past 18 months.” South African and other experts have said it is still too early in the Omicron outbreak to determine the longer-term course of the illness, and the younger population profile of South Africa means other countries may not necessarily see the same public health outcomes. South Africa has struggled at times with initially distinguishing between Covid variants, with some testing equipment unable to quickly spot Omicron without sequencing. Additional reporting by Daniel BoffeyHello, and Happy Thursday, Around Thanksgiving, I spoke with a few people who had recently attended a meeting at the White House to discuss voting rights. They were frustrated. They had gone into the meeting quite hopeful. After spending months watching Senate Republicans use the filibuster to block two major federal voting rights bills, there were signs things were moving in the right direction. In late October, Joe Biden gave his public blessing to changing the filibuster, the Senate rule Republicans have relied on to block the voting rights bills. So when hundreds of leaders of groups pushing for voting reform gathered on a 15 November teleconference meeting with White House officials, they expected to hear more details about a plan to move forward. But the people I spoke with said they didn’t hear any kind of plan at all. “They did not lay out a strategy for getting this done,” one person I spoke with said. Cliff Albright, a co-founder of Black Voters Matter, told me it was “very frustrating” and it felt like a “check-the-box kind of call”. Kamala Harris, tapped to lead the White House’s voting rights work, stopped by the meeting briefly, read from prepared remarks that one person described as the “same old, same old” and then left. White House staff answered three questions from participants on the call. The frustration with Biden’s handling of voting rights is not new. For months, activists have said that the president has failed to put muscle behind it. “He’s phoning it in,” Ezra Levin, a co-founder of the grassroots group Indivisible, told me in June. Biden has since given a speech on voting rights. “Nothing comes without a fight, which is why the president and vice-president are working with Speaker Pelosi, leader Schumer, and advocates to protect our democracy and the fundamental right to vote,” Sabrina Singh, a White House spokesperson, told me. In recent weeks, I’ve noticed that frustration is increasingly turning into alarm. State lawmakers across the country are rapidly enacting distorted political maps that will help cement Republican majorities in many places for the next decade. Those districts may well help Republicans retake control of the US House next year. Candidates are already filing for office to run in those districts in Texas and North Carolina. There are rapidly approaching primary elections set to take place in the spring. (The first day of early voting in the Texas primary is 14 February.) And yet, the Senate appears likely to end the year without passing a voting rights bill. Helen Butler, a longtime organizer in Georgia who helped turn out record numbers of Black voters last year, said she thought passing new voting protections would be one of the first things Biden did after he was inaugurated. “It is disheartening, I can tell you, out of all the work we’ve put in to have fair elections, to get people engaged, and to have the Senate that will not act to protect the most sacred right, the right to vote, is unheard of,” she told me. Now, Senate Democrats are looking to January as the earliest point at which they might be able to make changes to the filibuster and pass voting legislation, Politico reported Wednesday. The small group of Democratic senators tasked with finding a way forward on the filibuster is projecting optimism that they’ll be able to get Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, both staunch defenders of the filibuster, to support changes, according to Politico. We’ll see what happens in January, but when Levin and I spoke a few weeks ago, he wasn’t particularly optimistic. “If Congress doesn’t get this done by the end of the year, it’s hard to see why the political will will be there later. What will have changed in January, in February?” he said. Reader questions Please continue to write to me each week with your questions about elections and voting at sam.levine@theguardian.com or DM me on Twitter at @srl and I’ll try to answer as many as I can. Also worth watching … The justice department filed its first redistricting lawsuit this year on Monday, challenging Texas’ new congressional and state House maps. Texas Republicans drew districts, in some cases intentionally, to make it harder for Latino and Black voters to elect the candidate of their choice. A Trump-aligned group is looking for a way around Wisconsin’s Democratic governor to enact new voting restrictions. Lawyers for Crystal Mason, the Texas woman appealing a five-year prison sentence for illegal voting in 2016, filed an appellate brief arguing that Texas’ new voting law contains a provision that bolsters her argument for why her conviction should be overturned.An aspiring artist who killed one of Britain’s wealthiest landowners and repeatedly stabbed his own mother has told a jury he went “completely crazy” after a voice in his head shouted: “Attack, attack, attack,” following months of rising family tensions exacerbated by being “trapped” in Covid lockdowns. Thomas Schreiber, 35, insisted he had not wanted to kill the hotelier and landowner Sir Richard Sutton or his mother, Anne Schreiber, but “demonic” thoughts took hold and he could not stop stabbing them both. Schreiber told Winchester crown court that he snapped on the eighth anniversary of the death of his father, David, after his mother accused him of being “drunk” like her late husband. The defendant said feelings of regret about David’s death, and jealousy of his older sisters escalated during Covid lockdowns when he was living with his mother and her partner at their mansion in Dorset. He searched the internet, trying to understand his obsessive thoughts of revenge but could not find help. Schreiber, 35, has admitted killing Sutton, 83, but denies his murder and has also pleaded not guilty to attempting to murder his mother, 66, who was left paralysed by the attack. The defendant said he and Sutton were sitting peacefully on the evening of 7 April and Schreiber had poured himself a glass of wine, intending to toast the anniversary of his father’s death. He told the court: “Mum came in and said: ‘You’re drunk just like your father.’” Schreiber said he followed her into the kitchen and punched her in her back. “There was a knife on the island. I went completely crazy. A voice in my head said: ‘Attack, attack, attack.’ I picked up the knife and started stabbing my mum. Richard came in and I think he tried to stop me and I started stabbing him. I just couldn’t stop. Schreiber said he went “back and forth” between the pair. “My mum said: ‘Will you stop’ and I couldn’t. There was no choice.” Asked why he attacked the pair, Schreiber said: “I don’t know. I couldn’t physically control myself.” He told the jury that his mother knew he was sensitive about his father, who was an alcoholic. “I wasn’t drunk,” he said. “I wasn’t a drunk like my father.” He said the date of the attack – the eighth anniversary of his father’s death – was “hugely significant”. After the attack, he sat on a sofa, covered in blood, and thought: “I’ve killed my family.” He was horrified and disgusted at the “horror show” and planned to take his own life. He stabbed himself and cut his wrists during a police car chase from Dorset to London but survived. Schreiber said the “watershed moment” came in November 2020 when a row over the inheritance of a chandelier turned violent and Sutton struck him with a cane. “I closed myself off from my family … it was complete separation … terrible. It was rock bottom. I was really struggling. I had suicidal thoughts day and night. My family hate me. I’m a failure like my father.” Schreiber said Covid lockdowns and restrictions had a huge impact on his mental health. “Lockdown put a magnifying glass on my mental health. The opportunity to get out of myself and out of the house became less and less possible with the restrictions. Home life was a pressure cooker. It got worse and worse and worse.” Schreiber admitted that at times he hated Sutton and had expressed the hope he would die of Covid. But he also said: “I love my family. I love my mum, my sisters and at times I loved Richard.” He said he acted “like a monster” on the day of the killing but denied the attack began with him “glassing” Sutton in his study and said he could not remember if he stabbed his mother in the back as she lay on the kitchen floor. The court heard Schreiber is believed to have been three times the drink drive limit at the time of the attack. He said he was tipsy but not drunk. The trial continues.Lina Wertmüller, the Italian film-maker who was the first woman to be nominated for the best director Oscar, has died aged 93 in Rome. Wertmüller, whose scabrous political fables made a major impact on international cinema in the early 70s, was Oscar-nominated for her 1975 film Seven Beauties, and was awarded an honorary Oscar in 2019. Born in 1928 in Rome, Wertmüller – whose full name was Arcangela Felice Assunta Wertmüller von Elgg Spanol von Braueich, due to her part-Swiss descent – became interested in theatre and performance in her 20s, touring Europe with a puppet company, before getting to know film director Federico Fellini (via a schoolfriend who was married to actor Marcello Mastroianni). She worked as an assistant director on Fellini’s 1963 masterpiece 8 1/2 (“I was the worst assistant, but that was overlooked because I was likable,” she later told the Guardian), and made her own film debut in the same year with The Basilisks, a slow-paced portrait of life in a southern Italian town, and which benefited from a score by Ennio Morricone. Wertmüller followed The Basilisks with a series of putatively commercial films, including the spaghetti western The Belle Star Story, which she co-directed with Piero Cristofani under the joint name Nathan Wich, and co-wrote under the name George Brown. But the more directly political films on which her reputation principally rests were released in the following decade, several of them starring regular collaborator Giancarlo Giannini (best known to UK audiences as French agent René Mathis in Bond films Casino Royale and Quantum of Solace). They include The Seduction of Mimi (1972), with Giannini as a construction worker with a complicated personal life; Love and Anarchy (1973), about a would-be assassin who falls in love with a prostitute; and Swept Away (1974) – later remade by Madonna and Guy Ritchie – about a rich woman stuck on a desert island with a member of her boat crew. Seven Beauties, again featuring Giannini as an Italian mobster who ends up in a Nazi concentration camp, was released in 1975, and won a clutch of Oscar nominations: as well as best director, Wertmüller was nominated for best original screenplay and best foreign language film, and Giannini for best actor. Her increased international profile led to a Hollywood contract, and Wertmüller wrote and directed the English-language romantic drama A Night Full of Rain, starring Candice Bergen opposite Giannini. But the film was not a success, and her Hollywood career rapidly fizzled out. However, she returned to Italy and continued releasing films, though without the success of the 1970s. “Really, there are two strands – two souls – which coexist in my work: the lighthearted one associated with musical comedies and the more socially conscious one,” she told the Guardian. In 1990 she directed Sophia Loren in a TV adaptation of Eduardo De Filippo’s play Saturday, Sunday, Monday, and a decade later in the TV film Francesca e Nunziata. Alongside her film and TV work she directed a number of operas, including Carmen in 1986 and La Boheme in 1997; she also dubbed the voice of Grandmother Fa for the Italian release of the 1998 Disney animation film Mulan. Wertmüller was also known for the comedically long titles for many of her films: her 1978 release Blood Feud holds the record for the longest ever, according to Guinness World Records. The full title, at 179 characters is: “Un fatto di sangue nel comune di Siculiana fra due uomini per causa di una vedova. Si sospettano moventi politici. Amore-Morte-Shimmy. Lugano belle. Tarantelle. Tarallucci e vino.” Wertmüller’s pioneering status was belatedly recognised, leading to the honorary Oscar to whose maleness she memorably objected. Wertmüller was married to costume designer Enrico Job until his death in 2008.As we approach another uncertain Christmas, perhaps Fretwork’s new recording is the music we need. This may be a festive compilation, but the Tudor (and Stuart) Christmases these pieces were written for would have been preceded by weeks of Advent fasting, rather like Easter following Lent, and there’s as much contemplation here as there is rejoicing. These viol pieces and consort songs were private music, and the atmosphere is inward-looking. The title is a bit approximate considering that a fair bit of the music here was written in the years after Elizabeth’s death, but the sequence of 17 pieces has been carefully thought out with regard to key and to the subtly evolving mood. At the centre of it is William Byrd’s Lullaby, bemoaning the days “when wretches have their will”; this is surrounded with less solemn yet still quiet expressions of hopefulness and devotion by Byrd and Martin Peerson, and a short, slightly risque madrigal-like number by Thomas Weelkes. The songs are beautifully delivered by the mezzo-soprano Helen Charlston, who sings with firm yet confiding tone and lends the same sense of potentially endless expansion to her lines as do the viol players. A handful more singers lend occasional choral support. The songs are interspersed with instrumental pieces: short dances by Anthony Holborne, with suitably Christmassy titles from The Cradle to Heigh Ho Holiday, and two of Orlando Gibbons’s Fantasias “for Ye Great Dooble Bass”, in which the lowest viol adds a new sonorous richness. As played by the five members of Fretwork, each piece unfolds with its own calm yet unstoppable momentum; harmonies crunch and grind but can always be relied on to resolve, steadily and with absolute inevitability. There’s a feeling of consolation here that you can hunker down with, however you’re feeling about the festive season this year. This week’s other pick Mirrors is an enormously promising debut from the Trinidadian soprano Jeanine De Bique. Arias for five Handel heroines (or antiheroines) are paired with numbers that Handel’s contemporaries wrote for those characters in their own operatic versions of the stories. The fast arias will strike you first: De Bique is dazzling, cartwheeling through all the notes with buoyant clarity, spurred on by Concerto Köln and its director Luca Quintavalle. But she makes beautiful work of the slow numbers too, spinning out long lines on a silvery thread of voice; the final track – an aria for the sorceress Alcina by Broschi – is mesmerising.Half an hour into a lovely clear, sunlit Brisbane morning on day two of the first Ashes Test something extraordinary happened. Actually there were two things. The second of these was the commentators on Fox Sports stopped talking. This was a transformative event in itself, like having some painfully lodged object surgically removed from your inner ear: a toothpick, a kebab skewer, an endlessly burbling babel fish who speaks only 1990s Aussie Test great side-mouth pub chat. In medieval times there was a widespread belief in trepanning, or literally drilling a hole in your skull, to “remove the pressure” of horrendous pre-aspirin headaches. Listening to that unceasing bloke-bantz – the yes-mate, aw-mate, no-mate – this starts to make some kind of sense. Fetch the drill. Please, somebody, just stop that feeling. Maybe this is why England were so bad in the 90s, the sustained mental disintegration of having to listen to the slip cordon chat among themselves. John Crawley was right. Get me out of here. The Fox guys (and it is the guys) were derailed by the second thing, which was Mark Wood bowling the fastest spell of the match, at the start of a day that might have brought a few more than only the one wicket, but which was in its own way a kind of fulfilment. England had already pretty much bodged what chance they had in this game by the time Wood came on to bowl, and done so right from the top. Most obviously there was that wretched showing on day one. What’s the problem with England’s bowling? Answer: England’s batting. This is a rescue job every time. Just once it would be nice to come out and face tired opponents, running downhill with the wind. But then, the batting is simply the fruit of a system that disdains red-ball cricket, existing things, non-monetisable value, in favour of chasing a buck. A first day 147 all-out. A series already collapsing. This is the legacy-customer product now. Chuck in poor prep and planning from the coach and captain, and it is through this fog that the players must operate. But they did so with great heart here. What a thrilling, uplifting spectacle it was, out there in the middle of all that colour and light. There was David Warner’s gorgeously whiskery, beaming evil sheriff’s face, the face of a cartoon tiger who drives a car and robs trains. And there was Wood, the fastest bowler in the world at almost 32 years old, Tiggering in and hitting 91mph first up, smiling, chattering, jog-walking back, and bouncing it up to 94mph next ball. Wood beat David Warner’s bat nine times. He hit him in the chest, and hit Travis Head on the elbow in mid-afternoon. This kind of extreme, sustained pace ennobles everything around it, gives a deeper lustre to Warner’s innings of 94, adds another gear to Head’s fine hundred. As ever Wood did all this with that air of rakish good cheer, a cricketer who has crawled here through injury, dark times, thoughts of quitting; out there sending down those fizzing, purring bombs and providing in the process a reminder of something else. Here was a man still playing to the original plan, a parallel world where England came to Australia loaded with pace, like stumbling across the last surviving pillar of a ruined cathedral. So what about those plans? There will be talk of how unlucky England were. The thing is, there is no luck, not really, not in this kind of attritional sport. As Gary Player might have said, the harder I work at making the wrong choices, the unluckier I get. That imbalance of pressure, where every dropped chance kills you. That’s not bad luck. It’s bad batting and bad catching. A pair of new-ball bowlers who have never opened together, with no idea how their combinations might work, how that shared pressure can be honed. That’s not bad luck. It’s bad planning. The absence of Stuart Broad, the guy who always gets the guy. Beating Warner’s bat repeatedly en route to 94, when you’ve already taken away your own best chance of snuffing him out before he gets to 10. None of that is bad luck either. It’s bad selection. Slips too far back, wrong people in the right place, fielders on the half-volley, all those tiny, familiar margins. It’s poor captaincy, woolly thinking, an absence of that instinct for angles. And nothing here is bad luck. There is frustration too because England can throw themselves at the rest of this game and indeed the rest of the series with a weak gleam of hope. The seam bowlers were all impressive, even with the added burden of filling the hole left by Jack Leach’s pre-planned monstering. Ollie Robinson was hugely impressive in his first Ashes Test, despite bowling so slowly when he floated the full ball up it felt as though Warner could play three different shots – drive? Leave? Bit of a run down? – before the ball had passed him. Wood came back before tea and was straight into some 94mph leg gully stuff at Steve Smith, before drawing an edge to Jos Buttler. He had Mitch Starc dropped in the final over of the day. There is fight here, the remains of a plan, and also something instructional. If Wood’s own arc tells us anything, – the choices, the obstinacy that took him to this moment, 94mph under clear blue Ashes skies – it is that luck’s got very little to do with it.The City regulator has refused to intervene in a deal to sell the mutual LV= to a US private equity firm, despite an 11th-hour plea by lawyers to try to delay Friday’s vote by members of the mutual to approve the controversial takeover. The law firm Leigh Day, which is working on behalf of two LV= members leading objections to the takeover, met with officials from the Financial Conduct Authority on Thursday in an attempt to put the brakes on a £530m deal that would end the firm’s member-owned status and put it in the hands of Bain Capital. The lawyers have been urging the FCA to withdraw a statement from October in which the regulator said it would not object to either the takeover or plans to demutualise LV=. They have raised concerns about how the mutual’s leadership disseminated information about bids from Bain and rivals, including fellow mutual Royal London, as well as a lack of member consultation. Leigh Day said on Thursday that while the meeting with the City regulator was helpful, “regrettably the FCA declined to withdraw their ‘non-objection letter’ before tomorrow’s vote”. However, the law firm’s clients are now preparing to raise their opposition at a court hearing on 20 December that would formalise the Bain deal. “If LV= members vote to approve the transaction and the scheme of arrangement [on Friday] then our clients intend to voice their objections at the sanctions hearing,” Leigh Day said. The decision is expected to go to the wire, with LV=members able to change any votes previously cast on the day of the special meeting on Friday. However, Leigh Day has questioned whether this has been made clear enough to members, and raised this concern with the FCA. The law firm had raised concerns about a “material lack of procedural fairness” about the way information about bids from Bain and rival suitors were made available to members after the LV= board backed the offer from the private equity firm in December 2020. Leigh Day are also concerned over a lack of consultation over plans to demutualise LV=, and say there has been “confusing and contradictory” information about the business’s financial health. LV= has said it is “very aware of our responsibility to communicate clearly with members” and has “directly responded to a significant number of written questions”. It added that any objections raised by the two members were “based on a misunderstanding of the transaction and its implications”. The FCA said: “LV members have the opportunity to vote on whether this takeover should happen. Our role, under law, is to ensure that customers are treated fairly and that there is no material adverse impact on them should the transaction go ahead. We have challenged the firm to make sure this happens.” LV=’s 1.1 million members will be asked to cast two ballots on the takeover on Friday afternoon, the first of which ask whether members approve of the deal. However, that vote will only require approval from 75% of members who show up to vote, with no quorum – meaning there is not a minimum threshold on the number of members who are required to cast their ballot to ensure it is valid. The second vote – which will only take place if the first vote passes – will ask members to agree to scrap a rule requiring at least 50% of all its 1.1 million members to take part in any vote that could result in demutualising the business, and take power out of the hands of its members.Racing was thrown into turmoil on Thursday as the National Hunt jockey Robbie Dunne was banned from riding for 18 months, with three months suspended, for conducting a seven-month campaign of bullying and intimidation against his fellow rider Bryony Frost. In a vindication of Frost’s decision to lodge a complaint, Dunne was found guilty on four counts by an independent panel. Dunne was told by Brian Barker, the chair of the three-person panel, that “professional athletes should behave in a professional way and I’m afraid you haven’t. This was a deliberate targeting of a colleague whose vulnerabilities you exploited. “This was a deliberate course of conduct, in public, over a fairly long period, which had its desired effect and your behaviour and language would not be tolerated in any other walk of life or workplace. You meant to instil fear and humiliation and you succeeded.” Barker also expressed the panel’s “real concern” over a longstanding weighing room culture of self-policing disagreements between riders, which was described during the hearing as a “recipe for bullying” by the British Horseracing Authority’s counsel, Louis Weston. Barker said Frost had been a “truthful, careful and compelling” witness, and in taking her complaint to the BHA had “broken the [weighing room] code, knowing that isolation and rejection by some was inevitable”. He added that there was “real concern” that “the weighing room culture … is deep-rooted and coercive, and in itself not conducive to the good health and development of modern-day race-riding”. But in the aftermath of the verdict, relations between the BHA and the Professional Jockeys’ Association reached near-meltdown. The PJA immediately took issue with the panel’s comments and the BHA’s conduct of the case, in a statement that could open a significant rift with the regulator as it seeks to address issues raised by the investigation. “Bryony felt bullied,” the PJA said. “It certainly took courage to go through the process she has and we do not doubt the isolation she has felt. The PJA entirely accepts that Robbie Dunne’s conduct as found by the disciplinary panel fell well short of the standard the PJA expects. “All that said, the PJA does not accept the disciplinary panel’s findings in relation to the culture within, and collective behaviour of, the jump jockeys weighing room. It is a grossly inaccurate and wholly unfair representation of the weighing room and a conclusion we believe is at odds with the evidence presented.” The statement added: “The PJA and its board had for some months lost confidence in the disciplinary panel due to a number of serious concerns including the long and striking track record of the panel’s failure to ever criticise the BHA, its case management and its processes. The BHA and disciplinary panel have been aware of those concerns for some time. “Furthermore, the PJA and its members are appalled by the BHA’s characterisation of the weighing room culture as ‘rancid’, made via their advocate and therefore presumably under instruction. This and the BHA’s conduct throughout this process is incredibly damaging.” The PJA is understood to have suggested that Frost, who is a PJA member, “felt bullied”, rather than accepting that she was bullied in accordance with the panel’s finding, because of the possibility of an appeal against the decision. Dunne’s suspension comes into effect immediately, but he has seven days to lodge an appeal. The BHA’s case against Dunne included six alleged instances of bullying and harassment, including two during races at Leicester and Market Rasen. It portrayed him as a “self-appointed enforcer of weighing room traditions”, whose campaign against Frost and what he perceived to be issues with her riding style culminated in a “promise” to cause her physical harm by putting her “though the wing [of a fence]” after a race at Southwell in September 2020. That, Frost told the panel last week, convinced her that Dunne would follow through on his threat. “No one’s ever said [before] they were going to hurt me,” she said. “It was the promise that made me believe he wanted to, 100%.” Frost, who rode a winner at Warwick while the decision was being announced, said in a statement on Thursday that she “would like to thank every individual including the racing public that has supported me not only during the last couple of weeks but throughout”. She added: “I wish now to take a few days to reflect on the outcome before I make any further comment. I ask the media to please give me and the people closest to me a few days of privacy. I need to focus on my upcoming rides over the weekend. Thank you.” The BHA said in a statement that it welcomed the panel’s decision and that its decision to impose an 18-month suspension, well above the three-month entry point, “sends a clear message that conduct of this nature cannot be tolerated in any working environment within our sport”. The statement said: “This case has been a groundbreaking one for British racing, the first of its kind, and it is important that it acts as a catalyst for further change within the industry. “We understand that, for the vast majority of those who work in the sport – and in particular in the jockeys’ weighing room – it is a positive, supportive, welcoming place. We recognise the pressures on those involved in the sport, and that temperatures will at times be raised. “However, there is a line as to what is acceptable. It is essential that when something does go wrong that people feel that they can call out bad behaviour, and not be made to suffer in silence. The independent judicial panel chair [Barker] voiced concerns regarding these issues in his judgment. We call on everyone in the industry to recognise this.”The doctor of the Plymouth mass killer Jake Davison never told police that Davison was fit to hold a firearm, a hearing has been told. Davison applied for a firearms licence in July 2017 and his GP was contacted by police about his fitness to hold a lethal firearm. A pre-inquest hearing on Thursday heard that the GP declined to answer, and in January 2018 police granted Davison the firearms licence and thus permission to hold a pump action shotgun for five years. In August this year Davison shot dead five people before killing himself. Dr Carolyn Adcock, a paediatric consultant overseeing a review of the death of Sophie Martyn, three, who was one of the victims, told the hearing: “The GP wrote [to police] declining to give information because he did not feel he was in a position to be qualified to comment on the personality of a patient to say whether or not they were safe to hold a gun licence.” Devon and Cornwall police are understood to have told investigators from the Independent Office for Police Conduct, which is investigating whether officers bungled Davison’s gun application, that the rules at the time led them to believe they could not refuse the application. They had previously refused a licence when an applicant’s GP refused to answer the question of whether they were fit to have a gun, and then had the refusal overturned in the courts. After the Plymouth shootings, the Home Office tightened the rules. Davison, 22, shot dead his mother, the three-year-old girl and three other people on 12 August in a 12-minute shooting rampage. The gun had been taken away after he got into a fight in September 2020, only to be returned by police weeks before the killings. He had aired “incel” views online before the shootings. The hearing was told that during lockdown Davison got mental health support and was in contact with a telephone helpline run by Livewell Southwest, a health and care organisation. The IOPC is investigating whether the police bungled the handling of Davison’s firearm’s licence, including the decision to hand him back his weapon after it was taken away. The IOPC said it was also investigating a claim from a man who claims police were told that Davison attacked him outside a supermarket in Plymouth in 2016, before the gun licence was issued. It also said an officer from the firearms team had been placed under investigation for potential gross misconduct. The IOPC report is expected to be completed in the new year. Patrick Maguire, a solicitor representing the families of some of the victims, said: “My clients are greatly concerned about how Davison came into possession of the firearm against the backdrop of matters aired at today’s hearing.”Scotland has marked the end of its coal-powered history by demolishing the huge chimney at its last remaining coal plant at Longannet in Fife. The chimney, which was Scotland’s largest freestanding structure, dominated the skyline for more than half a century before it was destroyed on Thursday morning with 700kg of explosives. Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, who pushed the ignition button on the controlled implosion, described the demolition as “a symbolic reminder that we have ended coal-fired power generation in Scotland, as we work in a fair and just way towards becoming a net zero nation by 2045”. The Longannet coal plant, which is owned by Scottish Power, was the largest of its kind in Europe when it began generating enough electricity to power a quarter of Scottish homes in 1970. Almost half a century of power generation at the plant came to an end in 2016 when the energy company shut the site beside the Firth of Forth, drawing a line under the coal age that had powered Scotland’s Industrial Revolution. Sturgeon said Scotland aims to generate half of its overall energy consumption from renewable sources by 2030 by investing in renewables, hydrogen and energy storage to help tackle the climate crisis “in a way that leaves no one behind”. She said growth in these sectors over the next decade would be “transformative for Scotland, delivering further good, green jobs, strengthened energy security, and benefits for local communities”. Scottish Power, which is owned by the Spanish energy giant Iberdrola, ended its generation of fossil fuels in 2018 after selling off its last gas plants to Drax to focus on running wind and solar farms. Keith Anderson, Scottish Power’s chief executive, said the company had “bade farewell” to a landmark; “However, this is a landmark day for Scotland, too.” He said: “Watching the chimney of Scotland’s last coal-fired station fall today represents a real milestone, as the UK moves away from the large polluting power stations of the past and accelerates down the road to net zero emissions.” The UK still has a handful of coal plants that generate electricity ahead of the government’s 2024 ban on coal power. Drax continues to burn coal at two of its six generating units in North Yorkshire. There are also active coal plants at West Burton A in Lincolnshire, at Ratcliffe-on-Soar in Nottinghamshire, and at Kilroot in Northern Ireland.A German court has ruled that a man who slipped while walking a few metres from his bed to his home office can claim on workplace accident insurance as he was technically commuting. The man was working from home and on his way to his desk one floor below his bedroom, the federal social court, which oversees social security issues, said in its decision. While walking on the spiral staircase connecting the rooms, the unnamed man slipped and broke his back. The court noted that the employee usually started working in his home office “immediately without having breakfast beforehand”, but did not explain why that was relevant to the case. However, later it said that statutory accident insurance was only afforded to the “first” journey to work, suggesting that a trip on the way to get breakfast after already being in the home office could be rejected. The employer’s insurance refused to cover the claim. While two lower courts disagreed on whether the short trip was a commute, the higher federal social court said it had found that “the first morning journey from bed to the home office [was] an insured work route”. It ruled: “The plaintiff suffered an accident at work when he fell on the way to his home office in the morning.” In many countries, firms have a duty of care to their employees, regardless of where they work. The German federal court said: “If the insured activity is carried out in the household of the insured person or at another location, insurance cover is provided to the same extent as when the activity is carried out at the company premises.” It is not clear if the man was working from home due to the pandemic or had done so previously. The ruling said the law applied to “teleworking positions”, which are “computer workstations that are permanently set up by the employer in the private area of the employees”.MAKING A RENNES FOR IT In a city where Downing Street Christmas parties that don’t actually happen appear to happen with monotonous regularity, it’s no great surprise to learn that Tin Pot games that are definitely being played don’t get played. Having received reassurances before travelling on Wednesday that their match against Tottenham was definitely going ahead despite a serious outbreak of Covid among the hosts’ ranks, French side Rennes arrived in London only to discover Spurs had announced the match would no longer be taking place. “We can confirm that our [Tin Pot] Group G home fixture will not take place after a number of positive Covid-19 cases at the club,” said Tottenham, in a statement the Ligue 1 side quickly countered with one of their own, announcing it was a “unilateral decision which has not been confirmed by Uefa in any way”. Their grumbles seem entirely justifiable, considering they only flew to London after being told in an email from Spurs that the game that now isn’t going ahead would definitely be going ahead. By Thursday morning, Uefa confirmed the postponement, prompting Rennes to pack their bags and return home still upset at their waste of time. Once they’ve calmed down, they’ll almost certainly recognise the wisdom of not taking to the field against players who have almost certainly been in close contact with teammates who have since tested positive for a contagious virus, but it does little to dispel the air of farce surrounding the whole affair. As early as Tuesday it was common knowledge that seven Tottenham players and two backroom staff had tested positive for Covid, numbers that rose to eight and five, respectively, within 24 hours. “Tomorrow, who? Me?” sighed a visibly emotional and cross Antonio Conte in his pre-match press conference, before pondering aloud why he and his players were being forced to continue preparing for a game he did not know at the time would ultimately be called off. “This is not a good thing for you, the fans and staff. Everyone is a bit scared, we all have families. I ask why? Why? Yesterday we trained and two positives, today we trained and – after – another two positives. Who next? It’s not right, we’re going home to our families.” With the first-team area of their training ground now closed, their weekend match against Brighton unlikely to go ahead and next Thursday’s ding-dong against Covid-affected Leicester sure to be in doubt, Uefa is faced with the thorny problem of having to reschedule the game between Spurs and Rennes before its 31 December deadline, despite the London club not having a spare midweek window before – given their growing backlog – what’s going to be an extremely busy new year. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Barry Glendenning and John Brewin from 5.45pm GMT for hot Big Vase clockwatch coverage, while Nick Ames will also be on hand for Arsenal 1-2 Barcelona in Women’s Big Cup at 7pm. QUOTE OF THE DAY “I don’t know why he didn’t wait to the end, he could have got a picture then. In all seriousness, we’ve got to think about player welfare and safety” – Chelsea manager Emma Hayes after Sam Kerr was given a flamin’ booking for barging over an eejit pitch invader during the 0-0 Women’s Big Cup draw with Juventus. FIVER LETTERS “As a Liverpool fan, it’s been enormously entertaining watching Divock Origi score late, important goals off the bench over the last few years. The only worrying thing is that, in a few years’ time, he’s going to be brought in as a woefully under-qualified manager” – Matt Dony. “Ooh. Hull v Everton in the FA Cup third round has been chosen by the BBC as a TV match. Congrats to all the non-league teams for getting through but we can’t be bothered to show you. The magic of the Cup, eh?” – Alex Folkes. “If dropping to Big Vase is considered ‘an ignominy’, what adjective shall be used when they get knocked out in the last 16?” – Krishnamoorthy V. “In Romeo and Juliet some wordy character said: ‘What’s in a name?’ Well Shakespeare, my fellow Ipswich fans will tell you there’s quite a lot, as the club has sacked three managers in double-quick time and they were all called Paul. And to a man they were a horse’s ar [snip – Fiver Taste Ed]” – Lindsay Williams. “Re: multi-use-sounding football names (Fiver letters passim). I considered opening a pub in Manchester called United City. I thought it had a certain flair but others thought not. The day has gone now, but do you think it might have been a hit (provided there was enough profit to pay for all the bouncers)?” – Peter Lingard. “You’re probably already aware of your slight error in yesterday’s Fiver regarding ‘Buxton United striker Diego De Girolamo’. I seem to remember a team playing in the Taverners League in Buxton going by the name of Buxton United, but I’m pretty sure Diego didn’t play for them on Sunday mornings” – Jon Cantrill. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our letter o’ the day is … Matt Dony, who bags a revised and updated version of Richard Foster’s Premier League Nuggets. We’ll give a copy away every day this week, and it is available to buy here. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Here’s the latest Football Weekly Extra podcast. There’s a new Ashes pod about too, if you’re that way inclined. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Pelé has received scheduled treatment for a colon tumour. “In two or three days he will be back home to enjoy Christmas,” said his daughter Kely Nascimento. The Dutch FA has demanded the Human Rights World Cup must deliver a legacy on LGBT and women’s rights in Qatar. “It would be even more great if we made a first step on equality between men and women and also on the LGBT discussions,” said chief suit Gijs de Jong. They’re taking Barcelona’s exit from Big Cup well. “Barça staged their resignation from the football elite in a display of all their shortcomings,” howled the AS newspaper. “We feel very bad right now,” wailed Sergio Busquets after a 3-0 pumping by Bayern Munich. “We’re in a tough, difficult situation. We got ourselves into this mess and it hurts a lot.” Hibs have ushered boss Jack Ross out of the door that says ‘Dae One’. Wednesday night against, er, Young Boys, was a big night for Manchester United fledglings. Zidane Iqbal became the first British South Asian footballer to play for the club. And Robbie Savage’s son Charlie also made his bow. “I’m starting to tear up,” sniffed Sav Snr, a former United trainee shown the door by Lord Ferg. And RB Leipzig have a new manager in Domenico Tedesco, replacing Jesse Marsch. STILL WANT MORE? Karen Carney weighs up the three-horse race for Premier League glory. Barcelona have got used to humbling exits but this may take the crema Catalana, laments Sid Lowe. The rise of NYC FC. By Graham Ruthven. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! GET YOUR QUIZ ONRobbie Shakespeare, who has died aged 68 following kidney surgery, was the best known and most highly regarded bass player in Jamaica for a span of more than three decades from the late 1970s onwards. His drum and bass partnership with Sly Dunbar provided the rhythmic underlay – as Sly and Robbie – for many of the best works of reggae by artists such as Gregory Isaacs, Peter Tosh, Bunny Wailer, Black Uhuru and Burning Spear. Sly and Robbie’s creative peak came in the 80s, when they were the golden duo of reggae, pushing forwards with their creativity and exploring a more digital sound that sometimes took their drum and bass foundations into funkier, disco-like territory, while retaining a strong roots feel. After they branched out to provide the rhythm section for several Grace Jones albums, their influence began to stretch well beyond reggae, and in the later part of his career Shakespeare was much in demand as a player and producer with big names in the music business, including Mick Jagger, Yoko Ono, Sinéad O’Connor and Bob Dylan. In 2020 he was named at No 17 in Rolling Stone magazine’s list of the greatest bassists of all time. Born into a musical family in Kingston, Jamaica, Shakespeare first learned to play acoustic guitar, but took up the bass after an encounter at his family home with Aston “Family Man” Barrett, one of the pre-eminent Jamaican session musicians of the 60s and later the bass player and musical arranger for Bob Marley and the Wailers. Barrett helped Shakespeare to learn the bass, but also took him under his wing, allowing the younger man to shadow him on sessions and putting him forward for recording work once his playing was up to speed. Shakespeare had first come across Dunbar in the early 70s when playing at the Evil People club in Kingston. Dunbar was a resident musician at the nearby Tit for Tat venue, and whenever either of them had a break, they would slip over to the other club to watch what was going on. Impressed by Dunbar’s musicianship, Shakespeare told the producer Bunny Lee about his discovery, and the two of them ended up playing together as part of a studio band. Both regarded their partnership as a gift from the heavens. “From day one we had that special chemistry,” said Shakespeare. “Musically we’d have to set up a special channel to God to ask him why what we play always comes out right.” For his part Dunbar noted that “from the first time we played together we clicked musically. It was like magic. He knew what I was going to do and I knew what he was going to do.” Apart from their musical synchronicity, the pair were also remarkably close friends, as well as a good temperamental match. Dunbar, the more laidback of the two, often applied a brake on Shakespeare’s demanding, forceful personality, while Shakespeare helped the two of them to stand up to any music business murkiness. They rarely parted for any length of time, spent almost every day in each other’s company and claimed never to have had a fight or quarrel. “It feels like a bond, even more than a marriage,” said Dunbar in 1997. “We just relax together, and there’s no ego.” Shakespeare and his wife, Marian, were near neighbours of Dunbar and his wife, Natasha. Forming their own independent production company and record label, Taxi, in 1974, within two years Sly and Robbie had already become one of Jamaica’s most celebrated and prolific rhythm sections, their work encompassing not just sessions with the Revolutionaries and Aggrovator bands but, from 1975, as the mainstay of the Peter Tosh band, with whom Shakespeare played on six albums, including Legalize It (1976) and Equal Rights (1977). He was also on the classic 1976 Mighty Diamonds’ album Right Time, and contributed (without Dunbar) to Bunny Wailer’s Blackheart Man in the same year. Perhaps the quintessential Sly and Robbie sound was delivered with Black Uhuru, with whom they played from 1979 to 1986, including on the album Sinsemilla (1980), the title track of which showcases the pair in all their glory. That album also began to make them influential in reggae’s move towards digital instrumentation, epitomised by their jagged, staccato treatment of Murder She Wrote by Chaka Demus &amp; Pliers in 1993. Shakespeare’s switch into working with musicians outside reggae had begun as early as 1980, when he and Dunbar were drafted in to play on Jones’s album Warm Leatherette. He subsequently provided a number of memorable bass lines for Jones songs such as My Jamaican Guy, Pull Up to the Bumper and Private Life, and the association brought in much more work, both as a producer and bass player, with other high-profile artists. He was involved with three Dylan albums in the mid-80s (Infidels, Empire Burlesque and Down in the Groove), with Jagger’s 1985 album She’s the Boss, Ono’s Starpeace in the same year, Jackson Browne’s World in Motion in 1989, and two albums by O’Connor in the 2000s. Among other musicians he recorded with were Ian Dury, Herbie Hancock, Joan Armatrading and Sting. Sly and Robbie also released six albums of their own between 1985 and 2014, and their musical and personal friendship endured to the end. “I don’t even want to think about what it would be like if Robbie wasn’t here,” said Dunbar. “We’ve got so much history between us, you can’t replace that.” • Robbie (Robert Warren Dale) Shakespeare, musician, born 27 September 1953; died 8 December 2021If a massive meteor were expected to collide with Earth in six months’ time, what would our leaders do? Everything in their power to stop it? Or everything possible to leverage it for political and financial gain? How about the rest of us? How would we cope with the prospect of impending apocalypse? By facing the end of the world with sobriety and compassion? Or drowning ourselves in sex, drugs and celebrity gossip? Might some of us even enjoy the drama? Adam McKay’s new film, Don’t Look Up, is a starry satire addressing these questions with a broad brush – and fresh urgency. It is that rare thing: a mainstream movie that seeks genuinely to engage with the issues dominating the news and plaguing our dreams. Jennifer Lawrence and Leonardo DiCaprio play the misfit scientists who spot the comet; Meryl Streep is the Trumpian president who seeks to sweep this species-ending event under the carpet until it is expedient. Cate Blanchett and Tyler Perry are the remorselessly lightweight hosts of a US daytime talkshow on which the news is broken, Mark Rylance the creepy tech billionaire with ambitions to be the messiah who saves humanity. Here, Blanchett, Perry, Rylance and McKay answer questions about how they would face the end of the world as we know it. Tyler Perry When do you think the world will end – and why? Oh my gosh, this is so sad. Well, if we keep on the path we are on, especially with climate destruction and the hatred between people and the evil that continues to live, I think we will be our own demise. Thank God I know Jesus! Are humans cynical about extinction? I don’t think so. So many people are caught up in their own worlds and own day-to-day lives and more interested in a reality star than what is going on in the world of extinction. So many people are self-centred, which is pretty sad. If extinction were imminent, which daily chore would you stop immediately? I would stop working out right away. I wouldn’t lift another weight, I wouldn’t run another mile. I would sit on my ass and eat as many cookies as I could find. What would you most regret having done and not having done? I would regret that I didn’t get to see my son grow up to be a man. I would regret not spending as much time with him, because of my business, as I would have liked to. What movie, meal and drink would you try to enjoy before the end? It would probably be some funny, silly comedy like Anchorman, to make me laugh really hard. Who cares about the meal and what I’m eating? For drink, I wouldn’t care, either. But there would be some strong sativa weed that I would want to enjoy right before the end. What do you find terrifying? I find terrifying what is happening in the world and politics. I find terrifying what is happening with climate. I find terrifying what is going to be left to my son and grandchildren when this particular generation, who have some sense, are dead and gone. I’m worried, I’m really concerned, and find it very terrifying. Do you subscribe to any conspiracy theories? Absolutely not. Unfortunately, I’ve been named in some of those and it’s scary to think people believe these things. We live in a world where social media manipulates people in other countries and helps overthrow governments, and somehow that’s OK. And it shouldn’t be. Cate Blanchett If extinction were imminent, which daily chore would you stop immediately? Stockpiling toilet paper. I do find routine strangely comforting, though. So I might, sadly, go into routine overdrive. Baking like there’s no tomorrow – when there actually wouldn’t be one. Where would you want to see in the apocalypse – and with whom? I guess dancing up a storm in the living room with my husband and children, and the farmer from across the way. Man, that farmer can dance. What do you find terrifying? Leaf blowers. They encapsulate all that is wrong with us as a species. Do you think Covid has brought into focus how rich many people’s lives used to be? I’m not really a believer in “the good old days”. Richer before? I’m not so sure. Things weren’t working for millions of people before the pandemic. Systems were already broken, or breaking open. You could say the pandemic just made these fissures and inequities undeniable. It certainly brought into focus how possible it would be to implement a basic living wage. Do you subscribe to any conspiracy theories? Conspiracy theories freak me out; I mean, the fact that they are believed at all keeps me awake at night. I relish them in movies and novels – where they belong. What is the most propulsive thing that has ever happened to you? Giving birth. That and spending 36 hours in the eye of a hurricane off the coast of Greenland. Mark Rylance When do you think the world will end – and why? Pretty soon now. Is that why we don’t insulate our homes? Why bother? Are humans cynical about extinction? No, we commit to it wholeheartedly. We imprison our own conscience and murder the poor in third world countries. Let’s not be cynical, that takes some commitment. If extinction were imminent, which daily chore would you stop immediately? Mopping my conscience with biodegradable bleach. What would you most regret having done and not having done? Eating animals that have been tortured to death in a factory farm. And not? Sitting down in traffic on the M25 a few decades earlier. What movie, meal and drink would you try to enjoy before the end? What movies, meals and drinks do you get in prison for breaking the law in civil protest? If there were a meteor heading for Earth, where would you want to be – and with whom – when it hit? Anywhere but the M25, rushing around in circles going nowhere with no one. What do you find terrifying? That those of us with the passion and wisdom to see what is terrifying ahead are jailed, rather than employed to help us avoid the terror ahead. Do you think Covid has brought into focus how rich many people’s lives used to be? Has Covid affected our ability to give and receive love to and from others? Love is the only lens that can focus a life. So why don’t we insulate our homes? Can the venality of those in power ever be overestimated? What would be the advantage of doing that? Would it help insulate our homes? Do you subscribe to any conspiracy theories? The conspiracy of silence. What is the most propulsive thing that has ever happened to you? Catching a peeping tom at my bedroom window. If I had insulated my house, his face might have been further away? Whatever. He certainly changed my climate. Adam McKay What do you find terrifying? The moment that you realise you’ve been fooling yourself and it is far too late to take action. Do you think Covid has brought into focus how rich many people’s lives used to be Oddly, at least in America, I think it did the opposite. Many people finally got a break from the constant grind of working to pay endless debts and keep giant corporations’ share prices up and seemed to question what it’s all been for. Millions are quitting their underpaying jobs and at least a dozen unions nationally are on strike. Can the venality of those in power ever be overestimated? Never. Unless they say they love God and country constantly with an almost over-the-top sincerity. In that case, we can all relax, because they said it, right? Do you subscribe to any conspiracy theories? I think most of the answers are out in the open, but we’re told they’re boring or not clever enough to speak of. But I am partial to the idea that the entire art world is a money-laundering front, because that means money-laundering can be beautiful and occasionally move us to tears. What is the most propulsive thing that has ever happened to you? One time during a power outage, I came down the stairs in our pitch-black house, miscounted the steps, fell and my whole body went completely horizontal in mid-air. Somehow, I was unhurt. When do you think the world will end – and why? The world won’t end until the sun goes supernova in 5bn years. Unfortunately, it’s possible humans are long gone by then and it’s highly intelligent jellyfish left to soar off in a spaceship to inhabit a distant planet as the Earth is incinerated. Are humans cynical about extinction? We can’t comprehend it. We pretend to be cynical, because it looks much cooler than just staring in silence with our mouths half open. If extinction were imminent, which daily chore would you stop immediately? The chore of not smoking. What would you most regret having done and not having done? Even without the world ending, I will always regret happily voting for Bill Clinton – and the time years ago I did a Nas song at karaoke. What movie, meal and drink would you try to enjoy before the end? Is there a movie where the main character figures out how not to cry and crap his pants as the end of the world approaches? I would watch that movie while enjoying a meal of cigarettes with a nice tall glass of cigarettes. Where would you want to see in the apocalypse – and with whom? At home with my family. Or in an all-nude waterpark. • Don’t Look Up is in selected UK cinemas now and on Netflix from 24 DecemberIt’s a measure of what Billie Eilish’s life has been like in 2021 that she woke up one morning last month, rolled over to check her phone and found out she’d got seven Grammy award nominations. She’d overslept the actual announcement. “I was up late, watching Fleabag. Again!” We’re speaking over Zoom from her home in Los Angeles. “This is my third time watching Fleabag. I’ve literally just paused it, again, to do this interview. Andrew Scott is my favourite actor in the world! And Phoebe [Waller-Bridge] is so fucking good, I can’t stress it enough. When I met her at the Bond premiere, I was trying not to blow smoke up her ass the entire night.” Eilish would be a standout figure of 2021 for her Grammy-winning title music for No Time to Die alone, written, as always, with her big brother, Finneas. It premiered at the pre-Covid 2020 Brit awards and was finally unleashed in the cinemas just over two months ago (“We saw the whole movie in December 2019… we’ve had to keep all the secrets for two years… that was hard!”). But the Bond theme is old news, given everything else that has happened this past year. Billie’s second album, Happier Than Ever, released in July, was a huge, global hit, expanding her trademark glitchy-moody pop into new territories of torch song and bossa nova. The British Vogue cover interview that preceded it also exploded the internet, largely because of the Eilish-directed photoshoot – the green-and-black-haired, shorts-wearing punk everyone knew had suddenly turned into a blond, pink-corseted, Marilyn Monroe-esque bombshell. Then there was her emotional return to live music at a run of festival gigs from the summer (“to see how the fans reacted in real life to my new songs was amazing and surreal… thousands of kids singing at the top of their lungs”) and a warts-and-all documentary, Billie Eilish: The World’s a Little Blurry, documenting her early years, which came out in February. When Eilish saw it she “literally sobbed all the way through it”. Why? “To see how young I was then and how much was going on and what I dealt with and coped with. I was also being proud of myself and also pitying myself and also being kind of envious of that girl, the 16-year-old me who was just so fearless and carefree.” She catches herself. “I had to snap out of it!” Written in Covid lockdowns, Happier Than Ever is a difficult but beautifully dreamy second album, largely about growing up, as songs such as Getting Older, My Future and Everybody Dies attest. Given that her career began at 13, when Eilish uploaded her first single, Ocean Eyes, to SoundCloud (by February this year, that track had hit 700m streams on Spotify), it’s fair to say she’s not had the typical adolescence. “I was always very scared of getting older – I dreaded it,” she says, crunching ice between her teeth as she twists her thoughts around. “And honestly, I have almost only found, besides a few hiccups, that I’ve been enjoying just having a little adulthood. Doing things for the first time like getting gas and doing laundry and calling your doctor on your own.” She laughs. “Normal shit! Not necessarily fun, but it’s exciting, isn’t it, just being a human.” The second album, however, made Eilish “super-worried”. Why? “The bigger you get, the more people hate your guts.” She felt this too when Finneas released his debut solo album, Optimist, in October. “I said, ‘Don’t forget what you felt when you first made this. You loved it.’ I think that we should all love our art the way that we loved it when we first made it, you know.” Eilish posted her Marilyn-styled UK Vogue cover on Instagram in May. It got a million likes in less than six minutes, her second record-breaking feat on the platform. “Proof that money can make you change your values and sell out!” railed a Daily Mail headline. “It was so much fun, that shoot,” Eilish says today. “It was playing dress-up, you know? Because” – her voice hardens against the haters – “that’s what a fucking photoshoot is.” She found it funny when some people responded to the shoot by saying she had become a different person, she continues. “I’m just playing around! You know, I’m allowed to wear anything I want at any time and so is everyone else. That was a fun thing to put out there in the world. You’re allowed to change. You’re also allowed to not change. You’re allowed to wear anything and say anything and do anything and be anything.” The shoot had a big effect on her: it made her feel more comfortable in her skin, she says. “I hated the way I looked before – I don’t love it now, but I feel a little more confident in myself and I’ve gotten a lot more proud of who I am and more open to things. I think [that shoot] opened my mind up for having an open mind in the future.” This year, she’s also ramped up her involvement in environmental activism, playing live at the 24-hour Global Citizen event, calling for urgent action before Cop26 and executive-producing a “food justice” documentary, They’re Trying to Kill Us. She doesn’t mind lending her fame to big causes – quite the opposite. “I mean, my God, what else is the point of it? We can do what we are capable of doing and I think that that’s really important. And again, I’m not invincible, but I try my best to fucking help the world, because, jeez, why not? Somebody has to.” The end of the year hasn’t seen her slacking off. In recent weeks, she’s launched a new perfume, Eilish, influenced by her synaesthesia and her interest in scent and memory (“I can’t wait for people to smell like how I dream they smell!”). She’s also due to host Saturday Night Live this week (“I don’t know anything about it yet – but I’m very, very, very fucking excited”) just before the biggest event of all – her 20th birthday. How’s she planning to leave her teens? Crunch.“I don’t know, really.” She recounts her favourite parties as a child: her mum would dress as a fairy, handing out treats, and little Billie would get puppies to play with, a “bounce house” and a piñata. For now, she’s happy living at 300 miles per hour, looking forward to the release of the new Pixar film, Turning Red, for which she and Finneas have provided songs, and listening non-stop to her latest obsession, Gorillaz (“I’ve known them my entire life, but it’s like they’ve taken over my body these last few weeks – I’ve become completely infatuated!”). What does she wish for next year? At first, she replies like the old teenager. “Gosh, I don’t know. There are so many unknowns, you know?” Then comes the new Billie. “I’ll just say I hope for joy and happiness and love and that’s really what I want. I don’t really care about anything else.” Billie Eilish will tour the UK in JuneThe German software engineer Jürgen Krauss shocked fans of The Great British Bake Off when he was eliminated during the semi-finals despite having won three Star Baker accolades. Ofcom later received 115 complaints from angry viewers. Were you surprised that so many people complained? Not when I saw how emotionally invested people had become. I had to make three calls to families with crying kids to comfort them. I have had many direct messages on social media from people who said they just couldn’t stop crying. Not making the final must have been disappointing? Being on Bake Off was a once-in-a-lifetime experience and I’m happy with the outcome. I felt sad I had to leave, of course, but I was relieved that I didn’t have to do the final bakes. It would have been daunting preparing in the few days we had. I have to say the other three did incredibly well and I admire them for it. I am in a happy place. I’ve got over not being in the final. It’s just one episode I missed, just one. And I know a lot of exciting things are coming my way and people are watching what I’m going to do next – and that’s pretty amazing. What do you enjoy most about baking? I view every bake a little bit like a chemistry or a physics experiment. You have to be precise with the ingredients, you have to be precise with the method. And then you end up with something beautiful. I was very little when I started baking, with my mother, at home. As soon as I could stand, I was in the middle of it [all], baking cheesecakes and Christmas biscuits with her. It was something we both enjoyed. My favourite thing to bake is bread. You make this thing out of ingredients and it comes alive. It has its own mind. Unlike a cake, you can’t pour it into a tin and expect it to keep that shape. With bread, you need to work with it and against it. You can’t rush it. It has its own ideas about what it wants to do. How did you prepare for the competition? I spent a lot of time walking in the countryside with my wife, discussing the personal connection to each bake I was going to make. I started with the story I wanted to tell, not the cake. I don’t know if that approach worked in the semi-finals. I also consciously took risks with my flavours. But I like to have a challenge. And then another challenge on top. Was the secrecy around the programme tough? Filming for the series happens early in the year but, obviously, you just can’t say a word to anyone for months. The secrecy was the hardest thing of all for me. It all went into a blur, to the extent that I couldn’t remember how many Star Bakers I got, whether I got a handshake or not… When I watched the series, it all came back. And it was like a rollercoaster all over again. I felt physically exhausted after watching each episode in the later weeks. I could feel the adrenaline. My heart was beating faster, afterwards. You all seemed to get on so well… How did you feel getting a shout out from Chigs in the final? That was very sweet. He calls me his baking Yoda. It represents what all 12 of us felt for each other. We helped each other, we were there for each other. There was no competition behind the scenes. Watching the final was quite emotional, I had tears in my eyes. It was very touching, seeing the families of the other contestants and their strong bonds. To get through Bake Off, you need a strong family behind you. You need the support. Otherwise you can get into a state and hit roadblocks. You won Star Baker three times during your time in the tent and repeatedly triumphed during the technical challenges. You seemed so calm and grounded… The measure for me is my own performance. If I am happy with my bakes, then it doesn’t matter if I’m Star Baker or not. My star sign is Taurus and I think I have a typical Taurean character. A lot goes on inside, and when it erupts, it erupts really badly. Or to put it another way: I very rarely scream but if I do, you better be far, far away. In Bake Off, it helped having Noel [Fielding] and Matt [Lucas] around. They really add a lightness to the tent. Although they are not as much there as you would think from watching the show, they reminded me that it’s not that serious. There is a world outside the tent. Prue Leith loved your final bakes and said it was a pity she wasn’t the one who gives out handshakes. (In the semi-final, Jürgen was the only baker not to get a Paul Hollywood handshake.) Who was your favourite judge? I think Prue understood more what I was doing. Who did you want to win? I would have put my money on Crystelle because she really flourished with her flowers and her flavours. I believe if that focaccia came out as she wished, she would have won it. But I’m very happy for Giuseppe. The precision and the classic look of his bakes are really outstanding. You’re also a keen trombone player. Are you in a band? Yes I’m in a community big band, the Sussex Jazz Orchestra. My son Benjamin joins me. We play music from the 1950s and 1960s that you don’t often hear. I enjoy being able to improvise jazz. It’s like speaking a different language. I love Miles Davis but also early music composers like Johannes Ockeghem as well. In lockdown, our family got together with a neighbour and played 16th-century Venetian music in our garden.I last saw Lina Wertmüller on the stage of the Buñuel auditorium at the Cannes film festival in 2019, surrounded by cheering fans: a tiny, fiercely alert and beaming figure in her early 90s. She was there because Pasqualino Settebellezze, or Seven Beauties (1975), her strange, serio-comic masterpiece was being shown; this famously made her the first woman to be nominated for an Academy Award as best director. Seven Beauties is an absurdist anti-war satire, starring her favourite leading man Giancarlo Giannini – a roguishly handsome but unsettling presence who was to her movies, perhaps, what Marcello Mastroianni was to Federico Fellini, and Wertmüller started out as assistant to Fellini. Fellini was her mentor and friend, and she, in turn, was his lifelong passionate admirer as a creative life force – and yet it was arguably Wertmüller who had more mordant and subversive things to say about the postwar Italian soul. Seven Beauties, for which she wrote the original screenplay, is something to be compared to Günter Grass’s The Tin Drum. Giannini plays Pasqualino Frafuso, a fool – though not an innocent or a holy one – who is to reveal himself as an egotist, a coward and even a rapist as he careens across the strife-torn landscape of the second world war, motivated by a pompous macho concern for protecting the supposed honour of his seven sisters, who are far from bellezze in any sense. Pasqualino gets sent to an insane asylum for killing the pimp with whom one sister has taken up (and dismembering the body and despatching the portions all over Italy in suitcases) but is finally released to serve in the army – in which capacity he is sent to a Nazi concentration camp where he grotesquely attempts to seduce the female commandant and is made to undergo horrifying ordeals which resemble a bad-taste horror panto version of Sophie’s Choice. When he finally returns home to Naples, he naturally finds that all seven of his sisters and his mother have succumbed to exactly that dishonour which horrified him in the first place. It is a cliche to talk about classic movies (or books or TV shows) that couldn’t get made now, but for Seven Beauties there is no trigger warning big enough. Wertmüller displays a colossal daring in her film’s unsentimentality, its seediness, its cynicism, its calculated shock and offence, its incorrectness and black-comic tonal wrongness. It sprang from the same mood as Liliana Cavani’s The Night Porter (1974) or Marco Ferreri’s La Grande Bouffe (1973). There is a streak of vinegary nastiness in the film, to go with its mad picaresque energy, which speaks satirically to the nausea of Italian fascism. Before that, Wertmüller had started out with her indulgent but engaging dark comedy The Lizards (1963), which had as its premise a Fellini-esque bunch of guys yearning to escape their home town in the south of Italy, beautifully written and performed. The Seduction of Mimi (1972) – original title: Mimi the Metalworker Honourably Wounded – set the picaresque and sexual tone that was to be developed in Seven Beauties; the grisly trope of sexual assault and the spectacle of giggling homophobia. Giancarlo Giannini is Mimi, a worker fired for his supposed communist sympathies, whose roving eye leads him to be involved in mob violence and official corruption. Love and Anarchy (1973) also mixed political satire with sex to create chaos: Giannini is an anarchist plotting to murder Mussolini before the second world war. Swept Away (1974) was a broad comedy-satire-drama about a wealthy woman stranded on a desert island with one of her lost boat’s crew, played as ever by Giannini; the clash of their respective capitalist and communist beliefs becomes a sexual spark. (This was heart-sinkingly remade in 2002 by Guy Ritchie, starring Madonna and Adriano Giannini – son of Giancarlo.) By the time Wertmüller made The Blue-Collar Worker and the Hairdresser in a Whirl of Sex and Politics in 1996, her ideas and style were verging on self-parody. But her dynamism and her unflagging interest in the absurdity of sex and male sexuality – and her fierce political scepticism – made her a thrilling live-wire in European cinema.Tensions between Lewis Hamilton and Max Verstappen ratcheted up again on Thursday before the Formula One season decider at this weekend’s Abu Dhabi Grand Prix. The pair go into the season finale tied on points with their increasingly fractious relationship exacerbated by repeated incidents on track. With the possibility of the title being decided by a crash, Verstappen was unequivocal that his feelings toward the world champion had fundamentally deteriorated. Incidents between the pair and their Mercedes and Red Bull teams – including two major crashes at Silverstone and Monza and most recently further untoward duelling at the last round in Saudi Arabia – have punctuated the season. Last weekend Verstappen was given two time penalties for driving infringements, including having been adjudged to have braked erratically in front of Hamilton causing him to hit the back of the Dutch driver’s Red Bull car. The pair sat for their final press conference of this 22-race season just feet apart, separated only by the world championship trophy they are vying for but the gulf between them is increasingly a chasm. What had begun as a friendly season of mutual respect between the two has slowly, inexorably fallen apart. When asked if his opinion of Hamilton and Mercedes had changed over the course of their battle, Verstappen was blunt. “Yes, very much so,” he said. “And not in a positive way.” He continued with a sense of grievance, expressing his belief that he was being unfairly singled out by the stewards in Saudi Arabia. “Clearly only I was wrong somehow, other people do exactly the same thing and get nothing,” he added. “Both of us were off the track into turn one and somehow they judged that it was my fault, that I don’t agree with. It’s not how it should be, it’s not fair because it seems like other drivers can do different things, and it seems like only I get a penalty.” Hamilton pointedly remarked that he was hoping for a clean fight. “I do believe that everyone here racing comes to win,” he said. “I like to believe everyone wants to do it the right way.” The world champion insisted he would not focus on whether he could expect to trust Verstappen to keep it clean. “I don’t give it any energy, I am here to do the best job I can,” he said. “We go full steam ahead with that and don’t waste energy on things that are out of our control.” Both drivers said they felt no need to sit down pre-race to clear the air but Hamilton gave a barbed assessment of the incidents. “I would like to think we have learned from these things and we have moved forward,” he noted. That the atmosphere between the pair and how it affects their approach to racing is important was made all the more clear in the buildup to the Abu Dhabi race. With the two tied on points, the grand prix is a winner-takes-all finale but one that will also be decided if neither finish the race. If that were to be the case, should they take each other out in an incident, Verstappen would be champion based on his nine race wins this season to Hamilton’s eight. However, the FIA race director, Michael Masi, has issued a stark warning that driving unfairly or deliberate attempts to influence the title fight could be punished by a points deduction, changing the championship result. Masi clearly felt the need to remind both drivers that offences would not be tolerated. He quoted the international sporting code noting the right to punish “any infringement of the principles of fairness in competition, behaviour in an unsportsmanlike manner or attempt to influence the result of a competition in a way that is contrary to sporting ethics”. Given the importance of this weekend’s event he pointedly reminded the teams that punishments could include “withdrawal of points”. The rule is in place all season but that Masi chose this weekend to highlight it spoke volumes and raised the spectre of the title being in limbo while stewards pore over a potential infringement. The season decider will be shown live on Channel 4 after it concluded a deal to share coverage with Sky, which has exclusive rights to all live F1 races.Next June it will be 20 years since The Wire began its sprawling Dickensian portrait of Baltimore, Maryland, as a proxy for the decline and fall of the American empire. Whatever happened to the cast? Dominic West went on to play Prince Charles in The Crown; Wendell Pierce took on Willy Loman in a London stage production of Death of a Salesman; Idris Elba starred in Luther, Thor and Cats; Michael K Williams burned brightly in Boardwalk Empire and others before his jarring death in September. None, it seems, let Baltimore get under their skin as much as Sonja Sohn, who played police detective Kima Greggs – the first major portrayal of a Black lesbian on American television – on the trail of drug lords in the five-season drama. Sohn cofounded ReWired for Change, a local outreach programme for at-risk youth, and made her directorial debut in 2017 with Baltimore Rising, which depicted the Black-majority city in the aftermath of the death of 25-year-old Freddie Gray in police custody. Now she returns there with The Slow Hustle, an HBO documentary that examines the 2017 death of Sean Suiter, a widely respected Black police detective fatally shot in the head while on duty. How, why and by whom has never been solved. “I think of Baltimore as my soul home,” Sohn, 57, says by phone from North Carolina’s Outer Banks. “I consider Baltimore to be as much of a home to me as the place where I grew up in Virginia. I feel like the city is a reflection of my own psyche. “Coming to the city was was kind of a reckoning with my own self. I think Baltimore does what it did to me and it’s a divine mirror. We don’t always like what we see but we need to see what’s in that mirror if we’re going to actually present truthfully in the world.” The Slow Hustle starts with shocking footage of Suiter’s body being discovered (“Oh, my god!”, “Sean, no! Sean!”) in an alley in West Baltimore, an area notorious for poverty, segregation and violent crime. An independent review board ruled that the 43-year-old detective had in fact shot himself – a finding that his family and others vehemently reject. Sohn is also sceptical. She comments: “Everybody walks away from the film seeing that the suicide implication is pretty serious and, if you’re going to imply that, then you’d better have really stiff, unshakeable evidence. I’m not sure the police have proven that.” There are other theories. Suiter died just a day before he was due to testify before a federal grand jury investigating an elite Baltimore police unit, part of one of the worst law enforcement corruption cases in recent US history. Suspicions were aroused that a hit had been ordered to silence him. D Watkins, a local journalist and author who shares the view that Suiter’s death could have been an inside job, says in the film: “What developed for me out of the whole story is this whole idea of Black lives really don’t matter. Like, even if you’re a police officer, they really don’t.” The Slow Hustle contains interviews with Suiter’s widow and children, lawyers, politicians and investigative journalists, and Baltimore police including former commissioner Kevin Davis. There are poignant moments at the fallen officer’s graveside and at an anniversary vigil. Underpinning it all is a Wire-style critique of institutions, in particular a police department so hollowed out by corruption that even the attempt to solve the death of one of its own is met with insurmountable doubts. This malaise, Sohn points out, goes beyond Baltimore and policing in general. “For me this case, and the family’s position in this case, represent the microcosm of the macrocosm,” she says. “Right now we’re dealing on a mass level with this lack of trust of law enforcement because of the way they have treated Black folks. We are seeing multilayered corruption with new eyes as a culture. “Here we have a case in which a cop has fallen and ultimately one of the major obstacles to solving this death, this mystery, this crime is the fact that the police can’t be trusted. The city knows that Suiter was going to testify against a group of corrupt cops and there is this history of corruption in the police department in Baltimore, then that lack of trust is amplified throughout this city.” “So the first theory that folks are thinking is, ‘Of course you guys killed him’. That is the rumour that sweeps like a wildfire through the city and the fact that’s the first theory that erupts says something on a larger scale about what could happen if the police don’t get their act together and regain the trust of the people.” Sohn adds: “To me, what Nicole [Suiter’s widow] and the family are going through is the microcosmic example of what is happening to all of us, that when public institutions and structures don’t get their act together, the people suffer and, in this instance, the family suffers.” Sohn was at home in North Carolina when George Floyd, a Black man, was murdered by a white police officer in Minneapolis last year. But it brought back the visceral sensation of being in Baltimore for the uprising that followed the death of Gray. “I didn’t know how much I had been impacted by it physically until 2020 came and I saw the correlation,” she says. With police reform stalled in Congress, and Republicans stoking fear of rising crime in major cities, does she believe the momentum of the Black Lives Matter protests can be sustained? “At this point, it’s a more nuanced game. I don’t think we’re losing momentum. In workplaces across the country, the culture is changing quite a bit. But there’s a lot of pushback of course. “I’m sure those who are involved in policy making are in the midst of looking at how to develop a more nuanced strategy on some other levels because the folks who are in opposition are playing serious chess right now. They’re up in that supreme court and they are winning. It is not a good look.” Sohn was born to an African American father and Korean mother who met after the Korean war. She grew up in Newport News, Virginia, had a stint in New York as a slam poet and recorded an album in London. She was, perhaps, a counterculture rebel and social justice activist before her time. “I was like a serious punk in the ’80s,” she laughs. “I was railing when there was nobody railing with me. I was sitting up at CBGB’s [music club], the only Black girl with shaved hair, screaming, and I had a zine. I had my moment of doing all of that. I felt alone and I was happy. “What really got me with the Baltimore Rising cast is I saw them speak at a museum and I was like, ‘Oh my god!’ I cried. I said, ‘Where were you? I’ve been waiting for you all my life and now you’re here and I’m an old lady.’ But let’s see what I can do. I can make a movie. I’m still worth something.” The Slow Hustle is now available on HBO with a UK date to be announcedThe 2022 RIBA royal gold medal, the UK’s highest honour for architecture, has been won by Balkrishna Doshi, India’s most celebrated living architect. The 94-year-old, who worked with Le Corbusier on his designs for the city of Chandigarh, was instrumental in defining the architecture of post-independence India. His designs combined modernist principles with a deep understanding of local vernacular traditions. Doshi’s 70-year career has seen more than 100 built projects, ranging from low-cost housing to administrative buildings and cultural facilities, each finely tuned to the local context and climate. RIBA president Simon Allford praised his “delightfully purposeful” architecture: “In the 20th century, when technology facilitated many architects to build independently of local climate and tradition, Balkrishna Doshi remained closely connected with his hinterland: its climate, technologies new and old, and crafts.” Born in Pune, India, in 1927, into a family that had been involved in the furniture industry for two generations, Doshi studied architecture in Mumbai before travelling to Paris in 1951 to work for Le Corbusier, despite not speaking any French. He returned to India in 1954 to work on Le Corbusier’s plans for the new city of Chandigarh, as well as overseeing projects in Ahmedabad, including the celebrated Mill Owners’ Association Building and Villa Shodhan. The influence of his mentor remains strong. “The news of this award brought back memories of my time working with Le Corbusier in 1953 when he had just received the news of getting the Royal Gold Medal,” said Doshi. “I vividly recollect his excitement to receive this honour from Her Majesty. He said to me metaphorically, ‘I wonder how big and heavy this medal will be.’ Today, six decades later, I feel truly overwhelmed to be bestowed with the same award as my guru.” One of the last surviving connections to the great 20th-century modernists, Doshi also worked with Louis Kahn as an associate on the Indian Institute of Management in Ahmedabad, and they continued to collaborate for more than a decade. Crucially, his work brought a humanising presence to the sometimes alienating forms of 1960s modernism. He drew on the dense, tightly-knit street patterns of traditional Indian towns and informal squatter settlements, and wrote of the need for architecture to “reflect social lifestyles and spiritual convictions,” always referring to the “constant elements of Indian architecture: the village square, the bazaar, the courtyard”. His own studio in Ahmedabad, built in 1981, stands as a condensed manifesto of these principles. Low, barrel-vaulted buildings rise out of a garden-like landscape, with terraces crossed by channels of water, reflecting pools and a shallow outdoor theatre for gatherings. The building’s name, Sangath, means “moving together through participation,” and Doshi describes it as “an ongoing school where one learns, unlearns and relearns”. As always, climate is at the core. The buildings are half-buried in the ground, where they are better protected from heat, dust and monsoons, while the vaults are made of ceramic pipes, covered in concrete and broken white tiles, providing insulation from the sun while shedding water in the rainy season. Doshi’s Aranya Low Cost Housing, built in Indore in 1989, won the Aga Khan award for architecture, and was praised for its integration of mixed-income groups. It accommodates more than 80,000 people in a complex of houses and courtyards, woven together in a dense maze, with the homes designed with extension and adaptability in mind. His Indian Institute of Management in Bangalore (1977-1992) was similarly inspired by maze-like Indian temple cities, organised as a complex of interlocking buildings and galleries, with overlapping shaded areas providing respite from the hot climate. Taking a more organic turn in the 1990s, Doshi experimented with creating an underground cave-like complex for the Amdavad Ni Gufa gallery. Irregular tree-like columns support a roof of interconnecting domes, inspired by the shells of tortoises, clad in broken ceramic crockery. Daylight is brought in through snout-like openings, creating pools of changing light on the floor, conjuring a mystical atmosphere. Teaching has also been a central part of Doshi’s practice. In the 1960s he founded his own design school, the Ahmedabad School of Architecture (now known as CEPT University), with open-air classrooms and a focus on learning from context, which he led for 50 years, and he has been a visiting professor at a number of universities around the world. Adding to a catalogue of accolades, the gold medal comes nearly four years after Doshi was the first Indian architect to be awarded the Pritzker prize in 2018.Australia’s coal-fired power plants are likely to shut at almost triple the pace currently announced, with Victoria’s brown coal fleet to be closed in just over a decade and the main electricity grid becoming coal-free by 2043, according to the market operator. The draft Integrated System Plan 2022, an industry blueprint updated every two years and released on Friday by the Australian Energy Market Operator, plots how the grid serving eastern Australia will change to meet emissions reduction and market goals. It detailed four scenarios based on extensive consultation over 18 months. The most probable path, dubbed the “Step Change” option, anticipates a nine-fold increase in large-scale renewable energy, such as wind and solar farms, as electricity supplies double to meet the decarbonisation of transport and other sectors without coal. Solar panels on homes will also increase five times, and firming capacity in the form of batteries and other storage will triple by 2050. About 10,000km of new transmission will also be needed to connect the increasingly dispersed supply. Owners of some coal generators have already accelerated their declared retirement dates, based on market, financial and operating pressures caused by the rise of renewable generation, the report said. “The financial viability of existing thermal generation will become increasingly uncertain, particularly coal-fired generation that is less able to adjust generation levels rapidly in response to changes in market prices,” it said. “Significant financial decisions to repair and maintain plant may be harder to justify under this uncertainty, potentially resulting in declining plant reliability.” The ISP, which will be finalised next year, comes as major states such as Victoria and NSW develop renewable energy zones or promote renewables’ penetration through auctions or offer financial support for households to install solar panels. Federal Labor raised the target for 2030 national emissions reductions last week based on a jump in renewable energy and the Morrison government also set a net zero emissions target by 2050, based in part on the decarbonisation of the grid. While the ISP predicts an ongoing need for gas to support the grid during dark and still periods when there is little renewable energy, use of the fossil fuel has lately been decreasing along with coal. Gas-fired power in the National Electricity Market, that serves about 80% of the population, was the lowest in at least 15 years in October. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The report notes the transformation of the grid has already “outpaced all expectations”, with Australia installing five times the amount of large-scale renewables in 2019 on a per capita basis than the European Union. “In the last two years, through the pandemic, [such renewables] development accelerated, with 40% more [of it] now committed or anticipated to be connected to the grid by 2023-24 than was forecast in the 2020 ISP, it said. The grid’s share of renewables has risen to as high as 61% during periods in September, and Aemo now forecasts stints of 100% by as early as 2025. Installed capacity of the National Electricity Market now totals almost 60GW, generating about 180TW-hours of electricity annually. “With the Step Change, utility-scale generation and storage capacity would need to grow to 170 GW and deliver almost 400 TWh a year by 2050 to cater for existing loads and replace the gas and petrol currently consumed by much of our transport, industry, office and domestic use,” it said, adding that energy efficiency would also need to improve. Should Australia pursue a path of producing green hydrogen for export, that capacity would need to rise as much as eight-fold further should the country seek to be a hydrogen superpower, the report said. Linking up the new plants will deliver net market benefits of $29bn, or 2.5 times the investment. “It optimises benefits for all who produce, consume and transport electricity in the market, as well as providing investment certainty and flexibility to reduce NEM emissions faster in the next decade if needed, and time for greater community engagement and supply chain risk management,” it said, noting public support will be needed to allow the construction of power lines. Rooftop solar will provide about 30% of renewable capacity, with 54GW of new capacity needed to increase the current 15GW capacity. “By the mid-2040s, electricity supply is expected to be generated almost exclusively from renewable resources, with energy storages helping manage their seasonality and intermittency, and peaking gas generation providing firming support,” the report said. Risks include delays in major projects such as Snowy 2.0 giant pumped storage plant and the Marinus link between Tasmania and the mainland.La Niña could create a spike in Covid cases by forcing people indoors to avoid the rain at the same time as the Omicron variant is spreading in Australia, say epidemiologists who are warning health authorities to delay the easing of social distancing measures. The La Niña weather pattern means north and eastern Australia is experiencing a relatively cool, damp and stormy summer. Epidemiologists say it could drive a spike in Covid cases by making more people gather indoors and by generating higher humidity which allows virus particles to linger longer in the air. New South Wales will relax its Covid rules from Wednesday. Unvaccinated residents will, from then, enjoy the same freedoms as those who have received their jabs. Masks will only be required on public transport, at airports, and for unvaccinated hospitality staff. Additionally, QR-code check-ins will only be required for high-risk settings, including hospitals and aged care, while density limits will be scrapped entirely. More than 93% of people over 16 in NSW are fully vaccinated but daily infection numbers – that had remained in the hundreds in recent weeks – are increasing. There were 260 new cases on Tuesday, then 403 on Wednesday, 420 on Thursday and 516 on Friday. Prof Peter Collignon, an infectious diseases physician and microbiologist at the Australian National University, believes the latest uptick in cases in NSW is the result of continued rain in recent weeks associated with the La Niña event. “One of the reasons we’re seeing more cases in Sydney recently is because of the terrible weather, we’re all indoors more [and] as soon as people congregate indoors more, surprise surprise, we see more cases,” he said. There is a lower risk of transmission outdoors due to better ventilation. Collignon said any infection spike associated with more rain over the summer was unlikely to be as severe as in Europe and North America during their harsh winters. But it could still be noticeable and require appropriate, setting-specific precautions. “[La Niña] may mean we see more cases this summer … when it’s miserable outside, you’re inside, and you’re often doing it with others for hours in a crowded setting with alcohol. The bigger the group, the bigger the risk,” Collignon said. Collignon acknowledged there would be ongoing Covid transmission and he broadly supports easing restrictions in months when people are gathering outdoors – largely because of high vaccination coverage, low hospitalisation rates (there are currently 151 Covid patients in hospitals in NSW) and even lower death rates. However, in response to the dramatic winding back of rules set for NSW next week, he said “in settings where there is more danger, where the consequences are more severe, that’s where you need to take precautions”. Collignon noted this was particularly the case in hospitals and healthcare premises. Mary-Louise McLaws, a professor of epidemiology at the University of NSW and adviser to the World Health Organization, agrees rainy weather could increase Covid spread over summer, not only because it would force gatherings indoors, but also because of changes to the air associated with La Niña. “Certainly with the changes to the amino acids, there’s the potential for this virus to have more charge because particles are protected through a water molecule in the air. When they have better charge, rather than drying out, they stay in the air for a bit longer,” she said. However, McLaws noted that if humidity gets very high, there could be too much moisture in the air, making Covid particles heavier and forcing them to the ground more quickly. She said physicists are still researching the exact impact of humidity on Covid spread. Regardless, McLaws said the potential for greater transmission over summer, coupled with the fact that the transmissibility, virulence and vaccine-resistance of Omicron has yet to be confirmed, meant it was too soon to remove restrictions and allow unvaccinated and vaccinated people to mix unmasked in shops and hospitality venues in high densities. “It’s definitely unwise to push ahead with the relaxations. It is so much easier to ask Australians to continue wearing a mask and to wait until we know more about Omicron, and for those who are not yet fully vaccinated to wear a mask until we know more,” she said. “It’s too cavalier to throw away these really successful infection prevention strategies.” McLaws said wearing masks and applying density limits was a relatively light burden compared to the harsher lockdowns in place earlier this year. McLaws also argued lower vaccine coverage among younger, more socially mobile people, was a potential problem. “Australians are desperate to relax and enjoy themselves after a year of lockdown, and this is a potentially problematic time of the year,” she said. NSW health authorities are also concerned case numbers will continue to surge due to transmission at festive season celebrations. Deputy chief health officer Marianne Gale said on Thursday: “As Christmas approaches, and more of us gather with families, friends and colleagues to celebrate, it is particularly important to be vigilant.” Gatherings should be held outdoors wherever possible and people with even mild symptoms should not attend or have visitors, Gale said.The Morrison government has ordered a review into the efficiency of Australia’s ports, setting up a stoush with Labor over the maritime union’s industrial might. The treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, has tasked the productivity commission with examining the “long-term trends, structural changes, and impediments” that affect maritime logistics, with a report due mid next year. Amid a long-running industrial dispute between the Maritime Union of Australia (MUA) and container terminal operator Patrick Terminals, the commission’s review will include examining workforce issues and industrial relations. “The efficiency of Australia’s ports are vital to our economic success,” Frydenberg said in a statement announcing the terms of reference of the review. “With more than $400bn goods imported and exported every year, it’s critical that we lift productivity at our ports. “The Morrison government will continue to respond to global supply chain disruptions and importantly, through this review, will consider what domestic changes can be made to improve the efficiency of our ports.” The review into Australia’s ports was flagged by the prime minister, Scott Morrison, in a speech to the Australian Industry Group last week, in which he invoked the Howard government’s infamous waterfront intervention of 1998, which led to the entire workforce of the then-named Patrick Stevedores being sacked and replaced. Morrison said that “inefficient ports are a tax on us all” and flagged the government would be prepared to again intervene “to protect the Australian economy from serious harm”. The MUA and Patrick have been locked in bargaining negotiations for the past 18 months, during which time the MUA has launched more than 220 industrial actions. The two parties have agreed to a ceasefire, halting industrial action until 10 December in exchange for Patrick withdrawing an application to the Fair Work Commission alleging strikes were “causing significant issues in the economy”. Following Morrison’s remarks, the MUA accused him of peddling “lies about wharfies”. “For Scott Morrison to join this attack on working people is a disgrace and reflects the fact that his government will never represent working women and men and will always suck up to big business, wealth and international corporate elitism,” national secretary of the MUA, Paddy Crumlin, said. “Scott Morrison is like that bloke in the pub looking for a fight at the end of the night because he’s got nothing else going for himself. Taking a swing at wharfies and their families in the lead up to Christmas only proves how desperate his leadership has become.” Labor’s industrial relations spokesperson, Tony Burke, told the Australian Financial Review the move was a “tired old union-bashing routine” and accused the government of trying to stir up conflict ahead of the election. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning A report from the Australian and Competition and Consumer Commission in November highlighted problems in the global container freight supply chain that were being exacerbated by systemic industrial relations issues and restrictive work practices in Australian ports. It found that the MUA had pushed for “restrictive work practices”, including enterprise agreements that limited the ability of stevedores to automate and make recruitment decisions, for example being required to recruit “family and friends” of existing employees or people chosen by the MUA. “The long-running labour issues in the container stevedoring industry have resulted in lower productivity and higher costs for Australian cargo owners,” chair of the ACCC, Rod Sims, said. The report also found that the Covid-19 pandemic had destabilised the global container freight supply chain, causing delayed shipments and rapidly rising freight rates. Freight rates have increased almost seven-fold in key global trade routes over the past year. The MUA, however, argues that the cause of delays and rising costs is due to “unprecedented domestic demand for imported goods along with poor infrastructure planning by state governments and expert manipulation of pricing and scheduling by international shipping cartels.” It said the ACCC had “recklessly” conflated these issues “with waterside workers seeking fair pay, job security and safety at work.” Patrick operates four of Australia’s five major ports, including Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane and Fremantle. The five ports account for 94.7% of total containerised trade in Australia, with more than 85% of merchandise imported or exported via sea.A solicitor who prepared a will for a wealthy Sydney man has denied, during New South Wales supreme court proceedings, that he had an obligation to ask why his client was leaving tens of millions of dollars to his GP. Raymond McClure, who died aged 84 in 2017, altered his will twice in the five months before he died, eventually leaving Dr Peter Alexakis 90% of his $30m estate. Previous wills – the first of which was made in 1986 – made the Salvation Army and other individuals, including a longtime business partner, the beneficiaries of McClure’s estate. The Salvation Army’s legal secretary, Gary Masters, is challenging the validity of the final will in the supreme court, arguing it was executed in suspicious circumstances and Alexakis had undue influence over McClure. The will is also subject to multiple cross-claims. Alexakis says he had no knowledge McClure included him in the will and he never discussed changing the will or the extent of the estate with his patient. Solicitor Angelo Andresakis, who prepared the will for McClure, continued giving evidence on Thursday. He denied a suggestion by Raoul Wilson SC, for Masters, that he should have checked with McClure whether he was sure he wanted to change his will to provide 90% of the estate, plus a multimillion-dollar Strathfield home, to Alexakis. Andresakis had been the long-term accountant of Alexakis’s wife and her family, the court has heard previously. He had also assisted another patient of Alexakis to create a will that had benefited the GP. He prepared the will of Alexakis’s father, too. Andresakis said there was no reason for him to second guess McClure’s wishes when he made two wills for him after four visits to his hospital and house in mid-2017. Andresakis had previously said McClure appeared mentally sharp and was not having difficulty understanding the will. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Alexakis told the court earlier this week McClure asked him to recommend a solicitor, and that he had introduced McClure to Andresakis, but that he had not known McClure planned to include him in his will. The solicitor said on Thursday when he asked McClure who he wanted to include as a beneficiary he did not hesitate in nominating the GP. “It was the first name that he asked me to write,” Andresakis said. Andresakis also clarified evidence heard in the court on Wednesday, saying police had not attended his office in September 2017 but had informed him in a telephone conversation they were investigating the circumstances under which McClure signed his final will. The court also heard on Thursday from long-term friends of McClure, whose shares of the will had been diminished in the final two versions made in 2017. Greg Evans, a former Salvation Army employee who was close with McClure, agreed he was a house proud man who regarded the Strathfield property as his castle, and that he was “extremely private”. He had “very few” people who visited him, Evans said, but “I thought he trusted me, he trusted me because I represented the Salvation Army, and we had a good rapport”. Evans had previously recommended a solicitor to McClure in 2012, who he had used to make his will, and was aware he planned to leave part of his estate to the army. But McClure had also said he was suspicious of people who could take advantage of him, Evans said. “He was a retired businessman who was brought up in a very humble beginning and he made a lot of money.” Evans had said in an affidavit to the court McClure told him in 2015 he was hurt and disgusted by reports linking the Salvation Army to child sexual abuse, but that the following year he had still planned to leave part of his estate to the charity. The hearing before justice Trish Henry continues.Australian children aged five to 11 will receive the Pfizer Covid vaccine from 10 January, after the federal government accepted a recommendation for its use from immunisation experts. The Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation will announce on Friday that Pfizer, which was provisionally approved on Sunday, should be made available for children. This is the second of four steps to be completed before the vaccine can be rolled out in this age group, followed by childhood specific training for healthcare providers and batch testing of doses by the Therapeutic Goods Administration. Parents will be able to book appointments from late December, for doses to be administered from 10 January. The vaccines will be available through GPs, Aboriginal health services, community pharmacies and state and territory clinics. School-based programs will be a matter for states and territories. Atagi, after reviewing clinical data from Canada, recommended an eight-week interval between the two doses, which can be shortened to three weeks in special circumstances, such as outbreaks. Scott Morrison said: “In one month from today, about 2.27 million Aussie kids aged five to 11 years will have the opportunity to roll up their sleeve and get vaccinated against Covid-19.” “This will be welcome news for millions of families across the country who want the opportunity for the children to be vaccinated.” The health minister, Greg Hunt, encouraged “all parents to vaccinate their children against Covid-19”. “Vaccinating children can also help reduce community transmission and help prevent children passing the virus on to younger siblings, grandparents and the wider community,” he said. The TGA and Atagi are also assessing the Moderna vaccine for children 6-11 years of age with advice expected over the coming weeks. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Liberal senator, Gerard Rennick, who has shared accounts of alleged vaccine adverse events on Facebook that he admits he can’t be sure are “100% accurate”, has labelled the TGA approval for child Covid vaccines “completely irresponsible”. A spokesperson for Morrison told Guardian Australia: “The government will continue to listen to the medical experts on these issues and strongly suggests Senator Rennick does the same.” On Tuesday the chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, reiterated that Pfizer is “worthwhile, safe and effective” for children aged five to 11. Kelly said that Australian authorities had received “very reassuring” results from the US Centre for Disease Control, after 5m doses had been administered to children in that age group in the US. These resulted in “vaccine side effects, which generally are very minor and not unexpected”, he said. The head of the TGA, John Skerritt, said that one in 3,000 children who contract Covid-19 develop multi-system inflammatory syndrome, which is “quite serious and lasts many months”.“I’m training”, says the badge, or “Trainee”. Or they tell you “I’m new”, and that it’s their third shift. The last fortnight, I have been staying in the Bellarine peninsula – a popular holiday spot west of Melbourne. Almost all the cafes, restaurants and shops I visited were in training mode – teaching new staff how to use the register or make a coffee before the summer rush hits in a couple of weeks. By all accounts, they’re going to get slammed. But there was something different about this batch of new workers compared with previous summers. They’re not backpackers or older hospitality staff – they are local teens; gawky, sweet, pimple-faced, scared-looking and apprehensive. They look too young to be working, barely legal. They tentatively wrap presents or stumble over the pronunciation of a lettuce variety. They do not confidently bowl up to your table and ask: “Have you dined with us before?” From what I observed, their managers are patient with the new workers. They have to be – they don’t have the choices of workers that were available prior to the pandemic. Overseas students are only starting to trickle in. And backpackers are non-existent for the moment. And so Gen Zs are filling the gaps in the service industry, and cafes and shops are starting to look like they did 30 years ago – staffed by kids working after-school jobs. Economist and managing director of Accenture, Andrew Charlton, likens the recent Australian youth labour market figures to the graph of someone having a heart attack. “The youth labour market is going crazy. During Covid the youth job market got smashed, as young casuals who were the first to be hired were the first to go. But when the borders were shut this year and last year, they went from the biggest unemployment jump in years to the strongest youth employment rate ever.” Just like in the US, where outlets such as McDonald’s had to offer workers a pay rise, here “the youth labour market is pretty tight – cafes are struggling to get people. Supermarkets are manned by your 15 year-old neighbour and a bunch of self-service checkouts,” says Charlton. Recently I caught up with my friend Tom and his 15-year-old son, who had just started his first job as a kitchen porter (aka a “dish pig”). It had been a baptism of fire. His first shift had been on Melbourne Cup eve. There was the unusual sensation of hours spent on his feet and dishes coming at him fast. The worst, he told me, were the tiny cups for mustard and sauce that were difficult to clean. “It’s character building,” I told him. “You learn what you’re made of.” Sometimes you learn that ... you are lacking in character. As I was talking to my friend’s son, a suppressed memory resurfaced. It was the one shift I did as a dish pig. I was 18 and it was at a seminary. The priests had lasagne that night – burnt to the crisp in a large metal tray. The tray was the biggest thing I had ever attempted to clean. The size of half a person, it did not fully fit in the sink, and trying to grasp it was like trying to pick up a widescreen television that had been smeared in vaseline. The dimensions were unfriendly – it was impossible to grip, let alone clean. Even if there had not been food stuck to it, it didn’t fit in the sink. I was drenched head to toe, just trying to manoeuvre the thing into its grim bath. For hours (really, it felt like forever, like the moment is still ongoing, even now), long after my shift had ended I stood at the sink, up to my elbows in water that was grey – with bits floating in it – trying to scrape off the burnt meat and pasta. The scourer was inadequate – it was old and had gone soft in patches. The food was baked on to the tray. Even after adding boiling water, the remnants refused to lift. I wasn’t strong enough to move the burnt bits, even using my finger nails. At my lowest moment, I looked at the crucifix above the sink and muttered “Father, if it is your will, take this cup and lasagne tray away from me.” He did not. Feeling condemned to never leaving the sink, I finally gave up and hid the tray (still with bits on it) under other trays – and fled. Working when you are a teen will show you parts of character that you don’t get a glimpse at during school. Sure, you may know the Pythagoras theorem – but can you clean toilets dispassionately, including the men’s trough; know the correct way to clean floors (sweep, mop, sweep); handle hostile adults who complain about the product and its price; mop up spilt oil (very hard – particularly when you try and use water); remain calm when you are accidentally locked in a cool room; treat steam, oil and fryer burns and work through the pain; recognise and name the parts of a chicken; quarter a barbecue chicken and make gravy in mass quantities? All this I learned at the school of KFC. Some days, I thought, I can’t believe they are paying me to learn this stuff.One-third of large companies in Australia still don’t pay any tax despite a taxation office crackdown on the big end of town that has been under way for five years. Transparency data released by the Australian Taxation Office on Friday shows 782 out of 2,370 of Australia’s biggest companies paid no tax in the 2019-20 financial year, mostly because they made a loss or claimed credits against losses run-up in previous years. The 33% rate is up slightly from last year’s 32% but down from 36% in 2015 – the year before the ATO set up a big business tax avoidance taskforce. The tax office deputy commissioner Rebecca Saint said the agency closely examined the claims made by big corporations and there were “legitimate reasons why a company may not pay tax”. “Just because an entity doesn’t pay tax doesn’t necessarily mean that there’s tax avoidance or similar activity occurring, there can be good commercial justification to that,” she said. “We have high levels of confidence around those entities that don’t pay tax and what I mean by that is we actually go and have looked into whether those losses are generated from commercial activities, as opposed to tax avoidance arrangements.” However, she said the ATO hoped to do more to reduce the gap between the amount of tax it expects companies to pay and the amount actually collected, which currently sits at 8.3% when measured before enforcement action. “We’re looking to move that to 4%,” Saint said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Saint said the ATO wanted to reduce the corporate tax gap after enforcement action is taken from its current level of 4.3% to 2%. “So we are still striving and encouraging businesses to make even further improvements to their tax performance,” she said. Under laws introduced when Labor was in power federally, the ATO publishes the revenue, taxable income and tax paid by public and foreign-owned companies with turnover of $100m or more and Australian private companies with turnover of $200m or more. Australian private companies were initially to be treated in the same way as other companies but the threshold was increased by the Liberal government in late 2015. Of the companies that paid no tax in the new data, 16% made an accounting loss and 10% used losses from previous years. Five per cent made a loss only on a tax basis and 2% used tax offsets. Australia’s flag carrier, Qantas, was able to use carried forward losses, including one of a mammoth $2.8bn in the 2013-14 financial year, to reduce its taxes to zero until the 2017-18 financial year, when it paid $11m. This increased to $253m the following year. But over the next few years, Qantas is once again unlikely to pay tax after declaring a $2.35bn loss in the financial year just gone due to most of its fleet being grounded by the coronavirus crisis. Saint said she couldn’t comment on the appropriateness of allowing companies to use prior year losses to reduce their tax bills. “That is a policy question,” she said. “The legislation provides the ability for companies to be able to carry forward their losses to offset future tax payable. We look to ensure that each year the tax outcomes are correct.” The deputy commissioner said the new tax data showed the effect of the first months of the Covid-19 pandemic on some companies but the full picture would not be visible until the figures for 2020-21 were published next year. “I expect that you still see patchy results in the sense of what we have seen within some of the industry segments in the report is that there have been some entities that have performed really strongly and others who have been severely impacted by Covid,” she said. “Those differences are due to a number of reasons – it could be things like location, sub-industry and different restrictions affecting different groups. So I think it’ll be very variable coming through next year.”The drive of Kathryn Bigelow’s 1991 surf-crime flick, Point Break, can be boiled down to two things: bodies and desire. As quarterback turned FBI rookie Johnny Utah, Keanu Reeves is earnest and eager for the adrenaline of crime-fighting; as balletic surfer-robber Bodhi, Patrick Swayze yearns for the rush that comes with risk, bolstered by the ocean’s raw energy. To finance an endless summer, Bodhi and his crew of surfers form a bank heist quartet, donning masks of former US presidents and committing clean, almost untraceable robberies in revolt against a “system that kills the human spirit”. Following the hunch of his more seasoned partner, Agent Pappas (Gary Busey), Johnny infiltrates the Los Angeles surf scene to bust the group, deemed the “Ex-Presidents”. There, he finds himself intoxicated by the surfers’ euphoric lifestyle, caught in the swell of their enlightened anarchy. Lori Petty plays Tyler, Johnny’s love interest and access point to the subculture, and she is wonderfully tough against Reeves’ boyishness. Yet the heat of their romance is surpassed by Johnny’s own relationship to Bodhi, as the men’s easy bond mutates into fixation. During an interview Swayze gave at the film’s release, he expressed admiration that the dynamic between Johnny and Bodhi wasn’t “slap-ass, macho, jokey crap”. “I wanted to play it like a love story between two men,” he said. This is the richest reading of their dynamic: two adversaries, perfectly matched in some cosmically intimate way. While some heist movies are clinically, almost pornographically interested in the mechanics of committing a crime, Point Break is concerned only as a matter of bringing Johnny and Bodhi into each other’s orbits. They are, in the simplest sense, stimulated by one another. Their opposing allegiances necessarily cast them as one another’s prey, and this destructive infatuation charges their dynamic while preventing them from ever committing real harm. “You want me so bad it’s like acid in your mouth,” Bodhi teases. Bigelow recognises and embraces this thrill, rendering it stylistically in the way arched bodies glide across water, sunlight glistens through sea spray, and how the camera alternates between fluid and frenetic. Not to mention the film’s hair-raising skydiving sequences, or the five-minute foot chase shot with a “pogo-cam” to replicate the urgency of bodies in pursuit. There’s something electric in how the boundaries between “right” and “wrong” are so sensationalised as to be operatic. Sure, Johnny is an appendage of authority chasing the epitome of lawlessness, but the traditional hero/villain dynamic is also transgressed by their natural kinship. As Tyler observes early on, the pair share a certain “kamikaze look”. They’re motivated by similar things, chasing the same feelings, it’s just that one channels his desires through legally sanctioned avenues while the other seeks it elsewhere. To paraphrase Emily Brontë: whatever their souls are made of, Johnny and Bodhi’s are the same. Granted, Reeves is sometimes stilted in his performance, but even this somehow works – Johnny is straining to follow FBI protocol as an agent of the state, while everything in his body craves a higher pleasure. There’s something captivatingly uncomfortable about the way the character sits in his own skin. What do we expect from a game of cat-and-mouse where the cat is yet to realise he too is a mouse? Swayze fortunately balances out Reeves with a tremendously grounding presence, levelling his co-star’s more theatrical impulses. It’s an incredibly centred performance enhanced by Swayze’s controlled physicality, around which Johnny suddenly makes more sense: he’s itching for something, and his rival possesses exactly what he needs to be set free. However, once Bodhi realises the FBI is after him, the raised stakes elicit something monstrous in him, dragging Johnny into his downward spiral. The film’s third act is propulsive and high-energy, concluding with an epilogue that, while bittersweet, stresses the genuine bond underlying the pair’s treacherous flirtation. When Point Break was released, critics were quick to dismiss it as shallow, blathering machismo. But so rarely has the action genre anchored displays of masculine competition in such mutual respect and affection, daring to be outlandish and deadly serious all at once. In Bigelow’s hands, a potentially conventional story becomes a subversive, anti-establishment film about being seduced, blackmailed and radicalised by your crush.Right now, I am in the throes of what I call festive anxiety: that limited-edition, special form of anxiety that hits anyone in charge of gift-giving around the holiday season, magnified by the excess of pointless toys that are marketed to kids this time of year. Festive anxiety hits me hard: not just because of the work involved, but because a recent survey from eco-retailer Flora and Fauna suggested that despite an average spend of $1bn on new toys at Christmas, Australians still bin 26.8m toys every year. The oft-touted cure to this is the educational toy, which fulfils a dual purpose – entertaining the child, while setting the parents’ minds at ease. But do kids actually need “educational toys”, and do those toys actually do what they say they will? Not necessarily, says paediatric psychologist Deirdre Brandner, who believes that toy manufacturers can play into the vulnerability of parents who “overanalyse every decision” in the pursuit of giving children the best opportunities they can. “Whilst many [manufacturers] produce items that are a fantastic opportunity for positive engagement and learning, the same can be said for any household object,” she says. “A variety of experiences, toys, interaction with children and engagement of parents in a child’s play has much better learning outcomes.” She says that there hasn’t been valid or sustained research that suggests that any particular toys can result in improved learning outcomes, and advises parents to reconsider setting up play “with an expectation that it has to be about a specific outcome”. “Playing with toys is the first chance that a child has to explore and interact with the world on their terms,” she explains. “It is the experience of play that produces learning outcomes, toys are just the medium through which children discover, engage, create and problem-solve.” Brandner warns against attaching too many rules to play, which is part of a child’s natural cognitive, social and emotional development. She says that the only rules for play should be those that keep them safe and allow for positive interactions with their peers, enabling them to develop skills such as decision-making, contextualising, turn-taking and coping with winning and losing. “Play is about a process and open-ended play will allow the child to have autonomy over the outcome,” she says. “Children need play to be fun or else it isn’t play, it’s work.” Parents might be comforted to know that play can also be the “foundation of all later learning, including schooling success”, according to child development scientist Dr Siobhan Kennedy-Costantini, who operates Science Minded to help parents better understand their child’s cognitive and social development. She says that while they can be intertwined, play and learning do not have to be mutually exclusive, with academic pursuits replacing play (or vice versa). “Play supports all types of learning,” she explains. “Physical play, for example, helps develop our vestibular system, which helps us control our bodies. A well-developed vestibular system is essential for school-readiness.” She says “time or experience learning to move or control their bodies by jumping on trampolines or swinging on monkey bars” is very helpful. Without this kind of physical development, she says, children can struggle with complicated classroom tasks such as activating their core to sit upright at a desk while executing the fine-motor task of writing. If parents are particularly keen on some sort of tangible element to their child’s play, especially when they’re older, then Brandner suggests toys with open-ended outcomes and varying results. She says that Lego is a perfect example, because “there needs to be a balance between creating your own ideas using Lego and following instructions for build”. Kennedy-Costantini says that it’s important to remember that humans have evolved over thousands of years through playful behaviour, and encouraging a child’s own play helps them make sense of their world. “Play is not frivolous,” she explains. “In play, children are testing and refining theories, making connections, understanding relationships and figuring out how the world works.” Jayne Pavic, who founded toy store Monti and Me to help adults see the purpose in play after becoming a mother herself, agrees, arguing that “it’s impossible to play without learning”. “I think we need to redefine for adults what learning and play looks like,” she says. “If adults reframe everyday moments as brain building experiences – which they are – the emphasis on specific outcomes of toys becomes less relevant.” Despite selling toys, she insists “children can play longer and more happily with less toys”. Brandner says that investing in your child’s play through your time and attention can be a profound way of understanding how beneficial play can be, just for play’s sake. “A child’s life is going to be filled with many educational and learning opportunities,” she says. “Let’s not derail their enjoyment of play by putting constraints around it.”E-scooters will be banned from the public transport network in London from Monday for safety reasons after a spate of battery fires. The ban will apply to privately owned e-scooters and e-unicycles even when folded or carried, after a number of incidents when the electric vehicles have combusted. Transport for London and fire services said such incidents, when defective lithium-ion batteries ruptured and caught fire, could lead to significant harm to life and premises, not least with toxic smoke being emitted, potentially in confined spaces. TfL said customers with privately owned e-scooters would not be permitted to enter any premises on its network, or travel on any of its services, including the tube, buses or trams. Privately owned e-scooters remain illegal for use on all UK public roads but many hundreds of thousands have been sold. London has been trialling rental e-scooters since June, one of the last cities to join the trial scheme set up by the Department for Transport in July 2020. Such rental vehicles are the only e-scooters legally permitted for road use. . Scheme operators as well as TfL have stressed that the rental e-scooters have more robust safety features than most on general sale. However, because they do not fold, they are also not permitted on TfL services. Lilli Matson, TfL’s chief safety officer, said: “Our primary concern is always for the safety of our customers and staff. We have been extremely worried by the recent incidents on our public transport services, which involved intense fires and considerable smoke and damage. “We have worked with London fire brigade to determine how we should deal with these devices and, following that review, we have decided to ban them.” The ban does not include mobility scooters or foldable e-bikes, which TfL said were generally subject to better manufacturing standards and less of a fire risk. E-scooter users failing to comply face a potential fine of up to £1,000.The day off didn’t seem to have done much to improve Sajid Javid’s mood. The health secretary had cancelled his slots on the Wednesday morning media round on the grounds that he was “too upset” to appear. Upset not so much by the Downing Street lie rehearsal video, but more by Boris Johnson’s enthusiasm for getting other people to cover up for him. Cowardice is one of Boris’s more unreported qualities. For once the Saj had said no – the prime minister could do his own dirty work if he was so keen to have someone from the government on the airwaves – but he hadn’t had the self-worth to tell Johnson to sod off two days running. And he hated himself for it. So it was a decidedly grumpy and defensive Javid who tried not to make a fool of himself explaining to Radio 4’s Today programme why it was fine to get pissed with your colleagues at a party but not work alongside them, all the while knowing that the really tricky questions were still to come. Sure enough, presenter Mishal Husain got there in the end. If there had been no party, as the prime minister and Javid clearly believed, how come Allegra Stratton had been allowed to resign? It just didn’t make sense. Without a party, Stratton had merely been having harmless fun. Now the Saj got positively chippy. He had been given cast-iron assurances that no party had taken place and he had believed them. Who had given these assurances? He couldn’t say. Were they the same person who had been at the parties that hadn’t happened and had reassured the prime minister? He would have to kill Mishal if he told her. Husain acted confused. If Javid was so convinced, why didn’t he just tell everyone the facts and save us the hassle of an investigation by the cabinet secretary? Because. Just because. Realising he had been backed into a corner, the Saj tried to distance himself from everything. His new line was that he didn’t know anything about anything. He hadn’t been in the room for any of these parties. In fact, he hadn’t even been in government when these parties hadn’t taken place. So Mishal could talk to the hand. The health secretary retreated gracelessly. Not because he had been caught out in the interview, but because it had panned out just as he had expected. He had reached the end of time and no longer saw the world through a glass darkly. Like everyone else who had worked for Boris, he now realised, somewhat late in the day, that his main job was to be entirely expendable. To take the flak so that the greased piglet could escape unscathed. To be collateral damage. There was more collateral damage on view in the Commons later on, when the oleaginous junior minister Mike Ellis – his boss Steve Barclay was mysteriously missing in action – was sent out to answer an urgent question from Labour’s Fleur Anderson about the remit for the cabinet secretary’s investigation. Ellis started by being ever so ’umble. Ever so apologetic. He too had been horrified by the video footage that had emerged that made fun of a “gathering” – Ellis couldn’t bring himself to say “party” for fear of incriminating himself and others – that definitely hadn’t happened, because he too had been given assurances that no party had taken place and no rules had been broken from the Somebody Whose Name Could Not Be Mentioned. But even though nothing had happened, the investigation would now be extended to two further “gatherings” that also had not taken place. We were all going to play a game of Let’s Pretend. It was like shooting fish in a barrel for Anderson. But she wasn’t going to let that stop her. It’s not every day anyone can stand up to take free potshots at a minister in the Commons and he’s obliged to suck it up. It all came down to a matter of trust, she said. And right now it was impossible to believe a word anything the prime minister or his lackeys said. A sentence that could have been written at almost any point in the last two years. Lying is what Boris does for a living. Being prime minister is his freelance second job. Anderson continued. Would the cabinet secretary be investigating any further parties? The number of parties the Tories appeared to have had last year was now multiplying faster than Omicron. Almost every hour there was a new variant. And would the prime minister resign if he was found to have misled the house – yeah, right; was that a pig flying? – and could the cabinet secretary promise not to have attended any of the parties that hadn’t happened. Ellis gave a solemn undertaking that Simon Case definitely hadn’t been at the three “gatherings” he was currently investigating, as they hadn’t taken place, but couldn’t offer guarantees about any other “gatherings” that hadn’t happened. Magical thinking for a magical realist. The opposition benches gleefully piled on. Was it the cabinet secretary who had been going round giving all the assurances that nothing was amiss? Ellis couldn’t say as he was sworn to secrecy. And how, if it came to that, could we trust the police to investigate, given that the plods based in Downing Street seemed to have missed all the action? But it was the Tory benches who made Ellis’s life most difficult. Desmond Swayne observed that No 10 was very large. It wasn’t clear if he was defending Boris not knowing about a party or pointing out that there could have been two or more parties taking place at the same time. Boris could have been having a bash in his flat while the apparatchiks raided the wine cellar downstairs. Peter Bone, Philip Hollobone and Bob Blackman also contended that the government had to be held to higher standards if they wanted the public to obey Covid rules and that Johnson had to obey the spirit as well as the letter of the law. Not Boris’s strong point. Tellingly, there were almost no Tories in the house, and none that would defend Boris. So it was left to Ellis to praise his boss. He had known Johnson for years and believed him to be a man of honour and integrity. Which said more about Ellis’s judgment than anything else. Most of the house just wondered if there was a second Boris Johnson running around Westminster, one that nobody but Ellis had met. The session ended with a question about the fine imposed on the Tory party by the Electoral Commission regarding the payments for doing up Johnson’s flats. Ellis said nothing. This was above the paymaster’s pay grade. It was an appropriate end to the Tories’ crime week. They had certainly given the police plenty to do.Samantha Bee For her 200th episode of Full Frontal, Samantha Bee returned to a familiar topic: threats to reproductive healthcare in the US, particularly as the supreme court hears the case of Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization, which could strike down a woman’s right to an abortion. “Fuck this, fuck this so hard,” Bee said of the case, which concerns Mississippi’s ban on abortion after 15 weeks, well before the viability standard of about 24 weeks, and began oral arguments last week. “This ruling could effectively overturn Roe v Wade and revoke a right that has been fundamental and established for women in this country for decades.” “What makes this worse is that if Justice Amy Coney Barrett had her way, women would essentially become human incubators,” she continued, quoting the conservative Trump appointee: “Forced motherhood would hinder women’s access to the workplace, and to equal opportunities, [arguments] also focused on the consequences of parenting and the obligations of motherhood that flow from pregnancy – why don’t the safe haven laws take care of that problem?” “It doesn’t seem to me to follow that pregnancy and then parenthood are all part of the same burden,” Coney Barrett said. “So by that logic, if you die of complications from an unwanted pregnancy, it’s just because you were too lazy to live,” Bee translated. The court’s consideration of the case with a six-three conservative majority has called its legitimacy into question. “A majority of Americans believe the court’s decisions are based more on the justices’ political leanings than the constitution and law,” Bee explained. “Probably because the Justice is Blind statue outside the court now reads ‘She’s blind because she masturbated too much and made God angry.’” “Unfortunately, like the trauma from walking in on your grandparents having sex, Scotus appointments are for life,” Bee concluded. “We could be dealing with the consequences of their decisions for decades, especially when it comes to reproductive rights. For some people, it will be easier to find a Blockbuster than it will be to find a clinic.” Stephen Colbert On the Late Show, Stephen Colbert observed a major loss for Fox News: the 50ft Christmas tree outside its Manhattan studios, which burned to the ground Tuesday evening. “Of course, this would never have happened if the tree had a gun,” he joked. “Fox News tried to warn us this was coming – every time a store clerk says ‘happy holidays,’ a Christmas tree bursts into flames.” Police have said the arson suspect, arrested Wednesday, is reportedly homeless and that mental illness was a factor. “Homeless and mentally ill? Oh my god, the fire was set by Bill O’Reilly!” Colbert quipped. “The fire was particularly upsetting for the friends at Fox because the evergreen tree is of course a symbol of the eternal life given by Christ,” Colbert continued. Or as Fox and Friends cohost Ainsley Earhardt put it, “a tree that unites us, that brings us together, it’s about the Christmas spirit, it’s about the holiday season, it’s about Jesus, it’s about Hanukah.” “Ainsley, you’re a gift from Jesus,” said Colbert. “But I’m gonna go out on a burning limb and say this is not about Hanukah.” “But on the other hand, maybe it is about Hanukah,” he added, “because I have a feeling Fox will miraculously make this story last for eight days.” Jimmy Kimmel Jimmy Kimmel also mocked the burning of the Fox News Christmas tree on Wednesday evening. “The fire is believed to have started after Fox News’s pants caught on fire,” he joked. “Even though lighting trees on fire is very much in line with Fox’s position on climate change, the hosts of their morning show were very upset today,” he added. According to Earhardt: “We’re going rebuild it and we’re going to build it back better.” “We’re going to build it back better? Where have I heard that before …” said Kimmel. “This war on Christmas, I don’t know who’s on what side anymore.” Seth Meyers And on Late Night, Seth Meyers checked in on a plan by some fringe Republicans to make Donald Trump the Speaker of the House in 2022 – technically possible, as the speaker does not need to be a representative from Congress. Asked if he would want Trump to be speaker and if had talked him about it, Florida representative Matt Gaetz answered “I would,” and “I have.” “That might seem like a short answer, but it’s probably how much he talked when he brought the idea up with Trump before Trump cut him off,” Meyers said. “These people’s depravity truly knows no bounds,” he added of Gaetz and fellow conspiracist colleagues Marjorie Taylor Greene and Lauren Boebert. “Trump let a deadly pandemic ravage the country, leading to mass suffering. He stoked a violent coup to overturn an election and he came into contact with more than 500 people after testing positive for Covid and hiding it. And yet his sycophants in the Trump cult are still willing to do anything to get him back into power.”Through playing in a testimonial football match in the late 1970s I got to know Emlyn Hughes. He recognised me as an ex-soap actor from TV, and eventually introduced me and my son Joby, then aged six, to Ray Kennedy. One Saturday I took Joby to watch Liverpool play and they gave us tickets for the players’ lounge so that he could meet the team. I asked Joby who his favourite player was. “Ray Kennedy,” he said with his eyes lighting up. “I know him. I say goodnight to him every night on the poster on my wall.” After the match Joby sat on the floor with a drink. I didn’t know Ray that well, but when I saw him entering with his family and friends I went over and told him the story. He asked where Joby was and said he would just see to his guests and then come over. In no time at all, with that big smile of his, he pointed at Joby and said “Joby! Fancy seeing you here! Did you enjoy the game?” How to make a friend for life.This year has been an experimental one for Marvel. After no big releases in 2020, the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) has branched out into new, fully integrated television shows and hybrid blockbuster releases to sit alongside its main cinema offerings. Much of it has been met with praise and adoration, but more recent releases have failed to capture the imagination in the same way as previous fan favourites. Since the summer highs of Loki and What If…?, the MCU has been on a downward spiral the likes of which it has never seen before. Black Widow and Shang-Chi are burdened by the weight of two dozen other films bearing down on them, neither feeling completely at ease going off in their own direction. Eternals, which at least tries to offer something more intellectually and emotionally challenging, suffers from being overly detailed and slow. This meekness is reflected in the box office, which, even allowing for a global pandemic, is disappointing. For the first time since 2014, no MCU release has broken into the top six highest-grossing films of the year globally, with No Time to Die, Fast &amp; Furious 9, and Godzilla vs. Kong sitting comfortably above them. In fact, the most successful Marvel-branded film of the year – Venom: Let There Be Carnage – isn’t even an MCU entry. Things aren’t much better on the small screen. Hawkeye, centred on the blandest avenger of them all, has reported the lowest viewing figures of any live-action MCU Disney+ series so far. The franchise’s future may still look exciting, but critically and commercially the MCU is more on the ropes than it has ever been. Hopefully, Spider-Man: No Way Home can swing in to remind everybody what these films can do. The hype for Tom Holland’s third outing as the most iconic of all Marvel heroes (pre-MCU at least) exceeds that of any of the other releases this year. And it desperately needs to deliver. This is the eighth Spider-Man movie in the past two decades. No Way Home will relish this, using the multiverse as an excuse to bring back villains from the Tobey Maguire and Andrew Garfield-era films, from Willem Dafoe’s Green Goblin to Jamie Foxx’s Electro. While this is cause for excitement, it raises a difficult question: is the MCU so unsure of itself that it feels a need to pander to nostalgia so obviously? This is not an exercise in creative liberty. Instead, it feels like the nervous backup plan of a studio jittery about its continued success. In doing so, the MCU risks shooting itself in the foot, prioritising fleeting thrills and dramatic character returns in place of a story that realises how less can be more. The plot structure behind MCU films, for so long a large part of their success, also threatens to weigh No Way Home down. The arrival of Dr Strange presents Peter Parker yet again with a pseudo-father figure on whom to unload his personal insecurities and engage in witty banter with. After the Vulture in Homecoming and Mysterio in Far From Home, this is the third time this particular narrative card has been played. Even in the trailers there are unwelcome signs that this is not a role Strange will suit (“let’s Scooby-Doo this crap” is just an awful line). If you are able to sit through No Way Home with a checklist, ticking off such cliches as the potential sacrifice of a loved one, a cheesy villain line, and some awkwardly delivered attempts at humour, you know something has gone very wrong. As the MCU has grown, so has the need to dive into the lore of previous films, in this case going beyond the single shared universe itself. In Shang-Chi, the reintroduction of Trevor Slattery does little to meaningfully move the story forward. With Eternals, discussions about the Avengers and Thanos feel forced. They could have been removed entirely and the film would not have been any worse for it. Becoming part of an overwhelmingly interlinked series of films and TV shows means that each new movie or series is struggling to stand on its own two feet. There is a lot riding on Spider-Man’s latest outing to move the MCU back on to solid ground, but there are no guarantees that it will. Hopefully, No Way Home will revitalise a franchise that means so much to so many people. Perhaps it will be a roaring success, alleviating any fears about the quality of the MCU’s future. But if it doesn’t, this could prove to be a serious blow. Almost all of the other releases this year have been partially experimental, introducing new characters and stories. No Way Home is a return to a tried-and-tested fan favourite – or at least that’s the plan. Because if a film starring one of the most iconic superheroes of all time fails to rekindle the MCU’s fire, what will?Work from home, but keep going to Christmas parties: Boris Johnson’s advice has prompted questions about the logic behind plan B and left a lingering sense of confusion about the scale of the threat posed by the Omicron variant. So does the plan stand up to scrutiny? Scientists say that making working from home a first line of defence, ahead of social gatherings, is not necessarily a frivolous choice. In the hierarchy of measures that can be deployed, working from home is an effective way to bring down people’s daily contacts and is relatively painless economically. However, many fear that the threat posed by Omicron will require more than the first line of defence and that plan B does not go far enough. “People working from home makes a lot of sense as it can massively reduce contacts at a population level,” says Dr Deepti Gurdasani, a clinical epidemiologist and senior lecturer at Queen Mary University of London. “Having said that, the other measure that has the largest effect is reducing gathering sizes. For me it makes no sense to be instituting working from home policies and saying go ahead with parties. That is frankly ridiculous.” The problem is that we are on such a steep trajectory that hospitals could easily be overwhelmed by January, depending on how case numbers translate into severe illness. “What we are doing now is very unlikely to be sufficient,” said Gurdasani. This view is hinted at in official advice to the government by the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling this week that outlines a number of scenarios the UK could face. Under the worst three scenarios, which together are judged to be almost inevitable for the UK, “very stringent measures” are expected to be needed to control the growth of infections. There are also questions about whether the usual hierarchy of measures still stands during the Christmas season and at a time when a highly transmissible new variant is spreading rapidly. Christmas parties and large indoor gatherings have already been linked to Omicron super-spreader events. Work parties, in particular, bring together people who are more vulnerable to severe disease and younger people, among whom Omicron appears to be spreading most quickly at the moment. In addition, unlike the controlled workplace environment, parties often take place in crowded indoor settings, without masks and with loud talking and singing. “The problem with Christmas parties, unlike clubbing, is that you get senior managers – wrinklies like me, who are not normally in high-transmission environments,” said Prof Paul Hunter of the University of East Anglia. “The advice I gave my university was to shut down faculty-level Christmas parties. Going out with a few direct colleagues doesn’t worry me. It’s where you get the whole faculty turning up and cramming into the atrium of a building and mixing for a few hours that is a risk.” There is also a question of tone and how public health messages are interpreted, as well as the rules and guidance in place. Some say that encouraging parties also feels at odds with the looming wave of cases that has been projected and could potentially undermine public adherence to other advice. “To tell people to work from home then to say to go to Christmas parties is contradictory and lacks coherence,” said Prof Susan Michie, director of the Centre for Behaviour Change at University College London. “It’s a high-risk situation and it undermines the message to work at home where you can and to be cautious. It’s a problem for both those reasons. “Let’s learn from the past,” Michie added. “This is the third time of delaying measures when we have clear exponential growth of infection.”Paul Evans’s excellent country diary from Wenlock Edge (9 December) was quite symbolic of this week’s political farce. His description of a fallen 200-year-old tree, revealing the hidden bones, uncovered and carefully reburied to respect their secret, spoke volumes. But the classic uplift of the wren being an omen and bringing news was a ray of hope for those of us wishing for better times. Dr Mark Wilcox New Mill, West Yorkshire • Rather than being a chronological process (I’m not yet 50 – so why does everyone keep calling me middle-aged?, 7 December), “middle age is when the soul collapses with secretly accumulating disgust”, a definition I heard on the radio late one night many years ago. I’m happy to say that, at 82, my soul is still buoyant. Hal Dunkelman Cote, Oxfordshire • Only the wrapping paper (Letters, 7 December)? I remember my mother ironing actual presents, such as a scarf she didn’t fancy, to be recycled for a birthday or next Christmas. She made a pencilled early version of a spreadsheet to avoid embarrassing errors, which still occurred. Coincidentally, “gift” is the German for “poison”. Brian Smith Berlin, Germany • Until recently, the rolling information bar at the bottom of the large screen in our doctor’s surgery said: “Don’t forget to pre-book your next appointment.” I nearly added “dizzy” to my list of symptoms (Letters, 8 December). James Vickers Redcar, North Yorkshire • The one that drives me mad is “redouble your efforts” – when you probably haven’t yet doubled them. Stuart Waterworth Tavistock, Devon • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Some 688 people lost their lives on the streets last year – that’s 688 too many (Editorial, 5 December). And if we don’t act now, we are set to lose far more lives on the streets. The rise in fuel prices, the end of furlough, the cut to universal credit and the lifting of the eviction ban have posed a very grave danger to families and individuals who are struggling to make ends meet. That is why the Big Issue is calling on the government to stop mass homelessness with three key asks: take action on the £360m in rent arrears and provide additional support to help those unable to pay their rent or mortgage; put an end to no-fault evictions; and provide jobs and training in sustainable industries. We are the sixth richest country in the world. We can and must do better. It’s not just the government that can save lives – we can all play our part. Life continues to be extremely challenging for our vendors, who are out there working hard to lift themselves out of poverty. It would be wonderful if readers could go out and buy a copy of the magazine from their local Big Issue vendor to show their support this winter. John Bird House of Lords • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The mindset and language of Tory politicians discussing broadcasting and the arts is disturbing. Charlotte Higgins highlights the letter which the former culture secretary Oliver Dowden wrote to Arts Council England and other bodies about their approach to issues of contested heritage being “consistent with the government’s position” (An atmosphere of threat lingers over the arts – and it’s created by the government, 6 December). Robert Jenrick, then communities secretary, said in January: “We won’t allow people to censor our past.” A month later Dowden said: “Purging uncomfortable elements of our past does nothing but damage our understanding of it.” Initiatives such as the National Trust’s Colonial Countryside have been a particular focus for their criticism. But it is grotesque to suggest that historical research that helps us to understand the links between British country houses and slavery is about “purging” or “censoring”. Rather, it deepens our understanding – but Dowden threatened to ban the use of public funds for Colonial Countryside and suggested the National Trust was violating Charity Commission rules. Incidentally, a new chair of the Charity Commission has still to be announced by the new culture secretary, Nadine Dorries. Let’s hope we haven’t had the kind of overt political interference in this appointment as we had with the Ofcom chair fiasco. Granville Williams Upton, West Yorkshire • Charlotte Higgins is right to fear the growing atmosphere of threat to public funding of the arts. However, this has been latent for longer than is perhaps acknowledged. Raymond Williams in 1979 had already redescribed the “arm’s length principle” as “wrist’s length” in a Political Quarterly article recording his experience as vice-chairman of the Arts Council. Over recent decades, Arts Council England itself has presided over a climate of fear. Central government has always been there, hovering just out of sight – sometimes benignly, sometimes with menace. One longer-term threat is that, after local authority capacity in arts support has been all but eroded over the past 10 years, England’s massively overcentralised arts funding agency has a monopoly over both Treasury and lottery funding allocations. Christopher Gordon Chief executive, English regional arts boards consortium, 1987-2000 • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.My initial reaction to hearing of the Christmas party and the fake news briefing was feeling as if I had been kicked in the stomach (PM accused of lying after No 10 officials caught joking about Christmas party, 7 December). Then I cried. Like the majority of people in this country, I’ve followed the rules from the start. In my 60-odd years on the planet, I’ve paid my dues, I’ve voted in every election since turning 18 and I’ve tried to be decent and honest. My father died of Covid in his care home in Ipswich in April 2020, at the same time as we were being told that there was plenty of PPE for staff (the manager, by contrast, told me that was patently untrue and care homes were left unsupported). I hadn’t managed to see him for weeks and his funeral was a paltry, socially distanced affair with a Zoom wake. We suspect he believed that we had abandoned him as his understanding of the situation was limited, thanks to dementia. This recent turn of events has broken my heart. And it comes on top of endless scandals about tax evasion, dubious awarding of contracts and I am sure I don’t need to add more. I cannot believe that the people of this country, regardless of their political leanings, want to be ruled by such a heartless and corrupt bunch of people. Vivienne Maunder Ipswich, Suffolk • Like many, I feel absolutely sickened by the reports of last year’s Christmas party at No 10 and the government’s inability to own up to it. The leaked video of Allegra Stratton in her practice press conference laughing about it is outrageous. Last Christmas, my daughter, who is a mental health nurse in the NHS, made a 160-mile round trip to spend the day with us and in doing so stuck to the rules. This year, she and her colleagues have been instructed by the NHS trust she works for not to have Christmas parties. They can’t risk an already overstretched workforce being off sick with Covid. She and her colleagues take their roles and responsibilities seriously, unlike members of this government and their spokesperson. Carol Ferguson Thornton-le-Dale, North Yorkshire • The very fact that the hierarchy of the Tory party has not acted decisively to remove Boris Johnson as prime minister is a tacit act of collusion with his devious, dishonest and immoral modus operandi, which shames them all. In effect, it tars them all with the same maggot-infested brush. It’s about time all the opposition parties staged a walkout during a parliamentary session in disgust at being blatantly lied to. News of that would make the entire country sit up, take notice and loudly applaud. Linda Evans London • I’m frustrated that the overarching narrative surrounding the shameful party at No 10 last Christmas seems to be “how come they were allowed a party, and I wasn’t?” A party wasn’t, isn’t, and shouldn’t be desirable with Covid running rampant. Yes, the government – and especially the prime minister – behaves irresponsibly. But that doesn’t mean that the rest of us should too. Partying against the rules is wrong. Assisting the spread of Covid is wrong. Let’s stop shifting the government’s failures to personal grievances surrounding not having the equal opportunity to behave as badly as they do. Their actions are abhorrent – and that’s the end of it. Sebastian Monblat London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Travis Scott has said he didn’t notice concertgoers pleading for help, during his first interview since the devastating crowd crush at Astroworld that left 10 fans dead and hundreds injured. “It’s just been a lot of thoughts, a lot of feelings, a lot of grieving,” he said, “just trying to wrap my head around it.” Over the course of an hour-long interview with Charlamagne tha God, the host of the Breakfast Club radio show, Scott was serious and downcast. He said he wasn’t aware of anything amiss until a news conference was called after his set. “People pass out, things happen at concerts – but something like that?” he said, his voice trailing. When Charlamagne mentioned witness accounts of concertgoers pleading for help in between songs, the rapper said he would have stopped his performance if he had been aware. “I’m that artist that – anytime you can hear something like that, you want to stop the show,” said Scott, adding that his attention was compromised by the music, lights and pyrotechnical elements of his performance. An eight-time Grammy nominee, Scott is renowned for high-energy concerts that he stokes by encouraging fans to “rage” along. In a 2015 GQ video titled How to Rage with Travis Scott, he traces that exuberance to a longtime love of wrestling. “Since I was six, I wanted to be a fucking wrestler,” he says. “So in performances I always wanted to make it feel like it was the WWF.” But in Houston the excitement clearly boiled over. Fan footage shows Scott appearing to coax the crowd to form mosh pits during his set. Before the show, video of masses of Astroworld patrons trampling over one another while overwhelming security barriers and bypassing checkpoint areas trended on social media. Scott took exception to attempts to characterize raging as intentionally sinister. “That’s something I’ve been working on for a while, is creating these experiences and trying to show these experiences that are happening in a safe environment,” he said. “Us as artists, we trust professionals for when things happen that people can leave safely. And this night was just like a regular show, it felt to me, as far as the energy. It didn’t feel like, you know … people didn’t show up there just to be harmful.” In the month since that disastrous opening day, Scott has been named a defendant in more than 200 lawsuits, many of them citing him for “negligence” and the “encouragement of violence”. One Houston-based law firm representing more than 1,500 audience members is seeking $10bn in damages. On Monday Scott’s attorneys filed a dismissal request for 11 of those lawsuits, a motion that elicited negative feedback from fans. Publicly, Scott’s representatives absolve him of legal liability while leaving the possibility of more dismissal requests. Scott rebuffed the suggestion that he was participating in the interview to head off the mounting litigation.The charity regulator should stay as far as possible out of debates about “wokeness”, the government’s preferred candidate to head the watchdog has told MPs, saying he does not believe charities are too political. Martin Thomas told MPs on the Commons culture select committee that the Charity Commission should be firmly independent of government, and he saw no need to change the rules around political campaigning by charities. Thomas’s appointment has come under particular scrutiny amid widespread concern in the voluntary sector that ministers wanted to appoint a pro-Tory chair. The previous commission chair, Tina Stowell, a former Conservative politician, was criticised by some for drawing charities into “culture wars”. Thomas, when asked by the Conservative MP Damian Green during a pre-appointment scrutiny session on Thursday whether parts of the charitable sector had “become too political”, replied: “No, I don’t.” He told MPs he thought charity boards should be more diverse. “It’s very important that it [a trustee role] should not be an extra feather that you put in your cap as a result of being a part of the establishment or middle-class life. It should be something that is for everyone.” Thomas is a finance and insurance professional and chair of several charities. These include the Forward Arts Foundation, which is responsible for the promotion and enjoyment of poetry in the UK and runs National Poetry Day. He has no declared political activity. The commission has been at the centre of several recent political and media controversies involving high-profile charities accused of “woke behaviour” and playing politics, including the National Trust, Barnardo’s, and the Runnymede Trust. Each was exonerated by the commission after complaints by Tory MPs. In the case of the National Trust, the commission concluded it had acted “legally and responsibly at all times” in commissioning academic research into links between some of its country houses and the UK’s history of colonialism and slavery. In September the then culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, caused a row when he published an article saying the next commission chair should be someone committed to tackling charities “hijacked by a vocal minority seeking to burnish their woke credentials”. Thomas, when asked by the Labour MP Clive Efford what he thought of Dowden’s article, said it was unnecessary and trite. “The core point, if you take the rhetoric away, is that charities should be chaired by someone who believes charities should stay aligned to their charitable purposes,” he said. “That’s true, but it is also trite. It is of course the case that charities must stay live to their charitable purposes. To overlay that truth with dialogue about ‘woke’ or ‘anti-woke’ is extremely complicated because these are loose terms used in the debate about society, and they have no place in a regulatory dialogue or conversation.” Guidance, backed up by law, already made it clear charities could not support or be part of any political party but were able to “engage in the political debate of the day to the extent that it furthers their purposes”, Thomas said. “While I wouldn’t want to be accused on its behalf of being complacent, I think the regime we have is the right regime.” In 2018 the culture select committee refused to approve Lady Stowell for the role of commission chair but ministers appointed her anyway. Explaining the committee’s decision at Thursday’s hearing, the chair, Julian Knight, said: “The reason your predecessor did not pass muster is she gave probably the worst interview I have seen in 30 years of professional life.”‘If you’re going to cry, cry tears of laughter,” they sing. “Your funny bone can never break in two.” The lyrics are from an Inside No 9 episode looking back at the lives of an old school, end-of-the-pier double act. But they’re recycled in this evening-with tour, in which creators Steve Pemberton and Reece Shearsmith answer soft-bat questions about the making of that show. In essence, it’s a behind-the-scenes chat for fans of the series. But the underscore is a hymn to the pair’s friendship, as slide shows unspool of their lives in front of and behind the camera, and as they rise from their armchairs to perform song-and-dance set pieces that wouldn’t make an end-of-the-pier double act blush. The chat itself is entertaining enough. Pemberton and Shearsmith – suited, booted and prim like a showbiz Gilbert and George – seem like good eggs, with the former raconteur-ing answers to questions, and the latter making catty remarks from the sidelines. Shearsmith’s resentment of Black Mirror is well worked for comic effect, so too his sense that Inside No 9 is now so cosily well established, it’s practically Countryfile. Mark Salisbury, writer of a guide to the series, is a subdued interviewer but the format looks after itself, as individual Inside No 9 episodes are drawn from a hat and lovingly recalled. Tonight, we learn that Jack Whitehall got motion sickness filming the episode La Couchette, that the BBC scoped turning the same series’ Nana’s Party into a primetime sitcom, and that the line between stealing and “homage” is permeable. Questions are taken from the crowd in act two, which sync, conveniently enough, with anecdotes and slides the duo have prepared. Pemberton and Shearsmith don wigs and sing Chess chart-topper I Know Him So Well, to a backdrop of sentimental snapshots of their lives together. As with their story about staging their own deaths each day at the office, just for laughs, the touching impression arises of a fond and fruitful creative partnership, the warmth of which stands in intriguing counterpoint to the psychologically twisted comedy that’s made their name. Inside No 9: An Evening with Steve Pemberton and Reece Shearsmith is now touring.30. Wham! – Battlestations (1986) Tucked away on the B-side of The Edge of Heaven, Battlestations is a fascinating anomaly in the Wham! catalogue. Raw, minimal, and influenced by contemporary dancefloor trends – but still very much a pop song – it gives a glimpse of what might have happened had the duo stayed together and taken a hipper, more experimental direction. 29. George Michael – Something to Save (1990) An understated, atypical deep cut from Listen Without Prejudice Vol 1 – stripped-back, concise, acoustic-guitar driven, with just a hint of cello and tambourine. But it does a lot with a little: Michael’s vocal is really powerful and the moment when the stacked vocal harmonies kick in halfway through is a delight. 28. Wham! – Blue (Armed With Love) (1983) Blue started life as an unfinished near-instrumental hastily bunged on the B-side of Club Tropicana, and gradually developed on stage into a classy, blue-eyed R&amp;B slow jam far better than a lot of songs on their debut album, Fantastic. Wham! rightly had a regard for Blue: it turned up on greatest hits album The Final. 27. George Michael – My Mother Had a Brother (2004) Sometimes, the contents of Patience sounded a little too obviously like the work of someone who smoked an enormous quantity of weed, but My Mother Had a Brother – which retold the story of Michael’s closeted gay uncle, who killed himself on the day the singer was born – is tender and yet incredibly powerful. 26. George Michael – One More Try (1987) Faith offered an embarrassment of songwriting riches, including the pained balladry of One More Try. A great version on Michael’s final album, Symphonica, strips away the synths and replaces them with choral backing vocals and a southern soul organ, revealing the song’s musical roots. 25. George Michael – December Song (I Dreamed of Christmas) (2011) Inevitably overshadowed by Last Christmas, 2011’s December Song deserves to be better known. A gorgeous, heartfelt, harmony-laden but schmaltz-free ballad, it comes with a hint of darkness lurking in the background, as well as what appears to be a reference to Michael’s well-publicised troubles: “I went a little crazy / God knows they can see the child.” 24. Wham! – Wake Me Up Before You Go-Go (1984) If any song embodies what infuriated people about Wham!, Wake Me Up … is it. It’s neon-hued, incredibly perky and utterly brazen in its desire to be hugely commercially successful: they performed it on Top of the Pops wearing T-shirts that read Number One. It is also a fantastic pop song, which presumably infuriated people even more. 23. George Michael – Praying for Time (1990) Another shift away from the sound of Faith, Praying for Time is audibly immersed in the oeuvre of John Lennon. The music recalls Mind Games, while the frustrated, sarcastic lyrical tone and the slapback echo-dosed vocals are very Instant Karma!. But it rises beyond pastiche: the melody is gorgeous, Michael’s vocals are superb. 22. Wham! – Club Tropicana (1983) Inspired by the Gap Band’s awesome Burn Rubber on Me – you can hear the influence in its backing track – Club Tropicana was the classic sweltering-summer-of-83 hit, despite considerable competition. There’s something oddly sarcastic about the lyrics: another Wham! hit more knowing than its reputation suggests. 21. George Michael – Spinning the Wheel (1996) Given his fondness for a joint, it was perhaps inevitable that Michael would be drawn towards the sound of trip-hop in the mid-90s. But Spinning the Wheel offers trip-hop of a particularly high, luxurious quality: a beat indebted to reggae, subtle samples, a lazily soulful song atop. Plus, the sound of a spliff being lit at the end. 20. Wham! – The Edge of Heaven (1986) The Wham! No 1 no one seems to remember – you certainly don’t hear it as often as the others nowadays – which feels unfair. It’s a sophisticated example of Michael’s way with an irrepressible 60s soul pastiche, with lyrics that played on the duo’s imminent demise: “One last time might be for ever.” 19. Wham! – Bad Boys (1983) Reviled as the apotheosis of craven, weightless 80s pop, Wham!’s early singles were always more knowing than detractors seemed to notice. Bad Boys is a case in point: wilfully preposterous, extraordinarily camp (“Easy girls – AND LATE NIGHTS! / Cigarettes – AND LOVE BITES!”), it’s a song with its tongue cemented to its cheek that got taken in deadly earnest. 18. George Michael – Amazing (2004) Amazing now sounds weirdly prescient, a hybrid of disco rhythms and soft-rock instrumentation that predates the latter-day obsession with yacht rock embodied by the Too Slow to Disco compilation series. The vocal, meanwhile, perfectly captures the sweet sense of wonder in the rush-of-new-love lyrics. 17. Aretha Franklin and George Michael – I Knew You Were Waiting (for Me) (1987) On one level, I Knew You Were Waiting (for Me) was as much a statement as a song, the presence of Aretha Franklin automatically conferring a new gravitas on her co-performer. Although he didn’t write it, the song won the pair a Grammy award for best R&amp;B performance, deservedly so: I Knew You Were Waiting (for Me) is totally joyous. 16. Wham! – Young Guns (Go for It!) (1982) Anyone looking for a queer subtext in Wham!’s material might consider just how upset Young Guns’ protagonist seems to be about his BFF’s impending marriage. Wracked with repressed yearning, or a straightforward warning about settling down too early? Either way, the sheer quantity of hooks it packs in – and its innate understanding of how to turn club music into pop – is astonishing. 15. George Michael – Heal the Pain (1990) Another solo Beatles-inspired tune from Listen Without Prejudice Vol 1, this time founded in the effortless melodicism of Wings-era Paul McCartney. Michael pulls it off with such aplomb that McCartney himself signed up to appear on a new version, released on 2006’s greatest hits album Twenty Five: the warmth of their duet might make it the definitive version. 14. Wham! – Freedom (1984) Wake Me Up Before You Go-Go may be more ubiquitous these days, but Wham’s second No 1 of 1984 is the better song: less tricksy and DayGlo, it’s a beautifully turned, effortlessly commercial Motown homage worthy of peak-period Holland-Dozier-Holland. 13. George Michael – Faith (1987) Faith opens with a snatch of Freedom by Wham!, played on a church organ as if at a funeral: the cocky update of the old Bo Diddley hambone beat that follows signalled one of pop’s great reinventions. Someone should cover Faith in a straightforward rockabilly style: as it is, there’s an absolutely ghastly version by Limp Bizkit. 12. George Michael – Cowboys and Angels (1990) A relative flop on release, which was less to do with its quality than that it was the fifth single to be taken from Listen Without Prejudice. Its hazy and, more than likely, stoned take on orchestrated jazz-pop is utterly beautiful, its lyrics surprisingly affectionate and generous, considering it’s about a love triangle. 11. George Michael – Round Here (2004) The undisputed highlight of Patience was this mistily beautiful recollection of Michael’s childhood and teenage aspirations in the suburbs of north London. Intriguingly, it mentions his love of the Specials and the Jam, whose respective leaders, Jerry Dammers and Paul Weller, had been vocal critics of Wham!. 10. George Michael – Outside (1998) The musical response to Michael’s arrest for “lewd behaviour” in a California lavatory is one of the finest screw-you gestures in pop history: a gleeful, unapologetic, witty hymn to cruising – “I’d service the community, but I already have, you see” – set to the best disco track he ever came up with. 9. George Michael – A Different Corner (1986) Few artists have ever moved from teen sensation to “adult” artist with the deftness of George Michael. The real signal that the Wham! years were over, A Different Corner is a fantastic ballad and astonishingly bold. Given that it’s stark to the point of sounding eerie, it seems remarkable it made it to No 1. 8. George Michael – Father Figure (1987) The video for Father Figure may have depicted Michael in a relationship with a woman, but the song’s lyrics told a more complex story: “Sometimes love can be mistaken for a crime.” Meanwhile, the shift from the hushed longing of the verses to the explosive, gospel-inspired chorus is just fabulous. 7. Wham! – Last Christmas (1984) A song that pulls off Abba’s old trick of masking distraught lyrics – the protagonist’s protestations that he’s found someone else aren’t terribly convincing – with bulletproof ultra-hooky music. If it was easy to write Christmas songs as durable as Last Christmas has proved, everyone would do it and luxuriate in the annual payout. But it isn’t. 6. George Michael – You Have Been Loved (1996) Ubiquitous on British radio after the death of Diana, Princess of Wales, the second of Older’s great elegies for his late partner, Anselmo Feleppa, concentrates not on Michael’s grief but that of Feleppa’s mother. Hushed and painful, it would be almost too sad to listen to if the melody were not so exquisite. 5. George Michael – Careless Whisper (1984) The song that first signalled Michael’s solo ambitions dated back to Wham!’s first demo, but you can see how he thought it was bit luxe and grown-up for their brash image. It’s a brilliant pop song regardless, and, in “guilty feet have got no rhythm”, it boasts one of the great once-heard-never-forgotten lyrics. 4. George Michael – Fastlove (1996) Michael described Older as the sound of him “trying to come out … to my fans”. Nowhere was that clearer than on the superb Fastlove, a paean to cruising, underpinned with grief: “I miss my baby.” The music is fabulously poised – subtle and lingering, yet funky, flecked with references to Patrice Rushen’s Forget Me Nots. 3. Wham! – Everything She Wants (1984) If you turned over Last Christmas, you found Wham!’s greatest song, evidence of George Michael’s rapid development as a songwriter: six and half minutes of lyrical misery – its protagonist is trapped in a loveless relationship with a demanding partner – set to sublime synth-funk that has somehow never seemed to date. 2. George Michael – Jesus to a Child (1996) Never let it be said that Michael was afraid to take risks: after a three-year absence from the charts, he returned with an astonishing seven-minute mediation on loss and grief. The tune is haunting, the lyrics – which describe Feleppa’s death and pick over the emotional aftermath – genuinely extraordinary. 1. George Michael – Freedom 90 (1990) Freedom 90 might be George Michael’s equivalent of Changes by David Bowie: a loud declaration of a desire to keep moving artistically, complete with video featuring the leather jacket he’d worn in the Faith era set on fire. Perhaps it was a desire to get the message across that led Michael to set the lyrics to irresistible music. The buoyant house-influenced piano riff and Funky Drummer-sampling beats are very 1990 and so joyous they transcend their era; the gospel-inspired vocals soar, Michael himself sounding impassioned. The result is perfect pop music. • BBC Radio 2 listeners can vote for their favourite George Michael songs until noon on 11 December.Ghislaine Maxwell’s New York sex-trafficking trial was unexpectedly adjourned early Thursday because an “ill” attorney needed medical care. “I’ve been informed there’s an attorney in the case who’s ill, and that attorney has to get care,” the judge, Alison Nathan, told jurors this morning. Nathan’s disclosure came several moments after attorneys on the case asked to speak with her in private. It’s unclear from proceedings which attorney is ill. Nathan said: “We have no reason to believe it’s Covid-related,” but that this attorney needed to be at court for testimony that was expected today. Nathan did not describe the attorney’s symptoms in open court. “We want to make sure the attorney is taken care of,” Nathan said. Nathan said she expects proceedings will resume on Friday. The mid-morning adjournment meant that prosecutors are not yet able to rest their case against Maxwell. The prosecution had said earlier this week that they expected to wrap up on Thursday, or Friday morning. The Manhattan US attorney’s office alleges that Maxwell lured teen girls to supply them to Jeffrey Epstein between 1994 and 2004, and that he abused them. On some occasions, Maxwell was present, and sometimes participated in Epstein’s sexual abuse, prosecutors say. Maxwell, 59, is the daughter of the late British publishing impresario, Robert Maxwell. She was arrested at a luxurious New Hampshire rural estate in July 2020 for her alleged procuring of minor teens for Epstein. Maxwell is now on trial for six counts in relation to her alleged involvement. She has pleaded not guilty to all charges. Epstein, a convicted sex offender who counted Prince Andrew and former presidents Bill Clinton and Donald Trump as associates, killed himself in a New York City federal jail more than two years ago, while awaiting his own sex trafficking trial. Before the early adjournment, it was expected that Maxwell’s fourth accuser in the trial would take the stand. The third accuser to testify in this trial, Carolyn, alleged earlier this week that Maxwell coordinated sexualized massages with Epstein starting when she was only 14, in the early 2000s. Carolyn said on Tuesday that she went to Epstein’s Palm Beach home “over 100” times between the ages of 14 and 18, at which point she said she was deemed too old to appeal to Epstein.The principal of a Durham University college who called students “pathetic” for protesting during an event with the columnist Rod Liddle has stepped back from some of his duties. Prof Tim Luckhurst, the principal of South College, will not attend external events on behalf of the university while an investigation is carried out into a dinner where Liddle gave a speech. Liddle, who writes for the Sunday Times, the Spectator and the Sun, was invited to speak at the college formal last Friday evening. After some students staged a walkout before the speech, Luckhurst shouted “at South College we value freedom of speech” and “pathetic”. Luckhurst, a former editor of the Scotsman, has since apologised and said his anger reflected his “commitment to freedom of speech”. Durham students’ union has described the principal’s position as “untenable” and accused him of insulting and humiliating students. According to the student newspaper Palatinate, Liddle’s speech began with him expressing disappointment there were no sex workers there that night, in reference to a recent controversy over safety training offered by the university to student sex workers. According to the report, he said the left railed against “science or pure facts”, by reference to people with a “long, dangling penis”, and claimed colonialism was not “remotely the major cause of Africa’s problems, just as it is very easy to prove that the educational underachievement of British people of Caribbean descent or African Americans is nothing to do with institutional or structural racism.” On Wednesday Durham students staged a demonstration over the events at the formal. A university spokesperson said that while the investigation was ongoing, Luckhurst would step back from some of duties. The investigation, led by Prof Jane MacNaughton, will look into the steps that led to Liddle’s invitation, as well as behaviour at the event. It is due to conclude by mid-January. In a statement, Prof Antony Long, the acting vice-chancellor, said last Friday’s events had caused “distress and anger across much of our community”. Long thanked those who had written in, adding that the letters and emails “invariably convey carefully argued and respectful viewpoints”. He said: “However, please let us be clear that no member of our university community should be subjected to transphobia, homophobia, racism, classism and sexism. We are committed to providing a safe place to live, work and study for all.” According to one of two articles Luckhurst wrote in the Guardian in 2010, defending Liddle against a “screechingly intolerant campaign of hostility” when he was in the running to edit the Independent, the two men have known each other since 1985 when they were both advisers to Labour shadow ministers. In 2019 Sajid Javid denounced an article by Liddle that appeared to call for elections to be held on days when Muslims are forbidden by their religion to vote, and that ridiculed an MP who had given a speech about domestic violence. Liddle was arrested on election night in 2005 for allegedly punching his pregnant girlfriend, and subsequently accepted a caution. Liddle has claimed he did not touch her but he accepted the caution so he could be released.It was one of the most significant branching points in recent history – and at least one artefact of the way things might have been still exists. On Wednesday the Today show in the US released a video of Hillary Clinton reading the speech she would have given if she had beaten Donald Trump in the 2016 election. Clinton, who is giving a course in “the power of resilience” with the online education company Masterclass, teared up as she read aloud from her speech. She said reading it entailed “facing one of my most public defeats head-on”. To those who viewed the election of Trump as an epoch-defining catastrophe, the excerpt was an agonising glimpse of an alternative future. Clinton said: “Fundamentally, this election challenged us to decide what it means to be an American in the 21st century. And by reaching for unity, decency and what President Lincoln called ‘the better angels of our nature’, we met that challenge.” She reflected on the significance of what her election as the first female US president would have meant. “I’ve met women who were born before women had the right to vote. They’ve been waiting a hundred years for tonight. I’ve met little boys and girls who didn’t understand why a woman has never been president before. Now they know, and the world knows, that in America every boy and every girl can grow up to be whatever they dream – even president of the United States.” Clinton grew emotional as she read a passage about her mother, who died in 2011. She said: “I dream of going up to her, and sitting down next to her, taking her into my arms and saying: ‘Look at me. Listen to me. You will survive. You will have a good family of your own. And three children. And as hard as it might be to imagine, your daughter will grow up and become the president of the United States.” Clinton’s speech, which she said she had never previously read aloud, enters a canon of speeches never given – for reasons that were variously a relief, a disappointment or a matter of ongoing political dispute. Here are some other examples of the genre. ‘Whatever terrors lie in wait for us all’: Queen Elizabeth II’s speech for the outbreak of nuclear war, 1983 Written by civil servants during one of the most tense periods of the cold war, and released in 2013 under the 30-year rule. “The horrors of war could not have seemed more remote as my family and I shared our Christmas joy with the growing family of the Commonwealth. Now, this madness of war is once more spreading through the world and our brave country must again prepare itself to survive against great odds … “I have never forgotten the sorrow and the pride I felt as my sister and I huddled around the nursery wireless set listening to my father’s [George VI’s] inspiring words on that fateful day in 1939 [at the start of the second world war]. Not for a single moment did I imagine that this solemn and awful duty would one day fall to me. “But whatever terrors lie in wait for us all, the qualities that have helped to keep our freedom intact twice already during this sad century will once more be our strength … As we strive together to fight off this new evil, let us pray for our country and men of goodwill wherever they may be. God bless you all.” ‘Epic men of flesh and blood’: Richard Nixon’s ‘in event of moon disaster’ speech, 1969 Written by the speechwriter William Safire in case the crew of Apollo 11 were marooned on the surface of the moon, and unearthed in the Nixon archive in 1999. The document directs Nixon to telephone “the widows-to-be” before making the speech and suggests that a clergyman should “adopt the same procedure as a burial at sea, commending their souls to ‘the deepest of the deep’”. “Fate has ordained that the men who went to the moon to explore in peace will stay on the moon to rest in peace. These brave men, Neil Armstrong and Edwin Aldrin, know that there is no hope for their recovery. But they also know that there is hope for mankind in their sacrifice … “In ancient days, men looked at stars and saw their heroes in the constellations. In modern times, we do much the same, but our heroes are epic men of flesh and blood. “Others will follow, and surely find their way home. Man’s search will not be denied. But these men were the first, and they will remain the foremost in our hearts. For every human being who looks up at the moon in the nights to come will know that there is some corner of another world that is forever mankind.” ‘A nation reborn’: Alex Salmond’s speech for a yes vote in the Scottish independence referendum, 2014 Released by the former SNP leader to a university for research in 2015. “In the early hours of this morning, Scotland voted yes. We are a nation reborn. The community of this realm has spoken. Scotland shall be independent once again. To those who voted no, I extend an immediate hand of friendship … “To our friends and families across these isles waking to our new democracy, we say this: know that, in Scotland, you will always have your closest friend, greatest ally and most steadfast partner … “This morning, I want every person – yes voters, no voters, everyone in this proud and ancient nation – to pause, reflect upon and remember this greatest day in Scotland’s history. “We did this. We made it happen. We believed. We trusted ourselves and trusted each other. A country reborn. A democracy reclaimed. We reach towards the future.” ‘We are not waiting to lose before we get our act together’: David Miliband’s speech for the Labour leadership election, 2010 Obtained by the Guardian in 2011. Miliband is said to have recited the text to his wife in the back of the car on their drive home from party conference, where his brother Ed had prevailed. “My parents devoted themselves to building a family on unconditional love and support. It was a warm household in which we were encouraged to think for ourselves; to argue; to make up our own minds. Haven’t I learned that in the last few months? … “Only four Labour leaders have ever been elected prime minister. Out of 14. Reflect on that. Many good men … lots of hard work … but only four have led us to victory … “This leadership election, the new members, the new councillors, shows something is stirring. Something inspiring. We are not waiting to lose three times before we get our act together.” ‘He’s no longer Alaska’s “first dude”’: Sarah Palin’s victory speech, 2008 Written by the Republican vice-presidential candidate’s speechwriter Matthew Scully, and leaked in 2009. Palin also prepared a concession speech for the event of defeat but was stopped from delivering it by the presidential candidate John McCain’s team. “It’s been just 68 days since that afternoon in Dayton, Ohio, when Senator McCain introduced me as his running mate. He is truly the maverick. He took a chance on me. I will always be grateful for that. “It will be the honour of a lifetime to work him as vice-president of the United States. And I pledge to govern with integrity, and goodwill, and clear conviction, and a servant’s heart … “It’s been quite a journey these past 69 days. We were ready, in defeat, to return to a place and a life we love. And I said to my husband, Todd, that it’s not a step down when he’s no longer Alaska’s ‘first dude’. He will now be the first guy ever to become the ‘second dude’.” ‘Our landings have failed’: Dwight Eisenhower’s D-day defeat speech, 1944 Handwritten by the Supreme Allied Commander the night before the Normandy invasion and then put in his wallet. Now in the Eisenhower Library. “Our landings in the Cherbourg-Havre area have failed to gain a satisfactory foothold and I have withdrawn the troops. “My decision to attack at this time and place was based upon the best information available. “The troops, the air and the navy did all that bravery and devotion to duty could do. If any blame or fault attaches to the attempt, it is mine alone.”My colleague and friend Francesca Inskipp, also known as Cesca, who has died aged 100, lived a life lit by the qualities of resilience, curiosity, determination and warmth, and by a sense of fun, which enabled her to make an outstanding contribution to counselling and supervision in the UK. In the 1960s, she and her husband, John, oversaw a residential centre in Essex, running courses for sixth formers and youth workers. Brooklands buzzed with energy and an excitement for learning, and the years there stimulated Francesca’s desire for new horizons. In 1971, she embarked on a year’s full-time training as a counsellor at Keele University. After briefly training youth workers in Essex, she joined the Centre for Studies in Counselling, set up by Hans Hoxter, at the North East London Polytechnic (now the University of East London), where she remained until her retirement in the 1980s. With me and other colleagues there, she created courses in counselling for teachers, careers officers and other helping professions, while contributing to many formative developments in accreditation and training for the British Association for Counselling. Francesca was brilliant at “catching” ideas from all sorts of sources, and at collaborating with others to hone and apply them to new contexts. She took her work seriously but was also good at having fun - her party performances of the Charleston always impressed our students. She was born in Hastings, East Sussex, to a single mother, Helen Dupree. The family’s financial needs meant that Francesca left school at 15 and later worked as a secretary in wartime London. The delights and challenges of her seaside childhood stayed with her always. A friend from her youth, John Inskipp, returned to Hastings after the second world war, having spent four years as a prisoner of war in Crete. They married in 1947 and brought up three sons, while both training to be teachers. Teaching biology and her early involvement with the Duke of Edinburgh’s Award Scheme proved to be the perfect fusion of Francesca’s lifelong fascination for both the natural world and people. After her retirement from NELP in the early 1980s, she and John returned to East Sussex, to a seaside flat in St Leonards-on-Sea. Francesca swam regularly, worked as a counsellor and supervisor, and, with another counselling trainer, Brigid Proctor, hugely influenced developments in supervision and the training of supervisors. She was instrumental, too, in the setting up of counselling services in Hastings. She was consistently a learner and explorer. In her 70s she completed a three-year training in psychosynthesis, an approach to counselling which emphasises values, purpose and meaning in life; and she travelled far and wide with John in their beloved VW camper van. After his death in 2007, Francesca still travelled with friends, but was always glad to return to her beloved sea, her much-loved books, the Guardian, her cat, family and the many friends, of all ages and types, who were central to her life. She is survived by her three sons, Richard, Tim and Mark, four grandchildren and five great-grandchildren.After a 20-year hiatus, Sex and the City will return on 9 December with the sequel And Just Like That. Most of the main cast will return for the reboot, with the exception of Kim Cattrall as Samantha. There will also be new additions, including Sara Ramirez, who will play the host of a podcast to which Carrie (Sarah Jessica Parker) is now a contributor – perhaps a natural progression from her job in SATC as a weekly columnist. We would like to hear your thoughts on And Just Like That. Are you glad to see the sequel? Do you miss Samantha? What were your favourite moments? Share your thoughts You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Even now, at this distance, the video retains all of its shock value; the dark comedy mixing seamlessly with the gloating. Tottenham had lost 1-0 at Paços de Ferreira on 19 August in the first leg of the Europa Conference League play-off and it was the prompt for the Portuguese club to get trolling. Again. After the draw was made, Paços had uploaded a clip of two of their fans discussing the meeting with a London giant. Which one was it? They ran through all of the possibles, deliberately ignoring Spurs, until they were informed that it was indeed them. “Oh, these guys … We can easily beat Tottenham,” they say, before clinking their beer bottles together. Now, with the victory theirs, came that TikTok video. It was not delivered by the club this time, rather endorsed by them with a follow-up comment. It showed the Paços mascot, a giant beaver, gyrating suggestively behind its Spurs counterpart, a giant cockerel, as a supporter did likewise to the right of them. Needless to say, Spurs’s haters in London and beyond loved that and it rather set the tone for the club’s participation in Uefa’s new third-tier competition. Spurs would beat Paços 3-0 in the return to qualify for the group stage but they have not truly been able to win so far, only to avoid humiliation at best and run headlong into its grip at worst. As they have done pretty much whenever they have travelled away from home. Since that famous game, Paços have won only once all season and, if Spurs’s 2-2 draw at Rennes was creditable enough, the occasion was memorable mainly for the sight of Harry Kane leading out the team – shortly after failing to get the transfer he wanted to Manchester City. It was a meme trigger. Wasn’t Kane supposed to be playing Champions League football? Then there have been the defeats at Vitesse and NS Mura, the former after the then manager, Nuno Espírito Santo, left his first XI in London to rest for the weekend Premier League fixture at West Ham; the latter at the hands of the Slovenian minnows – the lowest-ranked team in the group phase – was one of the most embarrassing nights in Spurs’s history. It sparked an angry reaction from Nuno’s successor, Antonio Conte, who said he now understood the extent of the challenge that faced him. Criticism from inside and outside the club has been a recurring theme. The midfielder Harry Winks suggested that Nuno’s selection at Vitesse had been divisive. “We’re meant to be a team … everybody should be fighting for weekend games and it’s difficult,” he said. “Motivation should be everybody fighting for the same cause.” And now Spurs find themselves under fire from Rennes and even Vitesse for their request that Thursday night’s final group tie at home to Rennes be postponed as they reel from the impact of a Covid outbreak, which has forced them to close the first-team area of the training ground. Rennes, who have already topped Group G, raged about being made to travel and then not play, muttering about the impression that Tottenham were still just about above the Uefa threshold of having 13 available, senior players (including one goalkeeper). Meanwhile Vitesse, who are fighting for second place and a spot in a two-legged play-off to reach the last 16, were unhappy that they had to play on Thursday night at home to Mura while their rivals waited. It was because goal difference stood to be a separating factor between the teams. Vitesse pointed out that Spurs sent a B team to play them. Why could they not do so against Rennes? To repeat, Spurs have been ravaged by a frightening illness, turfed out of their place of work, wracked by uncertainty and yet they continue to absorb pot-shots. The club’s Conference League campaign has been a disaster from the start and yet it is not over. But for a quirk of fate, it would have been after Vitesse won 3-1 at home to Mura. Spurs’s away result against the Dutch club was a 1-0 loss before they beat them 3-2 at home, meaning that they are tied on the initial head-to-head tiebreaker in terms of points, goal difference and goals scored. Previously, Vitesse’s greater number of away goals in the matches between the clubs would have given them the edge but Uefa scrapped that rule this season and it now moves on to goal difference in all of the group games. The upshot of Vitesse’s margin of victory over Mura was that Spurs need a win by any scoreline when they play the rearranged Rennes match. In other words, they remain in the driving seat to advance in the competition that they did not want to enter; to add anywhere up to nine extra games to the second-half of their season – at a time when Conte intends to push for a top-four league finish. Never mind the strangely discombobulating Thursday-Sunday cycle, how much value would there be in winning the Conference League? To many onlookers, it has been written in the stars that Spurs will reach the final and face Roma, who are managed by their former manager, José Mourinho. On all the available evidence, they ought to be careful what they wish for.New restrictions to limit the spread of the Omicron variant will delay an interest rate increase from the Bank of England despite signs that the government’s measures will add to the cost of living for hard-pressed consumers, the City believes. The pound fell on the currency markets on expectations that Threadneedle Street’s monetary policy committee will shy away from the first increase in borrowing costs since the start of the pandemic, and instead join the Treasury in adopting a wait-and-see approach to Omicron. The government’s plan B measures, announced on Wednesday, will see workers asked to stay away from their offices and Covid passes made compulsory at larger venues. The curbs are expected to add to the cost of living, as spending shifts once more from going out to online shopping, driving up the price of consumer goods as demand rises. However, fears of an economic slowdown mean the Bank of England is now less likely to intervene to dampen inflation. At the start of last week, the City thought there was a 70% chance of the Bank acting to head off the inflationary pressure hitting living standards by raising interest rates from 0.1% to 0.25%. This possibility had dropped to 46% ahead of the plan B announcement, and fell further to 40% on Thursday. Paul Dales, the chief UK economist at Capital Economics, said: “While the emergence of the Omicron Covid-19 variant has increased the downside risks to our GDP forecasts, it has arguably increased the upside risks to our CPI inflation forecasts.” Rishi Sunak will monitor the impact of the curbs announced this week but has no plans to increase financial support at this stage because the possibility of this week’s tightening of restrictions in England was already factored into his plans. Groups representing hospitality, travel and retail – the sectors most likely to be affected by the curbs – are pressing for more government help but the chancellor is only likely to respond if tougher restrictions are imposed or the current restrictions last for a prolonged period. The latest flash estimates of the economy detected signs of an Omicron effect, with a surge in credit and debit card spending on Black Friday but a fall in the number of people eating out. “The transmissibility, severity and capacity for Omicron to escape vaccines are still unknown,” said Dales. “But if Omicron leads the government to close non-essential retail, hospitality venues and schools, we think GDP would fall by something like 3%. As has been the case in previous lockdowns, that would boost demand for goods relative to demand for services, which may keep goods inflation higher for longer.” In the meantime, analysts believe plan B measures will have only a modest impact on the economy’s growth rate. Josie Dent, a UK economist at the Centre for Economics and Business Research, said working from home would lead to a step change in commuter and thus city-centre consumer behaviour. She estimated the guidance would hit spending by £500m in five selected English cities in the next month – London, Manchester, Newcastle, Nottingham and Milton Keynes. “On the other hand, we judge that restrictions relating to mask-wearing and Covid certification measures are unlikely to imply significant economic costs on balance, as consumers and businesses have increasingly adapted to such measures throughout the pandemic. A short-term cost may however be felt by businesses as they implement such measures over the coming days. “Meanwhile, independent of plan B, increased nervousness over the new variant and stricter travel restrictions are expected to cause a loss of £0.9bn in UK hospitality revenues this month, and £0.4bn in inbound travel spending.” The ONS said Black Friday sales pushed spending on credit and debit cards in Britain to its highest level since before the first lockdown of March 2020, but restaurant bookings fell to their lowest since restrictions on indoor hospitality eased in May. In its evaluation of its recent forecasting record, the Office for Budget Responsibility – the independent body responsible for the government’s economic and financial health checks – said businesses had become better able to cope with even tough curbs. “As the pandemic unfolded, households and businesses became increasingly adapted to the virus and associated restrictions as consumers shifted purchases online, businesses made premises Covid-safe, and employees further adjusted to working remotely. As a result, whereas output dropped to around 25% below pre-pandemic levels in April 2020 it was only 9% lower in January 2021, despite both being spent in full national lockdown.”That’s all for today. Here are today’s main stories: Uncertainty over Omicron, and the introduction of new restrictions in England, mean the Bank of England is less likely to raise interest rates next week, some experts say. The number of Americans filing new claims for unemployment support has hit the lower level in over 50 years. Just 184,000 ‘initial claims’ for jobless benefit were filed last week, on a seasonally adjusted basis, a drop of 43,000. The hospitality industry is calling for more taxpayer support, as the rollout of Plan B restrictions and home working threatens to ruin Christmas trading. Rating agency Fitch has ruled that China Evergrande’s overseas bonds are in default after the world’s most indebted developer failed to make a crucial interest payment this week. The number of people dining out across the UK has dropped to the lowest level since the reopening of indoor hospitality in May. The City regulator has refused to intervene in a deal to sell the mutual LV= to a US private equity firm, despite an 11th-hour plea by lawyers to try to delay Friday’s vote by members of the mutual to approve the controversial takeover. The law firm Leigh Day, which is working on behalf of two LV= members leading objections to the takeover, met with officials from the Financial Conduct Authority on Thursday in an attempt to put the brakes on a £530m deal that would end the firm’s member-owned status and put it in the hands of Bain Capital. The lawyers have been urging the FCA to withdraw a statement from October in which the regulator said it would not object to either the takeover or plans to demutualise LV=. They have raised concerns about how the mutual’s leadership disseminated information about bids from Bain and rivals, including fellow mutual Royal London, as well as a lack of member consultation. Leigh Day said on Thursday that while the meeting with the City regulator was helpful, “regrettably the FCA declined to withdraw their ‘non-objection letter’ before tomorrow’s vote”. In the City, the FTSE 100 index has ended 16 points lower at 7321, down 0.2%. Engineering group Rolls-Royce was the top faller, down 3.4%, despite reporting that it was no longer burning cash after making deep cost cuts in response to the coronavirus pandemic Airline operator IAG (-3.3%), and gambling group Entain (-2%) were also high in the fallers. Most European markets finished lower too, with Germany’s DAX off 0.3% and France’s CAC losing 0.1%. Danni Hewson, AJ Bell financial analyst, sums up the day: “The thing about a glass half full is that it’s also half empty. After days of optimism-fuelled gains investors seem to have grown slightly weary of thinking positively and markets have slumped. There is certainly enough uncertainty around to trouble even those wedded to their rose-tinted specs. Evergrande’s teeter over the edge seems to have ended with the fall we all saw coming. With China’s government having done a pretty good job of assuring global investors that blowback should be limited markets have remained relatively untroubled. Then there’s tomorrows US inflation data hurtling towards us like a souped-up freight train. Even with Omicron in the mix any number over expectation will trouble central bankers. “In London Rolls Royce was one of the days big losers despite achieving quicker than expected cost savings as the travel sector finds itself back in the blender and any expansion plans will undoubtedly be shoved back in a drawer. By contrast trading updates from Frasers group, Moonpig and packaging company DS Smith were warmly received, all can function if restrictions are increased and indeed the latter should seriously benefit if this Christmas becomes “Clickmas” once again. Most workers support vaccine and mask mandates for the workplace, a new global survey has found. A poll of almost 14,500 employed adults in 33 countries, conducted by the World Economic Forum and Ipsos, found that about three in four agreed that everyone in their workplace should be fully vaccinated (78%), undergo frequent testing if unvaccinated (74%), and wear a mask in common areas (81%). A majority of workers in most countries (averaging 62% globally) would not feel comfortable going to work if such measures were not in place, according to the poll. It was conducted between 22 October and 5 November 2021 – a few weeks before the emergence of the Omicron variant. It’s the end of an era for one of the UK’s oldest investment trusts. Shareholders in Scottish Investment Trust today gave their approval for plans to merge with JP Morgan Global Growth &amp; Income, following a long run of relative underperformance. Today’s vote means that JP Morgan Funds will take over as investment manager and position the portfolio in line with the JP Morgan Global Growth &amp; Income portfolio, removing one of the few remaining self-managed trusts from the sector. The two trusts will be formally combined in the future, once Scottish Investment Trust can put itself into liquidation in an orderly fashion. Incorporated in Edinburgh back in 1887, Scottish Investment Trust began by investing in the Americas, buying stakes in railroads in the US, Latin America and Cuba, as well as an Argentinian bank, Costa Rican bonds, a Uruguayan chemical company and the Brazilian Submarine Telegraph Company. Early investors ranged from professional types such as lawyers, doctors and church ministers, to “ordinary working people” including a baker, a grocer, a house painter, a school mistress and a butler. Coincidentally, JPMorgan Global Growth and Income can also trace its history back to 1887, when The British Steamship Investment Trust Company was created. It was later renamed as Fleming Overseas, which JP Morgan Chase took over in 2000. Kyle Caldwell, Collectives Specialist at interactive investor, says there is a sense of poignancy and sadness about the decision: “Self-directed retail investors are becoming more and more influential on investment trust shareholder registers. In order to attract and retain these investors, pedestrian performance is becoming much harder for boards to tolerate. After all, boards want an investment trust’s assets to grow and have scale. If performance does not keep investors sweet – they are free to leave at any time. “Given this backdrop I am not surprised to see shareholders approve the merger of Scottish Investment Trust and JPMorgan Global Growth &amp; Income. It has been a prolonged period of underperformance for Scottish’s shareholders. Its ‘ugly duckling’ strategy of buying out-of-favour shares has not paid off over short and long time periods. “While the merger was not unexpected, and probably the right outcome, it is a sad end of an era. This is a trust with a strong retail shareholder base, which has been handed down through generations. In largely retail owned investment trusts, like Scottish, retail investors have a better chance of making their voices heard. President Joe Biden has welcomed the drop in jobless claims to a 52-year low, and flagged that tomorrow’s US inflation reading could remain high (it reached a 30-year high of 6.2% in October) E-scooters will be banned from the public transport network in London from Monday for safety reasons after a spate of battery fires. The ban will apply to privately owned e-scooters and e-unicycles even when folded or carried, after a number of incidents when the electric vehicles have combusted. Transport for London and fire services said such incidents, when defective lithium-ion batteries ruptured and caught fire, could lead to significant harm to life and premises, not least with toxic smoke being emitted, potentially in confined spaces. TfL said customers with privately owned e-scooters would not be permitted to enter any premises on its network, or travel on any of its services, including the tube, buses or trams. Privately owned e-scooters remain illegal for use on all UK public roads but many hundreds of thousands have been sold. Despite the rise in uncertainty around the Omicron variant, Deutsche Bank’s chief UK economist Sanjay Raja thinks the Bank of England will still raise interest rates next week, to 0.25%. But it’s a close call, he writes: Why are we sticking to our call? Fundamentally, news of the Omicron variant has changed little on the medium-term economic outlook. The labour market remains as tight as it has been in recent memory, in spite of the furlough scheme ending on 30 September. And inflation continues to outpace staff forecasts, despite a sizeable upward revision in the November Monetary Policy Report. Moreover, the potential disruption from Omicron may lead to even more inflationary pressures in the medium term, with supply chain bottlenecks and labour shortages/mismatches further exacerbated by rising restrictions, both domestically and globally. Risks to our view are finely balanced, however. Risk management considerations may lead the MPC to delay a rate hike, opting instead to wait for more information around the impact of Omicron on transmissions, hospitalisation, and vaccine efficacy. Reuters’ David Milliken flags that economist are expecting Omicron, and Plan B, to hit growth.... So as Victoria Scholar, Head of Investment at interactive investor, points out, a ‘no change’ looks more likely today: Wall Street has opened lower, despite the drop in US jobless claims to the lowest since 1969. The Dow Jones industrial average has dropped by 124 points, or 0.35%, in early trading to 35,630, having racked up strong gains earlier this week. Chemicals producer Dow Inc (-1.9%) is the top faller on the index of 30 large US companies, followed by aerospace firm Boeing (-1.8%) and construction equipment maker Caterpillar (-1.4%). Tech stocks are stronger, keeping the Nasdaq Composite flat. Back in the UK, people who send and receive parcels are to be better protected under proposed rules to improve how companies handle complaints amid a wave of problems with deliveries. With Christmas a fortnight away and tighter Covid rules making many more shoppers reliant on parcels, the regulator Ofcom is cracking down on the sector, saying that UK consumers “should be treated more fairly”. Ofcom plans to tighten up the rules on how firms deal with complaints, make it easier for people to contact companies and bring in better protections for disabled customers. It warned that if it did not see “substantial improvements” in customer service and complaints handling, then it would consider enforcement action or further, tougher regulation. Just in: The number of Americans filing new claims for unemployment support has hit the lower level in over 50 years. Just 184,000 ‘initial claims’ for jobless benefit were filed last week, on a seasonally adjusted basis, a drop of 43,000. That’s a new pandemic low, and indeed the lowest since September 1969. This indicates that US companies are continuing to hold onto their staff, as labor shortages push up earnings and leave companies with 11m vacancies to fill. However, if you don’t apply seasonal adjustments, there was actually a 63,680 increase in jobless claims, to 280,665. European stock markets are in the red today, as concerns over the severity of Omicron linger. Shares had rallied earlier this week, on hopes that the latest variant might give mild symptoms, despite looking to be more transmissible than Delta. But with Omicron’s impact still unproven, and new measures being introduced in England, investors are more cautious. The FTSE 100 index of UK-focused companies has dropped by 25 points, or 0.35%, away from three-week highs seen on Tuesday. The pan-European Stoxx 600 is down 0.25%, with Spain’s IBEX down 0.6%. Fawad Razaqzada, analyst at Think Markets, says stocks have lost momentum: With concerns about the ability of Omicron to cause serious illness still unproven, investors are likely to remain cautious when it comes to risk-taking. As we saw before, this should limit the upside for equities – and it has. After all, the spread of the disease is putting significant pressure again on health systems around the world, meaning more growth-chocking restrictions and lockdowns might be required. So far, however, the market seems to think that it will just be mild restrictions, which will cause minimal damage to the economy, and in any case calls for a pause in rate hikes or faster tapering. Bad news for crisp fans. Despite the improvement in availability of multipack crisps last week, the Walkers crisps shortage is set to extend deep into January, according to The Grocer. Shares in Evergrande jumped 4% in Hong Kong as investors anticipate intervention from the Beijing authorities after ratings agency Fitch declared that its overseas bonds are in default. Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, explains: The embattled property giant has been teetering on the brink of default for several months now with the latest missed payment deadline a sign that the company is perilously close to collapse. However the sense is that the Chinese authorities are standing by ready to stem any serious contagion and in fact there has already been some intervention from the central bank by injecting stimulus, from the local government and from Evergrande’s risk management committee including state members, which was set up to help eliminate future risks. The risks around Evergrande have been signposted to the market for several months now and although comparisons have been made to the collapse of Lehman Brothers, the Wall Street behemoth in 2008, Evergrande’s international exposure is a lot smaller. A series of joint statements were issued this week by China’s securities regulator, the banking and insurance regulator and the central bank, suggesting that the risk to the broader property sector could in fact be contained. A state-managed rescue would be the best-case scenario for Evergrande. However, the government has a difficult balance to strike. On the one hand, Beijing does not want to be seen as condoning the behaviour of a highly indebted company that has expanded at breakneck speed, given Beijing’s campaign to rein in corporate debt. On the other hand, Beijing will no doubt want to avert a systemic fallout in which Evergrande’s collapse endangers individual deposit holders, supplier businesses and China’s financial system. Online furnishings seller Made.com has slashed its revenue guidance, as it warned that supply chain disruptions and shipping delays would defer up to £45m of its revenue into the new year. The retailer said ongoing industry-wide disruptions were offsetting the impact of strong demand for its products, with extended factory closures in Vietnam, congestion in global ports and extended shipping times having already delayed deliveries to customers. Made.com said those disruptions had “worsened in recent months, negatively impacting the timing of stock intake”. More here: Uncertainty over Omicron, and the introduction of new restrictions in England, mean the Bank of England is less likely to raise interest rates next week, some experts say. Economists and investors believe the UK central bank is more inclined to leave borrowing costs at record lows of 0.1%, at its meeting on 16th December. Money market bets on a 15 basis point UK rate hike next week, to 0.25%, fell further to around 40% today. That’s down from 46% on Wednesday and nearly 70% at the beginning of last week, according to Refinitiv data reported by Reuters. Another measure of interest rate probabilities, based on interest rate swaps, suggests there’s only a 25% chance of a hike next week. Many in the City had expected a rate rise last month, so were surprised when the Monetary Policy Committee left borrowing costs on hold. Now, the first increase in Bank Rate since the pandemic could slip into 2022, despite inflation exceeding 4% and the labour market looking relatively strong since the furlough scheme ended. Martin Beck, chief economic advisor to the EY ITEM Club, he believes the MPC will likely hold fire on a rate rise next week: The MPC bucked market expectations in November by choosing not to raise the Bank Rate. But investors’ current prediction that the committee will not increase rates in the December meeting looks like a more reliable bet, and a view the EY ITEM Club shares. The new Omicron COVID-19 variant has complicated the MPC’s December decision, he explains: The immediate and direct effect of the new variant’s discovery – a fall in oil and other commodity prices – means the forces affecting inflation are no longer all pointing upwards, and the variant poses numerous other challenges for the economic recovery. New restrictions globally threaten to hold up supply chains even more, while consumers and businesses could reasonably be expected to become more cautious to spend. Granted, if the new variant does worsen supply bottlenecks, the result could be even stronger inflationary pressures. But, as is the case with the global forces which have pushed inflation up in recent months, tighter monetary policy would not address price pressures from renewed COVID disruption. If Omicron’s economic impact were to prove more significant than expected, an interest rate rise in December’s meeting might have to be quickly reversed. Raffi Boyadjian, lead investment analyst at XM, also believes rates could remain on hold until February 2022, due to the new measures announced last night. Whilst the new guidelines are nowhere near as strict as the recent restrictions imposed in many other European nations, the UK is coming from a place of near-zero Covid rules so there’s likely to be a mild hit to economic growth. More significantly, the Bank of England might be less confident to hike interest rates next week given the potentially weaker economic backdrop. Money markets have priced out the odds for a rate increase in December following yesterday’s announcement and are now looking at February for liftoff. This is also keeping the pound near Wednesday’s one-year low against the US dollar today, below $1.32. A Reuters poll of City economists, conducted this week, found that 25 thought Bank Rate would be left at 0.10% next week, while 21 predicted a rise to 0.25%. Last week, MPC member Michael Saunders, who voted for an interest rate hike last month, said he wanted more information about the impact of the new Omicron coronavirus variant before deciding how to vote this time. Gig economy companies operating in the European Union, such as Uber and Deliveroo, must ensure workers get the minimum wage, access to sick pay, holidays and other employment rights, unless they are genuinely independent contractors. The plans come as part of new laws to crack down on fake self-employment. Publishing long-awaited draft legislation on Thursday, the European Commission said the burden of proof on employment status would shift to companies, rather than the individuals that work for them. Until now, gig economy workers have had to go to court to prove they are employees, or risk being denied basic rights. Nicolas Schmit, EU commissioner for jobs and social rights, told the Guardian and other European newspapers that internet platforms “have used grey zones in our legislation [and] all possible ambiguities” to develop their business models, resulting in a “misclassification” of millions of workers. Here’s the full story: The City of London Corporation’s Policy Chair, Catherine McGuinness, has called on the government to set out a ‘clear roadmap’ back to normality in early 2022. McGuinness says the fresh restriction in England will be a disappointment to businesses in the Square Mile, which have suffered from the move to home working in the pandemic. “Christmas has been cancelled for many City shops, restaurants, pubs and other businesses that rely on footfall from workers in nearby offices. “Everyone should act responsibly, including by getting the vaccine and any booster as soon as possible, wearing masks and testing regularly. “We will urge City businesses, workers and residents to follow the new rules. “But we also ask the Government to set out a clear roadmap to normality early in the new year and base all decisions on data. “We need to find ways to live with the virus which allows the economy to prosper.” Britain’s crisps shortage may finally be easing, after weeks of disruption after an IT problem at Walkers. Just 1% of stores had run out of multipack crisps, when surveyed by Kantar between last Friday and this Monday, down from 4% a week earlier. Another 16% had short supplies of the snacks, down from 20% -- but still higher than crisp fans would like. Instead, Ibuprofen painkillers and frozen turkeys were in short supply, or missing, at 17% of stores. The number of people dining out across the UK has dropped to the lowest level since the reopening of indoor hospitality in May. The average number of seated diners at UK restaurants fell by 6 percentage points in the week to Monday 6th December, according to the Office for National Statistics, to 105% of levels seen that week in 2019 before the pandemic. That’s the lowest this figure has been since the week ending 17 May 2021, following a similar fall a week earlier when news of the Omicron variant broke. It’s a sign that some companies have cancelled Christmas parties since Omicron emerged, as Clive Watson, chairman of the City Pub Group, reported this morning. Back in August, diner numbers were over 30% higher than in 2019 as people flocked back to restaurants and pubs, with more people holidaying in the UK. This recovery has since faded, even before the move to Plan B in England. Takings at many Pret A Manger stores fell last week - perhaps a sign that some office workers had returned to home working, and aren’t picking up their usual lunchtime sandwiches? In today’s report on the UK economy, the ONS says: Transactions at Pret A Manger stores in the week ending 2 December 2021 fell in 8 of the 10 locations; they remained lowest when compared with their January averages in London airport and London city stores at 76% and 85%, respectively. Instead, spending on credit and debit cards has surged to their highest since before the first lockdown, jumping by 15 percentage points in the week to 2nd December. Spending was boosted by Black Friday and the rush to buy Christmas presents early. It could also show that people are moving their spending away from services and back to goods, points out Reuters’ Andy Bruce: Sterling is becalmed near its lowest level in a year against the dollar today, with the move to Plan B clouding the outlook for the UK economy. The pound is trading below $1.32, having hit $1.3165 yesterday for the first time since December 2020 when news of new pandemic restrictions broke. Market commentator Bill Blain says the UK’s stalling outlook and “political shenanigans” are weighing on sterling. Working from Home has very clear economic implications – and kills the December party season. Consequences, consequences. More and more the UK feels like a struggling health service with a inefficient nation attached. It’s not a good look. British transport company FirstGroup has reported that passenger growth at its buses has slipped in recent weeks, with the pandemic still overshadowing its recovery. In its half-year report, FirstGroup told shareholders that: There is some evidence of a slowdown in the rate of recovery recently, as the travel guidance and activity levels in Scotland and Wales and in many education settings across the UK remain somewhat restricted in light of the pandemic. Passenger volumes at its First Bus operations rose to 71% of its 2019 levels on average in recent weeks. FirstGroup, which sold the bulk of its North American transport business earlier this year, said it had managed a resilient financial performance, with passenger revenues and statutory operating profits higher. But it left its financial expectations for this year unchanged, “recognising there is uncertainty around the pace of recovery in light of the evolving circumstances of the pandemic”. Shares in hospitality groups have dropped this morning, as investors anticipate that plan B restrictions will hurt the sector. Restaurant Group, which runs the Wagamama, Frankie &amp; Benny’s and Chiquito chains, are the biggest faller on the FTSE 250 index of mid-sized firms, down almost 4%. Cinema operator Cineworld are down 2.75%. On the larger FTSE 100 index, catering group Compass are down 1.2%, while Premier Inns owner Whitbread has lost 1.5%. Airlines groups are also weaker, with British Airways parent company IAG dropping by 2.6% , and budget rivals easyJet (-2.3%) and Wizz Air (-2%) also lower. The wider market has ticked marginally higher, with the FTSE 100 up 0.1% as investors continue to hope that the Omicron variant will prove to be mild.... Small businesses across England are concerned that the move to plan B will hurt their recoveries. Eddie Young, a magician at Burton upon Trent-based Misterey Entertainment, says he already seen booking cancelled. “The nightmares are starting all over again. I am starting to get cancellations already. This will likely be the final nail in the coffin for many small businesses.” Denise Yeats, director of London-based Denise Yeats Creative Event Production, fears clients will be put off from holding events: “To say that my heart has sunk is an understatement. As an events specialist, my business was only just struggling to get back on its feet. I fear these new guidelines will only enhance the uncertainty of my clients to hold events. I really don’t know how much longer my business can survive.” And in Market Harborough, Jo Ferreday of events company Sheer Edge fears that restrictions will run into next year: “The majority of my income is based on live and in-person events so the move to Plan B has been a real blow, especially as there was no indication about how long these new restrictions will be in place. 2022 has a huge shadow of uncertainty over it.” City centre pubs, and those which rely on trade from office workers, will be particularly hit by the move to home working in England from Monday (where possible) again. It will also hurt brewers, who would have been hoping for strong sales this Christmas after the disruption a year ago. Emma McClarkin, chief executive of the British Beer &amp; Pub Association, warns it will threaten the viability of pubs to keep running -- echoing Clive Watson’s concerns this morning. “Make no mistake, this is a huge blow for our sector as it further undermines consumer confidence and is devastating for pubs based near offices and in town centres,” “The festive period is crucial to the recovery of our sector, so these restrictions could not have come at a more important trading time. They threaten the viability of pubs who will lose vital revenue over the Christmas period and so the Government will need to look at providing support. “We are pleased though that covid-passports are not applicable to the vast majority of pubs, as Government has recognised this would have been totally unworkable. We still need clarifications and to see the detail on other aspects – including on facemasks. England’s move to Plan B risks ‘devastating’ hospitality firms at a vital time of the year, warns Kate Nicholls, the chief executive of UKHospitality. She says that firms need full business rates relief, grants, rent protection and extended VAT cuts to cushion the impact. “While the government clearly acknowledges that hospitality is safe and can continue to host celebrations in the lead up to Christmas, the measures announced today will significantly impact consumer confidence and be particularly devastating to city and town centre venues. As such, they risk devastating the hospitality sector amid its most important time of the year. We therefore desperately need support if we are to survive this latest set of restrictions and urge the government to stand behind our industry. That means full business rates relief, grants, rent protection and extended VAT reductions. Anything less would prove catastrophic.” Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. UK hospitality businesses are urging the government to provide fresh emergency financial support as England moves to Covid Plan B, amid fears of an exponential rise in the Omicron variant. Otherwise, they say, many firms risk running out of cash and collapsing, if they miss out on the crucial boost from Christmas trading. Last night’s announcement that people must work from home where possible from Monday and that face masks would be a legal requirement in most public indoor areas such as theatres and cinemas from Friday, is a bruising blow to pubs and restaurants - even though there will be exemptions for eating and drinking in hospitality venues. Vaccine passports will be needed to attend large, potentially crowded venues such as nightclubs from next week -- which will remain open. Clive Watson, chairman of the City Pub Group, says there had already been a ‘meaningful drop-off’ in office party bookings from about 10 days ago, after the first Omicron travel restrictions were announced. He told Radio 4’s Today Programme that: There’s definitely been a drop-off in those types of bookings. Going forward, after yesterday’s announcement that’s only going to accelerate. The government has to appreciate that Christmas is a crucial time for hospitality, Watson says. A lot of businesses, especially late-night venues and restaurants, probably make a third of their profit in December, he explains. That tides them through the quieter January and February. If they can’t trade as normal, they can’t build up the cash reserves they need. It’s more than a body blow, insists Watson, whose firm owns 45 pubs across England and Wales. It’s almost... taking off the life support machine yet again. Watson warns that existing support, such as lower VAT rate for hospitality and business rates relief, is not enough. His message to government: Please, please, give us that enhanced state aid...to tide us over to those leaner months in January and February Otherwise, a lot of businesses in our sector will run out of cash. The Omicron variant had already dented consumer confidence, and sectors of the economy which rely on face-to-face interactions and spending by office workers now face a much less cheery Christmas. Other business groups have also warned that the new restrictions will have a serious impact on hospitality firms, so taxpayer help will be needed. There’s also understandable unhappiness that the changes are coming in with such little notice. Baroness Ruby McGregor-Smith, president of the British Chambers of Commerce, warned that last night’s announcement will damage business confidence, saying: “We have been calling on the UK government for several months to set out what contingency plans for business would look like if further restrictions were needed this winter. “Yet again, firms are now being asked to make changes at the very last minute. Restrictions will also impact on consumer behaviour with knock-on effects which could risk the fragile recovery, order books and revenues.” Unions fear a rise in unemployment unless the furlough scheme, which ended in September, is reactivated. Frances O’Grady, general secretary of the TUC, said: “Requiring people to work from home over the busy Christmas period will hit jobs – unless ministers bring back furlough. Cleaners, receptionists, conference and banqueting staff and hospitality and retail workers will be short of work if people don’t come into offices”. The agenda 7am: Germany’s balance of trade for October 9.30am GMT: Real-time indicators of economic activity and social change in the UK are published 1.30pm GMT: US weekly jobless figuresSienna Miller has said the Sun forced her to make decisions “about my own body that I have to live with every single day” after the newspaper found out she was in the early stages of pregnancy. The actor said the then Sun editor Rebekah Brooks, now the chief executive of Rupert Murdoch’s News UK business, phoned her agent in 2005 to discuss the pregnancy before the actor had had the opportunity to discuss it with close friends and family. Miller, who ultimately did not have the baby, believes a Sun reporter illegally obtained her private medical information from a “blagger” and said Brooks “knew about my pregnancy in the most vulnerable moment of my life”. Speaking outside the high court, Miller added: “It is a part of my case that [Brooks] assured those that represent me that she would not print that information. And it is part of my case that she, the Sun, did print that information.” The actor was speaking after accepting a substantial settlement from Murdoch’s company News Group Newspapers. That meant her claims of illegal activity at the Sun will not go to a full trial, which could have ruled on their veracity. The settlement was made on the basis that there was no admission of illegal activity or phone hacking at the Sun. Brooks was separately found not guilty of phone hacking at a criminal trial in 2014. Miller said she had been desperate to take the Sun to trial, but – because News Group had made her a substantial financial offer to settle the case – she could have faced a multimillion-pound legal bill if she had chosen to do so. “It was not my choice to be standing here; I wanted to go to trial. I wanted to expose the criminality that runs through the heart of this corporation. A criminality demonstrated clearly and irrevocably by the evidence which I have seen. I wanted to share News Group’s secrets just as they have shared mine. “Unfortunately, that legal recourse is not available to me or to anyone who does not have countless millions of pounds to spend on the pursuit of justice. Such is our world. Until someone comes along who can confront the Murdochs’ endless means, all that I have left are these words. And they are the truth.” Miller’s settlement statement in court made a series of claims about the behaviour of Nick Parker, who remains a senior Sun journalist, based on documents obtained during the legal discovery process. Miller believes her private medical records were obtained by Parker through a blagger named Christine Hart, who issued an invoice to Parker for “Sienns [sic] Miller Pregnant research”. Parker’s personal expenses also used references such as “SIENNA MILLER PREGNANCY RIDDLE” and “DINNER WITH TRACER (WHO CONFIRMED SIENNA WAS PREGNANT)”. Miller also repeated her belief that her friends and family were subject to “the prolonged, substantial and targeted voicemail interception and unlawful information-gathering activities carried out by journalists at the Sun”. News Group has always maintained that while phone hacking was rife at the News of the World during the 2000s, no illegal activity took place at its sister newspaper during the era when Brooks was editor of the daily tabloid. Despite this, the company has repeatedly paid large sums to people who have made allegations of illegality at the Sun. These include Paul Gascoigne, who this week settled a claim against the Sun alongside Miller. The former England footballer said the Sun’s reporting of personal medical information had a “devastating and debilitating impact on my mental health and wellbeing”. Speculation is now turning to Prince Harry’s ongoing phone-hacking case against the publisher of the Sun and whether he would be willing to potentially risk a major legal bill to force the case to trial. Outside court, Sienna Miller said she would happily give evidence in any future trial: “In these proceedings, I learned first hand the extents to which that newspaper and this corporation will go to protect those at the top from being exposed and facing the consequences of their actions. “They very nearly ruined my life. I have certainly seen how they have ruined the lives of others. Their behaviour shattered me, damaged my reputation at times beyond repair, and caused me to accuse my family and friends of selling information that catapulted me into a state of intense paranoia and fear. “I stand here in fellowship with the untold lives that have been destroyed by the Sun and News International.”Kehinde Wiley, the official portraitist of former president Barack Obama, has also made paintings of Grandmaster Flash, Ice-T and Michael Jackson, as well as various sports stars, not to mention fellow artists Lynette Yiadom-Boakye, Yinka Shonibare and Kerry James Marshall. He has reworked painters as diverse as Goya, Jacques-Louis David, Rembrandt and Gainsborough. He’s a complex and erudite artist. At the National Gallery, Wiley fills the Sunley Room with five paintings and a six-channel digital film. For his film, Prelude, Kehinde “cast” a group of black Londoners whom he met in Soho, taking them to the north of Norway. Shooting began just as the Covid-19 pandemic struck. The film is largely improvised, and Wiley has his cast walking, running and trudging through snow, surrounded by picturesque fjords and lowering mountains. In one of the most memorable passages of this wraparound six-channel digital film, he has his cast smile into the camera, each holding the pose for as long as possible. They smile and the smiles become grimaces as the cold bites. A tear wells in an eye. Expressions grow rigid. Pleasure and larkishness become fortitude and resistance – and a game to see who’ll break or turn away from the wind. But no one does. In another scene, two young men stand stripped to the waist, black bodies and white jeans against the snow. Wiley thinks of the whiteness of the snow as a kind of cage. The metaphor is clear. One young man’s fingers flail in mute expression against the cold. We watch two young women playing pat-a-cake, posing with their braided hair plaited together. A lone older man in a fur coat struggles uphill. Figures are smeared by blizzard and showers of embers as the protagonists build a fire. The score, by cellist and composer Niles Luther, is both romantic and wearying, filled with stirring emotional hooks. Scenes are intercut with readings: the 1836 essay Nature by Ralph Waldo Emerson, from Thoreau’s Walden and Wordsworth’s 1804 Ode: Intimations of Immortality. Wiley wants us to think about black aspiration in a white culture, about our different relationships to nature – and about being, living and dying in the world. It’s an ambitious and necessary project but, in this film, Wiley’s project feels somehow overburdened, a collection of overly long scenes and obtuse images stalled in the snow. While Prelude was largely improvised, Wiley’s paintings are all calculation and premeditation. Two paintings re-work German Romantic painter Caspar David Friedrich. Both are hugely enlarged from Friedrich’s 19th-century originals. Taking Friedrich’s 1818 the Wanderer Above the Sea of Fog, Wiley replaces the lone climber, who we see from behind gazing over the fog-bound mountains from his rocky vantage point, with Babacar Mané, a young black man from Dakar in Senegal, his hair in cornrows, a goatee on his chin. This is not a spot-the-difference game, though. Although Wiley is a fastidious copyist, the lighting has been tweaked, the figure rotated a tad. He carries two sticks, instead of Friedrich’s one. It is as if the lighting has been turned up, the colour intensified. Like Friedrich’s wanderer, we can’t know what the young climber is thinking. Is he in awe of the 19th-century sublime, steeling himself against the gothic awfulness of the mountains and the fog? Has Friedrich’s echo of the Napoleonic war become the low rumble of the 20th century (when the Nazis appropriated Friedrich for their own ends), or the longer histories of peoples and landscapes, belonging and exclusion? We can’t know. Wiley’s second take on Friedrich reworks the artist’s 1818 Chalk Cliffs on Rügen. Friedrich’s family have been replaced by two young men, playing a clapping game against the backdrop of Friedrich’s precipitous chalk cleft on the southern shore of the Baltic. Two sub-Saharan men transposed into a northern landscape, they occupy the space ambiguously, and in a way Wiley may not exactly intend. This is also the case of the three seascapes here, the people in their decrepit, dangerous vessels on the turbulent swells. Although the individual figures, their crafts, the seas and the weather are all rendered accurately enough, I never lose the sense that the different elements have all been slotted together. Everything is a bit illustrational. Wiley is not Géricault, Winslow Homer or Friedrich. His is an art of quotation, reworking history from a position that is totally contemporary, to make points about what one catalogue essay calls “the historical violence that lay at the heart of the sublime painting tradition”. You can only look at the past from the present. Technically, Wiley’s paintings are as aware of CGI and Photoshop, movies and advertising as they are of the techniques of the artists of previous centuries. Wiley has a studio of painters in Beijing to assist in the production of his works, and the figures in the paintings are frequently Photoshop-ed into the compositions. A painter of ambitious – and audacious pictorial machines, with all their literary and art-historical quotations and subtexts – there is something discernibly mechanical about Wiley’s paintings. Machines make stuff: Wiley’s generate meanings. He is a black artist not, like Homer, dramatising the lives of herring- or cod-fishermen on the Grand Banks of Newfoundland, but recasting these mariners as refugees. You can’t but think of people from Cuba or Haiti crossing to Florida, and the desperate migrants attempting to cross the Mediterranean and the Channel. While Théodore Géricault’s 1818-19 Raft of the Medusa was a response to a real disaster, Wiley’s paintings are too wedded to their art historical sources to have as much bite, or sense of the tragic, as news footage. They’re as much like posters taken from movie stills as paintings revisited: too artificial, too theatrical, too stiff to be believable. Kehinde Wiley: The Prelude is at the National Gallery, London, until 18 April 2022.Boris Johnson could face sanctions involving suspension from the House of Commons as MPs piled pressure on the standards commissioner to investigate spending on his flat in the wake of a serious censure by the Electoral Commission. A review into government staff parties in defiance of Covid rules has been widened to look at more events, including one that Boris Johnson is believed to have attended. The price of a pint could rise by about 10p as a result of the latest Covid restrictions, according to the chairman of the City Pub Group who said Christmas party cancellations had risen since the move to plan B was announced yesterday. Three UK cabinet ministers have gone into isolation after being in close contact with the Australian deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, who later tested positive for Covid. GPs have begun offering booster vaccines to patients under 40 against official guidance. Boris Johnson has picked the prominent Brexit campaigner Gisela Stuart for a senior role in charge of regulating appointments to the civil service. The charity regulator should stay as far as possible out of debates about “wokeness”, the government’s preferred candidate to head the watchdog has told MPs, saying he does not believe charities are too political. EU citizens and other non-Irish or non-British nationals who cross the border from the republic of Ireland into Northern Ireland will have to get pre-clearance under new rules being proposed by the UK government. As Lisa O’Carroll reports, they will require a US-style waiver known as an Electronic Travel Authorisation (ETA) to cross the border as part of the new post-Brexit immigration nationality and borders bill. The scheme is expected to come into force in 2025 but has already been denounced as “unworkable” on the Irish border, where thousands of people commute in both directions for schools, work and shopping. Boris Johnson has affirmed that voters have the right to throw him out. He made the argument in an online speech for Summit for Democracy hosted by the US president, Joe Biden. In his speech Johnson said: Out of Athens more than 2,500 years ago, there came a simple and beautiful idea: that people are neither passive nor powerless, but free citizens with a right to participate in the governance of their country. The idea of democracy has gathered force down the centuries, inspiring billions across the world, and converging on the principles we all share. We believe that our peoples are entitled to elect and remove their governments through the ballot box, overseen by independent courts and a free media. We’re only here because our electorates have, at least for the time being, raised us to positions of responsibility for their affairs - but they have every right to cast us down and out again, and we would not wish it any other way. The Scottish government says climate change, tackling inequalities, the economy and public services are at the heart of its budget for 2022-23. In its news summary it says: Record levels of funding will help to restore public services – including a record £18bn for health and social care – and to respond to the pressures created by the pandemic. Significantly, this budget will support the next steps in the single greatest public health reform since the establishment of the NHS – the creation of a new National Care Service. The budget funds the Scottish government’s priority of tackling child poverty and inequality by targeting over £4 billion in social security payments. This includes £197 million to double the game-changing Scottish child payment from April 2022, and extend it to under 16’s by the end of 2022, helping to lift an estimated 40,000 children out of poverty in 2023-2024. It prioritises a green recovery and economic transformation by investing at least £2bn in infrastructure initiatives that will support green jobs and accelerate efforts to become a net-zero economy, helping to end Scotland’s contribution to climate change and ensure no-one and no region is left behind as a result. Shoppers would be allowed to remove their face coverings in supermarkets if they walked around the store singing, PA Media reports. PA says: Under plan B, which was enacted by the prime minister yesterday, face coverings will become compulsory in most public indoor venues in England from tomorrow, including cinemas, theatres and places of worship, but not gyms, bars or restaurants. Masks are already required on public transport and in shops. Boris Johnson said yesterday that there was an exemption for singing. This was mainly seen as being applicable to places of worship where a mask should be worn during the service but could be removed to sing carols or hymns. But officials confirmed today this would also be applicable to other indoor settings. Asked whether a shopper could therefore remove their mask in Tesco if they were singing, it was confirmed that would be within the rules, as would removing the mask to sing in a theatre. But officials stressed there needed to be a “reasonable excuse” so singing in the supermarket would be pushing the limits of the law. The consultation on legislation to ban conversion therapy will be extended by another eight weeks, the government has announced. Mike Freer, the equalities minister, said the extension was “to ensure that the full range of opinions are represented, and that everyone who wants to has a chance to comment on our proposals”. Pressure for an extension has come from campaigners particularly on the right, and from the Telegraph, who have argued that the proposals as currently set out could inhibit clinicians who question a person’s decision to identify as transgender. Three women have been fined for attending gatherings in breach of coronavirus rules on the same day as the Christmas party at Downing Street last year, PA Media reports. PA says: The Metropolitan police has said officers will not investigate the 18 December event, where staff and aides are said to have drunk together, eaten cheese and swapped secret Santa presents. But prosecutions for breaches of Covid-19 regulations at Westminster magistrates court last week included three women convicted over gatherings on the same day as the alleged festive bash, according to court records first reported by the Evening Standard. Ami Goto, 23, from Marylebone, and Ebru Sen, 26, from Sittingbourne in Kent, were each fined £1,100 plus £210 costs for a gathering of two or more people in a flat in Holborn when London was under Tier 3 restrictions. Emilia Petruta-Cristea, 24, was also fined £1,100 and ordered to pay £210 costs over a gathering at her home in Wanstead. The cases were dealt with behind closed doors by a magistrate sitting under the single justice procedure. GPs have begun offering booster vaccines to patients under 40 against official NHS guidance, my colleague Andrew Gregory reports. Covid-19 case rates in London, eastern England and the south-east have climbed to their highest level since the start of the year, PA Media reports. PA says: A total of 648.5 new cases per 100,000 people were recorded in the south-east in the week to 5 December, the highest rate for the region since the week to 3 January. Eastern England is at 552.4 cases per 100,000, the highest since the week to 10 January, while London’s rate stands at 461.1, the highest since the week ending 17 January. The south-east has recorded the highest regional rate in England in the three most recent weeks, suggesting it is one of the main areas of the UK driving the current spike in cases. The figures, from the Health Security Agency, show rates are rising in all regions along with most age groups. There is a link to the new UKHSA Covid surveillance report here. The UK Health Security Agency has said there are now 817 confirmed cases of Omicron in the UK. That is an increase of 249 - or 44% - from yesterday. Sir Ernest Ryder, a former appeal court judge, will lead a review of the House of Commons standards system in the wake of the Owen Paterson row, the Commons standards committee has announced. According to the committee, Ryder will consider whether the current system for dealing with misconduct allegations against MP is compatible with fairness and natural justice, including “whether greater clarity can be achieved about the roles of the [parliamentary commissioner for standards] and the committee, and setting out potential options for formalising appeal or introducing additional elements of appeal into the system”. The UK has recorded 50,867 new coronavirus cases, and 148 further deaths, according to today’s update to the government’s dashboard. The total number of new cases over the past seven days is up 8% on the total for the previous week. Deaths are up 0.7% week on week. Boris Johnson has picked the prominent Brexit campaigner Gisela Stuart for a senior role in charge of regulating appointments to the civil service, my colleague Aubrey Allegretti reports. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, has written to Kathryn Stone, the parliamentary commissioner for standards, saying the latest revelations about Boris Johnson and the refurbishment of his Downing Street flat strengthened the case for a standards investigation. Here’s an extract from the letter. Revelations in the Electoral Commission’s report call into question the conduct of the prime minister in relation to the ministerial code. It is clear that the prime minister misled the public, along with the independent adviser, when he told Lord Geidt during his investigation that he was unaware of the Lord Brownlow donations until February 2021. Today’s investigation report reveals that the prime minister messaged Lord Brownlow via WhatsApp on 29 November 2020, asking him to authorise more money towards the refurbishment works on the residence. This shows that the prime minister is in flagrant breach of both the members’ code of conduct and the ministerial code. The ministerial code clearly states: ‘Ministers should be as open as possible with parliament and the public’. This has not happened. The members’ code of conduct incorporates the seven ‘Nolan principles’ for standards of public life: selflessness, integrity, objectivity, accountability, openness, honesty and leadership. The opposition parties are today accusing Boris Johnson of lying to Lord Geidt, his independent adviser on ministerial standards, over what he knew about the funding for the expensive refurbishment of his Downing Street flat. No 10 rejects that claim and says Johnson has not lied to Geidt, or the public, about this. (See 1.03pm.) The evidence may not be 100% conclusive, but the new version of the story that has emerged is different from the one published by Lord Geidt. In the report published in May Geidt clears Johnson of the charge of not properly registering the donations that funded the flat refurbishment. He says Johnson did not know that Lord Brownlow, a Tory donor, had paid the money personally until media reports emerged, in February 2021 Johnson had asked Brownlow in June 2020 to chair a trust that would raise money to fund work on the private residence at Downing residence. But this idea was subsequently unviable for legal reasons. Geidt says: For the credibility of this inquiry, I have tested the assertions of Lord Brownlow and the relevant political and government officials that at no point in the eight months until late February 2021, as media reports were emerging, was the prime minister made aware of either the fact or the method of the costs of refurbishing the apartment having been paid. I have spoken to these individuals in person; they have confirmed to me that these assertions are correct. In particular, Lord Brownlow behaved in a confidential manner consistent with his own experience of blind trusts. I have also spoken in similar terms to the prime minister who confirms that he knew nothing about such payments until immediately prior to media reports in February 2021. Geidt’s main complaint about Johnson is that he seemed remarkably blasé about who was paying for the work. Geidt says: The prime minister – unwisely, in my view – allowed the refurbishment of the apartment at No 11 Downing Street to proceed without more rigorous regard for how this would be funded ... Under normal circumstances, a prime minister might reasonably be expected to be curious about the arrangements, and especially the financial arrangements that led to the refurbishment of his apartment at Downing Street. In the middle of a pandemic, the current prime minister simply accepted that the Trust would be capable of satisfactorily resolving the situation without further interrogation. But the Electoral Commission report out today suggests that Johnson was much more involved than Geidt realises. It says that on 29 November 2020 Johnson messaged Brownlow via WhatsApp to ask if more work on the flat could go ahead. Lord Brownlow via WhatsApp asking him to authorise further, at that stage unspecified, refurbishment works on the residence. Lord Brownlow agreed to do so, and also explained that the proposed trust had not yet been set up but that he knew where the funding was coming from. The Electoral Commission report also said that Brownlow told a senior Tory official on 30 November he would be paying the money himself, and that on 6 December 2020 he told the PM he had approved further works. Geidt did not seem to be aware of 29 November WhatsApp messages and No 10 would not say today if he had been shown them. In response to claims that the new evidence showed the PM lied to Geidt, No 10 said that Johnson knew that Brownlow was chair of the trust funding the refurbishment - but that he did not know Brownlow was putting up the money himself. When a journalist put it to him that the WhatsApp message implied Johnson knew “exactly what was going on”, the PM’s spokesman said: He was not aware of the details of the underlying donor. That’s what Lord Geidt means ... As you can see, Lord Brownlow did not make a decision about personally covering costs until after that [conversation]. When it was put to him that, given Brownlow told the PM on 29 November that he knew “where the funding was coming from”, it seems strange that the PM did not ask from where, the spokesman replied: Lord Brownlow was chair of the blind trust, and acted in accordance with his experience of managing blind trusts in that way. The prime minister’s discussions with Lord Brownlow were done without him knowing the underlying donor. There is no hard evidence that on 29 November Brownlow did say that he would be paying the bill personally, and so in that respect the Downing Street account holds up - although to many it may stretch credulity. But the very fact that this WhatsApp conversation took place does contradict the claim in the Geidt report that Johnson “knew nothing about such payments until immediately prior to media reports in February 2021”. At the very least it is clear Geidt was not told the full story. Here are the main points from the Downing Street lobby briefing not related to the Electoral Commission report. The PM’s spokesman dismissed reports that, when Boris Johnson talked at the press conference last night about having a “national debate” about how to move beyond restrictions as a way of managing Covid, he was not floating the idea of mandatory vaccination. His comments have been taken in this way because it was not clear exactly what he meant. But the spokesman said: I think he was making a broader point on the intention to keep developing further mitigations against coronavirus and any subsequent mutations, be that polyvalent vaccinations or further therapeutics, like the antivirals that we’re rolling out. We recognise how challenging this is, and disheartening for the public to see us having to introduce further restrictions, albeit at a relatively limited level. And so we will do everything possible to continue to be at the cutting edge of this work. The spokesman also said Johnson does not want to see “a society and culture where we force people to get vaccinated”. No 10 has confirmed that, under the new Covid pass system, lateral flow tests can be used to show someone is Covid-free, even if they are taken at home. As PA Media reports: There will be no fine for anyone faking a coronavirus test result but there would be fines for businesses who did not check Covid passes properly, starting at £1,000 - halved if paid within 14 days - rising to £2,000, £4,000, then £10,000 for subsequent offences. There would also be penalties for people who provide fake Covid passes. A text message or email from the NHS could also be used to prove Covid-19 status, as well as the official Covid pass. The spokesman said that so far the public had been taking it “seriously and being responsible” with this method of testing. The new Covid measures announced last night will be reviewed on 5 January, and the legislation will last until 25 January, No 10 said. If they need to be extended, there will be a fresh vote. The spokesman said, if the restrictions could be removed before 25 January, they would be. He said: The PM’s message to all MPs would be the very moment we get any information on characteristics that change that picture for the better then we would, of course, act and remove at the very earliest possible opportunity. The spokesman said there would be “severe” consequences for the NHS without the new measures announced last night. Asked if he had a message for Tory MPs planning to vote against them, he said: I’m not going to comment on decisions or motivations when MPs are voting, that wouldn’t be for me. But I simply would make the point that we do know, and the advice that we have received, is without action - given the incredibly fast growth rate of this variant - the consequences, in terms of hospitalisations and deaths, could be severe. Given we know that boosters do provide a level of protection - and potentially a significant level of protection - it is only responsible to provide that extra time to get more people protected. The spokesman said Johnson would be spending more time with his family following the birth of his new baby - but he stopped short of saying the PM would be taking paternity leave. The spokesman said the PM had a “unique role” and that he had to balance his family role with leading the country. Jacob Rees-Mogg has defended making a joke about Christmas parties and Covid regulations amid calls for him to resign. As PA Media reports, the Commons leader was filmed recently at a thinktank reception saying he hoped the event he was attending would not be “investigated by the police in a year’s time” - a reference to the No 10 partying controversy. At business questions earlier, the shadow Commons leader, Thangam Debbonaire, said it is a “very bad look indeed for a group of male politicians to let a female staffer take the rap”, and asked Rees-Mogg if he would apologise for making a joke about parties. Debbonaire said that judging by Rees-Mogg’s comments in a video of him speaking at an Institute of Economic Affairs event, “it does rather seem that he also thinks it’s all been a bit of a joke”. She went on: Would he also agree that it really is a very bad look indeed for a group of male politicians to let a female staffer take the rap for the mess? She laughed, he laughed. She’s apologised and resigned. What’s he going to do? Rees-Mogg said: What I was saying was how nice it was to be free of restrictions so that we can have parties this year. That was what I was being pleased about, as opposed, in comparison to last year. And this has got better because of what the government has done. Richard Burgon (Lab) said Rees-Mogg should resign. He told the minister: The prime minister’s former spokesperson has resigned after being caught on video laughing and joking about a rule-breaking Downing Street party. The leader of the house also this week has been caught on video laughing and joking about rule-breaking whilst giving a speech at a lectern. She resigned. Surely the leader of the house should resign too, or isn’t it another case of ministers in this government believing it’s one rule for them and another rule for everyone else? Paul Givan, the DUP first minister of Northern Ireland, and Michelle O’Neill, the Sinn Féin deputy first minister, have both said the No 10 Christmas party controversy has damaged the public health message in Northern Ireland. On a joint visit to a vaccination centre in Lisburn, Givan said: I think it has done damage and what I would say to people is ‘look beyond the political drama of what’s going on at Downing Street’. And O’Neill said: There’s no doubt that it undermines the public health message but what we’re focused on here today is just to drive home that message that what we have in place here (in terms of restrictions) is enough if two things happen - if we have strong enforcement and if the public adhere. Nicola Sturgeon has urged the public to continue their compliance with Covid protections regardless of their anger over the Downing Street Christmas party row. Sturgeon was taking questions at FMQs ahead of the Scottish budget statement later this afternoon, and after Douglas Ross distanced himself from Boris Johnson, saying he should resign if he had misled the Commons. She said: People can be angry at politicians, but it is important that people comply with these protections for their own safety, for the safety of loved ones and for the country as a whole. She added that the Omicron variant posed “a very serious challenge” and that she would be briefing other party leaders on its nature and scale later this afternoon. It’s rapidly spreading, it poses a real difficulty for us, but one of the ways in which we can help slow transmission is to comply with all these protections and I would appeal to people across the country to do so. The Downing Street lobby briefing has just ended. It was particularly long because there were extensive questions on Covid and on the No 10 flat refurbishment. On the latter, Downing Street does not accept that Boris Johnson lied to Lord Geidt, the independent adviser on ministers’ interests (sometimes referred to as the independent adviser on ministerial standards), about the flat refurbishment. In fact, the spokesman specifically rejected the charge. Asked to explain the discrepancy between the Geidt report (pdf), which says Johnson told him he did not know Lord Brownlow had paid the flat refurbishment bills until “immediately prior to media reports in February 2021”, and the Electoral Commission report, which said that on 29 November 2020 Johnson messaged Brownlow via WhatsApp “asking him to authorise further, at that stage unspecified, refurbishment works”, the spokesman implied the WhatsApp conversation did not cover the full detail of how the money was being paid, and that this was why lying was not involved. The spokesman said: As as set out Lord Geidt’s report, the prime minister was not aware of the details of the underlying donor until immediately prior to media reports in February 2020, when he immediately saw the necessary advice about his interests, and as a consequence settled the amount himself. That was on 8 March. Lord Brownlow was appointed by the PM as chair of the trust on 23 June and Lord Geidt’s report notes that Lord Brownlow behaved in a confidential manner, consistent with his own experience with blind trusts. And despite the prime minister and Lord Brownlow having some limited contact during the following three months, the record shows no evidence that the prime minister had been informed by Lord Brownlow that he had personally settled the total costs. As you’ve seen, the Electoral Commission report shows Lord Brownlow’s decision to cover the refurbishment costs personally came a day after his message to the prime minister. Asked specifically if the PM had lied to Lord Geidt, the spokesman said: “No.” He also said that Johnson had not lied to the public about this affair. I will post more from the briefing soon. Dominic Cummings, the PM’s former chief adviser, has joined those accusing Boris Johnson of lying to Lord Geidt over the funding of the Downing Street refurbishment. Cummings has repeatedly accused Johnson of flouting the law over this issue, and he has implied before that this is one of the scandals most likely to bring Johnson down. Tom Bradby, the ITV presenter and former political editor, claims that Lord Geidt, the independent adviser on ministers’ interests, could bring down the PM if declares publicly that he has been lied to by Boris Johnson. The SNP has also accused Boris Johnson of lying to Lord Geidt, the independent adviser on ministers’ interests, in the light of the new evidence today from the Electoral Commission. (See 11.02am.) Ian Blackford, the SNP leader at Westminister, said: Not only did [Johnson] breach electoral law – he lied about it too. In May he told Lord Geidt that he did not know who was behind plans to refurbish the flat until Feb 2021 – but the Electoral Commission has said Boris Johnson contacted Lord Brownlow in November 2020 asking for more cash for the refurbishment. Boris Johnson lies as easily as he breathes. Michael Ellis, the paymaster general and Cabinet Office minister, faced a barrage of criticism from opposition MPs when he was responding to the UQ earlier about the inquiry into the Downing Street parties. Here are some more points and quotes from the exchanges. Ellis refused to say who the Downing Street person was who gave Boris Johnson an assurance that no rules were broken at the No 10 events. At PMQs Johnson said he had had been “repeatedly assured ... that there was no party and that no Covid rules were broken”. The Conservative MP Peter Bone said he wanted to know who this person was, but Ellis said he did not have an answer. Ellis said that Simon Case, the cabinet secretary, did not attend any of the parties (Ellis called them gatherings) that he will be investigating. Yesterday Downing Street was not able to give this assurance. Ellis insisted more than once that Johnson was a man “of honour and integrity”. He said he could say this because he had known the PM for many years. The Conservative MP Desmond Swayne said it would be possible for a PM not to know about a party in Downing Street. He said: Would it be helpful if there were a greater understanding of the fact that Number 10 is not a house, it is a front door behind which there is a suit of modern offices and meeting rooms, across three floors and it is perfectly possible to be in the rafters above Number 11, completely isolated from what else is happening in the building? Ellis replied: “It is certainly true as a matter of geography that Number 10 Downing Street is a very large property with a multitude of offices and many, many people working inside it. In that sense, of course, geographically, he is absolutely correct.” Many MPs expressed outraged about rule-breaking at No 10. The Conservative MP Bob Blackman said: One of the key issues here is those that are making draconian rules not only have to live by the letter of the rules but by the spirit of the rules as well. Philip Hollobone (Con) said: My constituents are very angry indeed about reports of Christmas parties in Downing Street during what was a very large second wave of Covid, and the behaviour was totally inappropriate and possibly criminal. And Labour’s Afzal Khan said: Everyone experiences bereavement differently but for those of us who have lost loved ones during the pandemic there is a sentiment that increasingly unites us - and that is anger. I am angry that while my mum lay dying in hospital, I could not hold her hand. I’m angry that I had to bury my father-in-law and mother-in-law two days apart. Above all I’m angry that members of this government could be so flippant, so callous and so arrogant as to host not one, not two, not three but seven parties and then lie about it. Dominic Cummings, the PM’s former chief adviser, claims that the leaving do on 27 November in Downing Street (see 10.46am) wasn’t a party. Instead he wants the media to focus on a “victory party” reportedly held by the PM’s wife, Carrie, on the day Cummings left No 10. The leaving do was for Cleo Watson, a close ally of Cummings’. Carrie Johnson, on the other hand, is someone he clashed with repeatedly at No 10, and who was given credit by many for forcing him out of government. Angela Rayner, the deputy Labour leader, has said Boris Johnson must now explain “why he lied to the British public” about the refurbishment of his Downing Street flat. (See 11.02am.) In a statement she said: Boris Johnson’s sleaze is corroding the office of prime minister. The Paterson scandal, illicit Christmas parties in Number 10 and now dodgy payments from a multimillionaire Conservative party donor to fund his luxury Downing Street refurb. It is one rule for them, and one rule for the rest of us, and Boris Johnson is at the heart of it. It is right that the Electoral Commission has fined the Conservative party but the prime minister must now explain why he lied to the British public saying he did not know who was behind the Number 11 flat refurb - all the while he was messaging the donor asking for more money. Boris Johnson has taken the British public for fools. He has not only broken the law but made a mockery of the standards we expect from our prime ministers. Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, has just announced that the Christmas recess will start - as expected - on Thursday next week. Earlier there were rumours the recess might be brought forward (see 10.06am), but if that was a serious plan, it seems to have been quashed. Ofsted has said it will cancel its inspections of schools, colleges and nurseries in England for the remainder of 2021. An email from Ofsted to headteachers this morning – reported by Schools Week– said: Early years settings, schools and colleges will be using the final days of term to put in place these measures and consider contingency measures for January. In order to do that contingency planning, the secretary of state for education and her majesty’s chief inspector have agreed that early years settings, schools and colleges will not be inspected next week unless there are safeguarding concerns. Paul Whiteman, general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, said: Ofsted inspections are the very last thing schools need given the current level of disruption due to Covid, and the pressure school leaders are under just to stay open and minimise disruption for learners. Pupils will be best served by their schools not being distracted by preparation for inspection. Clearly, one week goes nowhere near far enough and we will be pushing for this suspension to be extended into the new year. The Department for Education has updated its guidance to schools following the plan B announcement, advising leaders to allow some staff to work from home so long as it does not disrupt in-person teaching or support. Attendance remains mandatory for pupils and students. The Conservative party has said it may appeal against the Electoral Commission’s finding relating to the refurbishment of the Downing Street flat. (See 9.54am.) A party spokesperson said: The Conservative party has received notification from the Electoral Commission that, in their judgement, the manner in which a payment was reported represented a technical breach of reporting requirements under the Political Parties, Elections and Referendums Act. We have been in constant contact with the Electoral Commission with regards to this matter and have sought their advice as to how the transaction should be reported since it was made. We are considering whether to appeal this decision and will make a decision within 28 working days. As Sky’s Sam Coates reports, the full Electoral Commission report into the funding of the refurbishment of Boris Johnson’s flat suggests that Johnson may have misled Lord Geidt, the independent adviser on ministerial interests, when he gave evidence to the Geidt inquiry into this. We should get a response from No 10 at the lobby briefing at 11.30am. Dame Angela Eagle (Lab) also ridiculed the idea that there was a distinction between a gathering and a party. (Her point went down well in the Commons chamber although, as someone with experience of teenage children, I can report that some people of that generation do see a difference between spending Saturday night at a “gathering” - fewer than 20 people - and a larger “party”.) Fleur Anderson, the shadow Cabinet Office minister who tabled the urgent question, told Michael Ellis in her reply to him that he inquiry should cover all Downing Street parties. And she said she was calling them parties because that is clearly what they were. UPDATE: Anderson said: I welcome the prime minister’s announcement that he’s asked the cabinet secretary to conduct this investigation. I have asked for this urgent question as there are further urgent questions to be asked about the investigation, and I don’t think we need to call them alleged parties, they are the parties, held in the government department or by government ministers elsewhere. Are there more parties that we need to hear about? The decision to include the party held on 27 November in the Simon Case investigation means that the cabinet secretary will be adjudicating on an event that Boris Johnson attended. This is what my colleague Aubrey Allegretti has written about the leaving do on 27 November. While England was still in the grip of its second national lockdown, a leaving do was organised in No 10 – said to have been for Cleo Watson, a former aide to Johnson’s chief adviser, Dominic Cummings. A source told the Guardian that Johnson personally attended and gave a speech, remarking on how full with people the room was, before leaving to continue working. At the time, socialising in groups from different households was completely banned and people were ordered to work from home, though key workers could continue going into the office. Michael Ellis, paymaster general in the Cabinet Office, is responding to the UQ on the inquiry into No 10 parties. He repeats the point Boris Johnson made at PMQs yesterday when he said he was shocked by the No 10 Christmas party video. The PM has been repeatedly assured that there was no party and no Covid rules were broken, he says. But he says the government recognises the public anxiety and public indignation about this, in that it appears people setting the rules have not been following them. He says the terms of reference of the investigation by Simon Case, the cabinet secretary, will be published today. He says Case will investigate three gatherings: two at Downing Street, on 27 November and 18 December, and one at the Department for Education, on 10 December. (This is an advance on yesterday, when No 10 implied at first that just the 18 December event would be investigated. But this also means several other parties, or party-type events, are not being investigated. See here, or the post at 9.28am.) He says Case will investigate what happened at these gatherings, and whether disciplinary action is needed. If evidence of a criminal offence emerges, it will be referred to the police, and the Cabinet Office inquiry will be paused. He says all ministers, officials and special advisers will be expected to cooperate. The findings will be published, he says. But, in accordance with precedence, details any an disciplinary action relating to individuals will not be made public. Sajid Javid has admitted having doubts about whether Covid rules were followed in Downing Street at an event last year alleged to have been a Christmas party, my colleague Aubrey Allegretti reports. Scottish front pages this morning are dominated by the Downing Street Christmas part(ies) row, as they are in England, but in particular highlighting Scottish Tories’ condemnation of their colleagues’ antics. The Scottish Conservative leader, Douglas Ross – who announced on Thursday morning he is self-isolating after a member of staff received a positive lateral flow result – was certainly robust when he stated that Johnson “cannot continue in the highest office in the land” if he misled the Commons over whether the party took place. Ross said he was “angry, annoyed and really disappointed” when the video of No 10 aides laughing about the alleged party emerged on Tuesday night, adding that it undermined public trust in the Covid rules. It’s worth recalling that Ross resigned as a Scotland Office minister last May over Dominic Cummings’ trip to Barnard Castle. He was echoed by former leader Ruth Davidson, who said the UK government was “taking the public for fools”, adding “none of this is remotely defensible”. And a few front pages nod to the fact that Johnson was following Scottish and Welsh measures as he announced a return to home working and the introduction of vaccine passports as Omicron cases continue to rise. The number of people in England waiting to start routine hospital treatment has risen to a new record high, PA Media reports. PA has filed these highlights from the latest NHS England waiting time figures. PA says: A total of 5.98 million people were waiting to start treatment at the end of October 2021. This is the highest number since records began in August 2007. The number of people having to wait more than 52 weeks to start treatment stood at 312,665 in October 2021, up from 300,566 in the previous month and nearly double the number waiting a year earlier, in October 2020, which was 167,067. A total of 16,225 people in England were waiting more than two years to start routine hospital treatment at the end of October 2021. This is up from 12,491 at the end of September and is around six times the 2,722 people who were waiting longer than two years in April. The number of people having to wait more than 12 hours in A&amp;E departments in England last month from a decision to admit to actually being admitted has risen to a new record high of 10,646. The figure is up from 7,059 in October and is the highest for any calendar month since records began in August 2010. Some 120,749 people waited at least four hours from the decision to admit to admission in November, down very slightly on the 121,251 in October. The average response time last month for ambulances in England dealing with the most urgent incidents - defined as calls from people with life-threatening illnesses or injuries - was nine minutes and 10 seconds. This is down slightly from nine minutes and 20 seconds in October, which was the longest average response time since current records began in August 2017. Ambulances in England took an average of 46 minutes and 37 seconds last month to respond to emergency calls, such as burns, epilepsy and strokes. This is down from 53 minutes and 54 seconds in October, which had been the longest average response time since records began in August 2017. The news keeps coming today. PA has just snapped this. Prime Minister Boris Johnson and wife Carrie have announced “the birth of a healthy baby girl at a London hospital earlier today”. At least this is one surprise announcement that no one can dismiss as a dead cat. Congratulations and best wishes to all of them. The Daily Mirror’s Pippa Crerar says she is hearing suggestions that the government might bring forward the date of the Christmas recess. Sending MPs home early is a reliable way of minimising plotting, because it means MPs are no longer congregating in parliament. Here is the full report from the Electoral Commission on its investigation into the funding of the PM’s flat refurbishment at Downing Street. Louise Edwards, director of regulation at the Electoral Commission, said the fine imposed on the Conservative party reflected “serious failings” in its compliance with reporting requirements. She said: Our investigation into the Conservative party found that the laws around the reporting and recording of donations were not followed. We know that voters have concerns about the transparency of funding of political parties. Reporting requirements are in place so that the public can see where money is coming from, inaccurate reporting risks undermining trust in the system. The party’s decisions and actions reflected serious failings in its compliance systems. As a large and well-resourced political party that employs compliance and finance experts, and that has substantial sums of money going through its accounts, the Conservative party should have sufficiently robust systems in place to meet its legal reporting requirements. The Conservative party has been fined £17,800 by the Electoral Commission for failing to properly record a donation relating to the refurbishment of the Downing Street flat used by Boris Johnson. In a news release the commission says: The Conservative Party has been fined £17,800 by the Electoral Commission after failing to accurately report a donation and keep a proper accounting record. The sanction was imposed on the party, following the conclusion of a detailed investigation. The investigation looked at whether any transactions relating to works at 11 Downing Street fell within the regime regulated by the commission and whether any such funding was reported as required. The investigation found that the party failed to fully report a donation of £67,801.72 from Huntswood Associates Limited in October 2020. The donation included £52,801.72 connected to the costs of refurbishment to 11 Downing Street. The full value of the donation was not reported as required in the party’s Q4 2020 donation report. The commission also concluded that the reference in the party’s financial records to the payment of £52,801.72 made by the party for the refurbishment was not accurate. The investigation found that decisions relating to the handling and recording of this donation reflected serious failings in the party’s compliance systems. The Commons authorities have announced that there will be an urgent question at 10.30am on the terms of the inquiry into Downing Street parties. The Labour MP Fleur Anderson has tabled it. A minister from the Cabinet Office will respond, but it is not clear who it will be yet. The most senior minister there is Steve Barclay, but for a UQ like this they often send a more junior minister, like Michael Ellis or Nigel Adams, particularly if they want to minimise press interest. I have amended the agenda at 9.28am to take this into account. Good morning. Prime ministers get used to reading in the papers that they are having their worst every day/week since taking office - normally every couple of months or so - but sometimes it might be true, and this morning Alex Wickham in his London Playbook briefing says that last night Tories he spoke to “were unanimous that Wednesday was Johnson’s worst day politically since becoming prime minister”. But today, in at least two respects, the situation continues to get worse. First, the Times is reporting new allegations about lockdown-busting partying by the Tories (paywall). It focuses on two events, and it reports: As anger grows among Tory MPs about an event held in No 10 on December 18 last year, The Times can disclose that Conservative Party staff danced and drank wine late into the night at another event that month. Senior advisers and officials working in Downing Street also held a Christmas quiz, and one source claimed that Dan Rosenfield, Johnson’s incoming chief of staff, took part ... On December 14 about 25 people gathered in the basement of Conservative headquarters in Westminster. The event was organised by the campaign team of Shaun Bailey, who was running for mayor of London. Bailey attended the party, at which people wore festive hats and he received a Lego set as a Christmas present from a donor. Revellers damaged a door and staff were disciplined. No 10 aides were said to have been among those present. At the time London was in the Tier 2 level of restrictions, meaning all socialising indoors between households was banned ... At about the same time, a Christmas quiz is understood to have been organised for officials and Conservative advisers working for the prime minister, with invitations sent out in advance. Yesterday No 10 initially said the inquiry by Simon Case, the cabinet secretary, would just focus on the 18 December Downing Street party, but at the press conference later in the day Boris Johnson said Case could look at other things, and the Times story will add to the pressure on him to extend the remit of his investigation. And, second, the Tory rebellion over the move to plan B is serious, and growing. As Jessica Elgot reports, Sajid Javid, the health secretary, was heckled from his own side in the Commons last night as he announced the move to plan B. Johnson seems to have made the situation worse at the press conference by calling for a debate on mandatory vaccination and this morning on the Today programme Marcus Fysh, the Conservative MP, denounced the introduction of Covid passports as a “disgrace”. He said: Of course I’ll vote against it. Everybody should vote against it. This is a fundamental thing about what sort of society we want to live in. It’s a disgrace that they’re pursuing that, utter disgrace. Johnson is in no danger of losing the vote next week, because Labour will support him. But a prime minister who loses the support of a substantial proportion of their own MPs on the key issue of the day loses authority. Here is the agenda for the day. 10.30am: A Cabinet Office minister responds to an urgent question about the inquiry into No 10 parties Around 11.15am: Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, takes questions in the Commons on next week’s business. 11.30am: Downing Street holds a lobby briefing. Around 12.15pm: Dominic Raab, the justice secretary and deputy prime minister, makes a Commons statement on delivering justice for victims. 12pm: Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, takes questions in the Scottish parliament. Afternoon: Kate Forbes, the Scottish government’s finance secretary, makes a budget statement in the Scottish parliament. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comWeightlifting and boxing are the “two problem childs of the Olympic movement” and remain at risk of being removed from the 2028 LA Games programme, the International Olympic Committee president, Thomas Bach, has warned. Bach expressed his deepest concerns about weightlifting, which has faced significant doping and governance issues, while it was made clear to boxing that it needed to continue making significant reforms following financial problems and the judging scandal at the 2016 Rio Games. A third sport, modern pentathlon, was also told to replace horse riding with a more inclusive sport if it wanted to be in the LA Games – a decision that followed the shocking scenes at the Tokyo 2020 Olympics, where the German coach Kim Raisner was sent home for punching a horse. Meanwhile, skateboarding, surfing and sport climbing are in the list of 28 sports for LA 2028 that have been submitted for approval when the IOC meets in Beijing in February. “The proposed inclusion of these youth-focused sports is based on the significant contribution to the overall success of the Olympic Games of Tokyo 2020, their commitment to innovation and the partnership expressed by LA 28,” Bach said. “We are also recognising the deep roots each of these three sports have in LA and in California.” Bach said that there would be a “pathway” for boxing’s governing body, Aiba, as well as the federations of weightlifting (IWF) and modern pentathlon (UIPM) to be part of the LA Games if the sports make a series of reforms by 2023. He added: “Aiba must demonstrate that it has successfully addressed the ongoing concerns around its governance, financial transparency and sustainability and the integrity of its refereeing and judging processes. “The IWF and its future leadership must demonstrate its transition towards compliance and effective change of culture. Furthermore, they must successfully address the historical incidence of doping in the sport and ensure the integrity, robustness and full independence of its anti-doping programme. “Third, and this is very much different from weightlifting and boxing, the UIPM must finalise its proposal for the replacement of horse riding and for the overall competition performance. “They must demonstrate a significant reduction in cost and complexity and improvements across the areas of safety, accessibility, universality appeal for youth and general public.” Football has retained its spot on the LA programme but the IOC said it would “continue to monitor the evolution of the international match calendar” following Fifa’s controversial plan to hold the men’s World Cup every two years.A Scottish health board has apologised for “horrendous” failings after an independent review found that deaf children missed out on vital cochlear implant surgery because of mistakes and delays in diagnosis. NHS Lothian apologised to the families involved as the report set out repeated errors in identifying hearing loss and admitted the delays would have long-term consequences for the speech and language development of the children involved. An independent investigation of NHS Lothian’s paediatric audiology service uncovered “significant failures” over a nine-year period in 14% of cases after sampling more than 1,000 patient records, in particular amongs the under fives. Experts agree that early identification and correct care are vital in helping deaf children develop language and communication at this crucial age. Cochlear implants expose hearing-impaired children to the sensation of sound. The report was commissioned by the health board after criticism about the care of a child with hearing difficulties and was carried out by the British Academy of Audiology. It highlighted the average age of diagnosis of hearing loss at NHS Lothian between 2009 and 2018 was 1,653 days, or 4.5 years old, compared with 109 days in England. The report also found that 12 children who were eligible for cochlear implants faced significant delays, to the extent that five missed out on getting them altogether; 49 children had a delayed identification of hearing loss or the fitting of their hearing aid; and 30 were not offered the correct hearing aids. Responding to the report, chief executive at the National Deaf Children’s Society Susan Daniels said: “The horrendous findings in this report represent a real-life nightmare for the families involved. They placed their trust in a service that was supposed to help, only to be completely let down. Some will be left with life-changing consequences, while many others across Scotland will now be facing the very real fear that the same thing could happen to them.” Following the report, the charity called for an urgent country-wide review, warning that thousands more children treated at NHS Lothian could have been affected. “This means we need urgent action from the Scottish government, starting with a thorough review of children’s audiology services across the country. Until we have national leadership, better data collection and mandatory standards that services must comply with, thousands more deaf children could be at risk and families won’t be able to rest.” The review found no evidence that national protocols on hearing tests for children had been followed “at any point since 2009” and that delays had gone “unreported and unnoticed.” Scotland’s health secretary, Humza Yousaf, called on the health board to enact the report’s recommendations “as a matter of urgency” and apologised directly to the families involved. “I am deeply disappointed at the unacceptable failures this report has highlighted, and I have already made my views unequivocally clear to NHS Lothian,” he said. “The service provided to children affected and their families was simply not good enough.” Tracey Gillies, medical director at NHS Lothian, said: “We are very sorry and saddened to learn that there are some children whose conditions were not diagnosed correctly, or as early as possible, as a result of testing that was not up to standard. “We have already written to the most severely affected families individually to offer support and a face-to-face meeting to discuss their child’s condition. We have also arranged appointments for those children whom the review recommends should be tested again.”Boris Johnson has said that he “covered the costs” of renovation work carried out on the flat above No 11 Downing Street, which the prime minister and his family have used as their private residence, but he continues to be dogged by questions about its funding. How it started … Johnson and his wife, Carrie, were said to have wanted to transform the flat in the weeks after his 2019 general election win from his predecessor, Theresa May’s, “John Lewis furniture nightmare” into a “high society haven”. Although an annual £30,000 public grant is available for Downing Street works, Johnson had wanted to spend more, with the result that the Tory peer David Brownlow was asked to chair a trust using anonymous donations. With refurbishment under way by June 2019, the Cabinet Office agreed to pay extra costs from three invoices totalling £52,801, then be reimbursed by the Conservatives from a trust. The money trail … The party did reimburse the government on 6 August, but in September the Cabinet Office was invoiced by the supplier for a further £12,967. This was forwarded first to Brownlow and then to Conservative central headquarters (CCHQ), before the peer confirmed in an email that he would be making a £15,000 donation and “£52,801.72 to cover payments the party has made on behalf of the soon to be formed ‘Downing Street Trust’ of which I am chairman”. He also paid £12,967 to the supplier on the same day, 19 October, for the invoice received in September. Further payments he made directly to the supplier included £33,484 on 18 December and £13,295 on 12 February 2021, bringing the total sum Brownlow and his company paid the Conservatives and the supplier to £112,549. The following month, Johnson paid £112,549 to the supplier himself, so the supplier returned the funds received from Brownlow and the Cabinet Office. The inquiries … Launching a formal investigation in April of this year into how the work was paid for, the Electoral Commission said that there were “reasonable grounds to suspect that an offence or offences may have occurred”. On the same day, the prime minister announced the appointment of Christopher Geidt as his new independent adviser on ministerial interests. Lord Geidt, a crossbench peer, built on work by Simon Case, the cabinet secretary, and investigated whether Johnson should have made any disclosures required by the ministerial code. What Geidt concluded Geidt cleared Johnson of breaching the ministerial code in May 2021, though he concluded that the prime minister had “unwisely … allowed the refurbishment … to proceed without more rigorous regard for how this would be funded”. He also said he had checked a claim that Johnson knew nothing of the payments made for the flat by others, reporting that the prime minister had told him “he knew nothing about such payments until immediately prior to media reports in February 2021”. How the Electoral Commission differed … Its report this week makes clear that on 23 June 2020 Johnson offered Brownlow the role of chair of the Downing Street Trust, and on 29 November messaged him on WhatsApp asking him to authorise further refurbishment works. The commission fined the Tories £17,800 after ruling that the party had not followed the law over Brownlow’s donations to help cover the renovations. The Conservatives had failed to “accurately report a donation and keep a proper accounting record” of the money handed over by the Tory peer, the watchdog said. Unanswered questions A key area now centres on evidence, documented by the Electoral Commission, showing Johnson had sent Brownlow a WhatsApp message in November 2020 “asking him to authorise further, at that stage unspecified, refurbishment works on the residence”, to which he agreed. But while Downing Street says Johnson did not lie to Geidt, telling him he had no knowledge of the payments until immediately before media reports in February, Labour has called for a fresh investigation from peers and for the parliamentary commissioner for standards, Kathryn Stone, to examine the matter. Downing Street’s defence amounted to Johnson not knowing that Brownlow was providing the money to the “blind trust” he was organising. Another question centres on how Johnson ultimately also paid £112,549 to the supplier of the renovations himself, so the supplier returned the funds from Brownlow and the Cabinet Office. “Any payments between the prime minister and the supplier are outside the scope of our investigation,” the Electoral Commission has said.A low-profile American heiress living in Italy has come under fire for donating $650,000 to three organizations that helped stage and promote the political rally on 6 January that was followed by the insurrection at the US Capitol by extremist supporters of Donald Trump. Julie Fancelli, 72, who is the daughter of the founder of the Florida-based Publix supermarket chain, is facing criticism after new investigations revealed that she is the largest publicly known donor of the 6 January rally, the Washington Post reported. At the rally held near the White House, Donald Trump urged supporters to go to the Capitol in an attempt to stop the 2020 presidential election victory by his Democratic rival Joe Biden from being officially certified by Congress. Rioters then broke into the Capitol, although after hours of chaos and danger during which lawmakers and staff hid in fear of their lives, the election result was certified in the early hours the following day. Worried relatives and those close to Fancelli say that her support of far-right groups could be prompted by Fancelli’s interest in conspiracy theorist Alex Jones. On 29 December, eight days before the rally, Fancelli wired $300,000 to Women for America First, a non-profit that helped organize the 6 January rally, and $150,000 to the Republican Attorneys General Association’s non-profit arm, which covered robocalls promoting the march to “call on Congress to stop the steal”, reported the Washington Post last December, referring to Trump’s campaign to overturn the election result. Fancelli also gave $200,000 to State Tea Party Express, a rightwing group, according to Sal Russo, a top consultant for the group. Russo told the Post that records of Fancelli’s donation have been provided to the House committee investigating the insurrection and that the money was used to pay for ads on the radio and social media, encouraging supporters of Donald Trump to participate in the rally. Russo said to the Post that he does not support the violence that happened at the Capitol. Information on how expenses such as travel and hotel stays were covered for the thousands of Trump supporters who attended the rally and march on the Capitol is still being investigated, but details, including Fancelli’s substantial , financial support, continue to emerge. Democratic representative Bennie Thompson of Mississippi, the chair of the House committee investigating the events that led to the 6 January insurrection, told the Post that he believes Fancelli “played a strong role” in financially backing the rally. “We’re trying to follow the money,” said Thompson. While Fancelli has not responded to requests for comment from the Post since August, she has addressed her involvement in the 6 January rally. “I am a proud conservative and have real concerns associated with election integrity, yet I would never support any violence, particularly the tragic and horrific events that unfolded on January 6,” said Fancelli via a statement released 10 months ago. Previously, after an initial report about the $300,000 Fancelli donated before the rally, Publix Super Markets released a statement via social media, saying that Publix would not comment on Fancelli’s actions as she was not an employee of Publix or involved in the business. Following an inquiry from the Post last week about Fancelli’s total contributions, Publix said that the company “cannot control the actions of individual stockholders” and issued a rebuke of her actions. “We are deeply troubled by Ms Fancelli’s involvement in the events that led to the tragic attack on the Capitol on January 6,” said Publix in a statement to the Post. Fancelli had planned to attend the rally herself, even booking a room at the upscale Willard hotel, but decided not to travel due to the pandemic, according to a Republican who was familiar with her donation, the Post reported.Germany’s new foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, has been caught a diplomatic vice days into the job, as US puts pressure on the coalition government in Berlin to vow to block the Nord Stream 2 pipeline in the event of Russia invading Ukraine. The controversial pipeline project, which runs from Ust-Luga in Russia to Lubmin in north-east Germany, is also likely to be the first test of the new German government’s unity of approach. Baerbock, the 40-year-old Green co-leader, has long opposed the near-complete giant pipeline, but the German coalition programme is silent on the issue, due to support for the project from the new German chancellor Olaf Scholz’s Social Democrats. As Nato and Europe prepared a deterrence package designed to frighten Russia off a military incursion into Ukraine, the Biden administration, with strong backing from the UK, Poland and Baltic States, is demanding that the pipeline be included as part of a wider sanctions package if Russia sends troops into Ukraine. It is expected that Germany will agree, but on conditions that are likely to be subject to negotiation within the government and reveal the degree to which Baerbock is forced to submit to Scholz’s control of foreign policy. Speaking in Paris on Thursday alongside the French foreign minister, Jean Yves Le Drian, Baerbock said: “The territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine are non-negotiable for us. Russia would pay a high political and economic price for renewed violation of Ukrainian statehood.” In opposition, Baerbock said the pipeline only benefited the Putin regime, destabilised Ukraine, contradicted EU climate change targets and clashed with Europe’s geostrategic interests. Scholz has been more evasive on the subject, fully aware of the pipeline’s champions within the ranks of the SPD. The energy link is not only supported by former chancellor Gerhard Schröder, now chair of Nord Stream’s board of directors, but also the centre-left party’s branch in Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, where the local population hopes to draw economic advantages once gas starts running underneath the Baltic Sea. Scholz indicated that he would not leave it to his Green coalition partners to dictate his government’s language around Nord Stream 2. “The whole country is being watched by the world,” he said. “That’s why we as a government will act in unison – and that starts with the head of government.” “We have a very clear attitude: we want everyone’s borders to be respected,” Scholz told Die Welt newspaper on Wednesday. “Everyone understands that there will be consequences if that is not the case.” The new chancellor did not go as far as spelling out a threat to abandon the project. The Russian gas company Gazprom built the pipeline at a cost of €9.5bn (£8.1bn), overcoming objections from the US, Poland and Ukraine, and is now awaiting German regulatory certification, currently withheld on a legal technicality concerning Nord Stream’s independence as a transmission operator from Gazprom. When fully operational, the pipeline would transport 55bn cubic metres of gas to Germany every year, equivalent to about 15% of the EU’s total gas imports. The US in July backed off from taking sanctions against German firms involved in Nord Stream, but said if there was evidence of Russian efforts to use the pipeline or gas supplies as a way of forcing through political or wider economic concessions, they could return. “If Vladimir Putin wants to see gas flow through that pipeline, he may not want to take the risk of invading Ukraine,” the US national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, said on Tuesday after a conversation between Putin and US president Joe Biden. There is strong support for the measure in the US Congress. Baerbock also came under pressure from Poland on the issue ahead of a visit to Warsaw on Friday. “I will call on Chancellor Scholz not to give in to pressure from Russia and not to allow Nord Stream 2 to be used as an instrument for blackmail against Ukraine, an instrument for blackmail against Poland, an instrument for blackmail against the European Union,” the Polish prime minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, said on a visit to Rome. Even if sanctions are not imposed in the immediate future, the new German government will have to clarify whether it wants the pipeline to go ahead if the threat to Ukraine is lifted. It is not clear on what legal basis the pipeline, long presented by the previous German government as an economic project with virtually no geopolitical consequence, needs clearance under European Union energy competition laws. EU rules require “unbundling”, whereby companies producing, transporting and distributing gas within the EU are separate legal entities and a pipeline such as Nord Stream 2 can be used by third parties with a non-discriminatory and transparent pricing structure. The Nord Stream issue comes as part of the self-imposed pressure placed on the new German government to give a higher profile to human rights and values in foreign policy. With France resisting joining the diplomatic boycott of the Beijing Olympics, Baerbock said Germany would make its decision in conjunction with its European friends. France is to host the summer Olympics in 2024 and is reluctant to see the tournament become a victim of geopolitics. After her visit to Warsaw on Friday, Baerbock will travel to Liverpool for a UK-hosted meeting of G7 foreign ministers. The liberal Free Democratic Party (FDP), the third coalition partner in Germany’s “traffic light” government, has also positioned itself against the pipeline.Tottenham’s Premier League game at Brighton on Sunday has been called off because of the Covid outbreak at the London club, as every top flight club was told to reintroduce “emergency measures” to limit infections. Spurs said on Wednesday that eight players had tested positive, causing their Europa Conference League match against Rennes on Thursday to be postponed. The match at Brighton now also needs to be rearranged. Tottenham’s manager, Antonio Conte, has described everyone at the club as “a bit scared” amid an escalation of positive Covid cases that prompted the first-team area of the training ground to be shut. A Premier League statement read: “Brighton &amp; Hove Albion’s home fixture against Tottenham Hotspur, due to be played on Sunday 12 December at 2pm, has been postponed following a Premier League Board meeting this afternoon. “Tottenham asked for the match to be rearranged following a significant number of positive Covid-19 cases among players and relevant staff. This led to First Team facilities at the club’s training centre being closed after consultation with the Premier League and UK Health Security Agency. “The Premier League Board has taken the decision to postpone the game following guidance from medical advisers, with the health of players and staff the priority. The postponed fixture will be rescheduled in due course and the Premier League wishes a quick recovery to those with Covid-19.” After confirming the postponement, the Premier League board wrote to all 20 clubs advising of a return to “emergency measures” last seen in the summer, when a series of Covid outbreaks disrupted pre-season preparations. The measures will mandate the wearing of masks indoors, limit time spent in close contact – such as in medical treatment rooms – and also likely involve the return of spot inspections to make sure measures are being followed. The change came alongside uncertainty over new government Covid measures known as “plan B”. Official government guidance says that as of next Wednesday, sports events “will be required by law to check that all visitors aged 18 years or over are fully vaccinated, have proof of a negative test in the last 48 hours, or that they have an exemption”. The Guardian understands, however, that checks are likely not to apply to all visitors, with the final terms and conditions still to be determined with the Sports Grounds Safety Authority. There is also a lack of clarity over precisely which venues qualify for the new measures. Rules state, for example, that checks must apply in stadia that host more than 4,000 standing spectators but some organisers believe this figure refers to regular attendance figures, rather than the potential capacity. New clarity on the rules, which were introduced by the prime minister, Boris Johnson, on Wednesday, is expected by the beginning of next week, just two days before they are expected to be introduced. The Football League has already spoken twice with their clubs over such checks, however, while the Premier League reminded match-going fans on Thursday that they “must be prepared” to show proof of Covid vaccination, or a negative test, as part of the competition’s existing protocols. In their own statement regarding the postponements, Tottenham apologised to both Rennes and Brighton. It said: “The Club requested the match to be rearranged following a significant number of positive Covid-19 cases among players and relevant staff. “As with our other affected fixture, against Stade Rennais in the Europa Conference League, we shall update supporters with more information as soon as it is available. We should like to apologise to everyone at Stade Rennais and Brighton &amp; Hove Albion and to both their supporters and ours for any inconvenience caused.”