Boris Johnson has invoked the teaching of Jesus Christ to urge the public to get a Covid booster jab, in a message issued to mark a Christmas he said would be “significantly better” than last year’s. In a video statement filmed in front of a Christmas tree in Downing Street, the prime minister celebrated members of the public who were “getting jabbed not just for themselves, for ourselves, but for friends and family and everyone we meet”. “That, after all, is the teaching of Jesus Christ, whose birth is at the heart of this enormous festival – that we should love our neighbours as we love ourselves,” he said. His words echoed the message from the archbishop of Canterbury, Justin Welby, who said earlier this week: “I would say, go and get boosted, get vaccinated. It’s how we love our neighbour. Loving our neighbour is what Jesus told us to do. It’s Christmas, do what he said.” The prime minister said he could not say the pandemic was over, but pointed out that many people were able to celebrate with more family members this year than last. “If this year you need a bigger turkey and there are more sprouts to peel and more washing up to do, then that is all to the good, because these rituals matter so deeply. And I hope that people will enjoy this Christmas this year all the more keenly because of what we had to miss last year,” he said. There had been fears the government might impose limits on socialising over the festive period in a bid to slow the spread of the highly transmissible Omicron variant, but ministers decided to wait and monitor the data. In 2020, some parts of the country, including London, the home counties and the east of England, were placed under tier 4 restrictions just days before Christmas that meant a “stay at home” order was in place. Elsewhere, up to three households could gather, but only for a single day. The NHS has accelerated the pace of booster vaccinations significantly since the arrival of Omicron, and in some parts of the country will continue to deliver jabs even on Christmas Day. Johnson was baptised a Catholic but has rarely discussed his own religion. He married his wife, Carrie, at the Catholic Westminster Cathedral earlier this year. When ITV’s Robert Peston asked if he was a practising Catholic, Johnson replied: “I don’t discuss these deep issues.” The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, used his Christmas message to mark the contribution of frontline workers, including soldiers and nurses, during what he called an “incredibly difficult” year. “For too many, there will be one less chair at the table for the Christmas meal. But, in the darkest of times, Christian values of kindness, of compassion and hope have shone through. Communities have come together to help one another,” he said. Looking forward to 2022, Starmer said: “If we stick together, support each other and work together, we can find a path through. I know a better future is possible.”NHS England has said there are 200,000 vaccination appointments available on Christmas Eve, Christmas Day and Boxing Day and urged anybody due a booster to consider coming forward “to get the gift of a jab”. Staff and volunteers will continue to deliver jabs in some locations on 25 and 26 December, as the NHS tries to meet Boris Johnson’s target of giving everybody eligible a booster by the end of the year amid a surge in the number of Covid cases. Vaccination centres that were open “over the festive period” included Redbridge town hall in north-east London from 10am to 5.50pm and Grim’s Dyke golf club in Pinner, Middlesex, the NHS said. Walk-in appointments can be obtained in Eastbourne, Dewsbury and Hartlepool. Dr Emily Lawson, the head of the NHS Covid vaccination programme, praised those willing to work over the Christmas weekend and argued that people should consider getting a booster as a last-minute present to family members. “This Christmas, before sitting down to your dinner with your family, I would encourage anyone not already boosted to come forward, book an appointment and get the gift of a jab,” the NHS official said. The latest figures show that 840,000 people across the UK received a booster on Wednesday, the seventh consecutive day that jabs exceeded 800,000, taking the number who had received a third jab to nearly 31.7 million. Daily vaccination rates have leapt by about three-quarters in a little over a week as the NHS has rapidly organised to try to meet Johnson’s pledge, opening more sites, increasing hours and calling for volunteers to help. But health service chiefs had no warning that the booster jab target was being brought forward to help tackle the sudden upsurge in Covid cases, and reaching the goal has become increasingly demanding. About 13.2 million are people yet to be boosted, with nine days to go before the end of the year. Allowing for a day off to account for reduced vaccination rates over the holiday period, that would mean 1.65m jabs a day would need to be given to hit the target. Sajid Javid thanked NHS workers for their commitment to helping dramatically increase vaccination rates. The health secretary said: “You have shown our country at its best and achieved phenomenal things this year including delivering our turbocharged booster rollout.” Everybody over 18 is eligible for a booster if their second jab took place more than three months ago and they have not caught Covid in the past 28 days.People are less likely to shake hands and hug people they do not live with than they were before the pandemic, a poll suggests, while separate research indicates that anxiety levels have increased markedly in the run-up to this Christmas. Data collected by YouGov and the PA news agency suggests that nearly two-thirds of people shake hands less now than they did before Covid-19 and more than half have cut down on hugging people they do not live with. Meanwhile, provisional figures from the Office for National Statistics (ONS) show that more than a third of adults are experiencing high levels of anxiety, the highest proportion since the UK’s third national lockdown in January. The latest official data suggests the proportion of adults experiencing high levels of anxiety has reached 38%. Such high anxiety levels have not been seen since similar data was collected between 13 and 17 January this year. The average level of anxiety experienced by adults – calculated as the mean of all anxiety levels expressed on a scale of one to 10 – is also at its highest since January. The ONS said the rating had been increasing since the end of November, and the 4.3 average figure recorded this month had not been seen since similar figures were collected between 27 and 31 January. The ONS estimates are based on a poll of 3,314 adults in Britain done between 15 and 19 December this year as part of its opinions and lifestyle survey. Other widespread behavioural changes identified in the YouGov research include the use of hand sanitiser more often and the observance of social distancing around people whom respondents do not live with. About half of the people surveyed said they were more inclined to wipe down trolleys or baskets in supermarkets, and more than a third said they were more likely to meet people outdoors. The poll of 1,652 people in Britain also investigated feelings about the pandemic and what it will mean for the future. A third of people said they thought it would never be effectively over in the UK, while 4% thought it was already effectively over. A majority thought it would be over within one or two years. And the survey suggested that fewer people felt their lives had returned to normal since the emergence of the Omicron variant than had felt that way before. In the first two days of this month, 20% of respondents said they felt a return to normality. That proportion fell to just 12% in the latest data.A controversial New Zealand scheme that offers visas to wealthy foreign investors has resumed operating after a year’s hiatus due to the pandemic, prompting concern from overseas New Zealanders who fear it will place additional strain on the country’s overburdened managed isolation and quarantine (MIQ) system. Martin Newell, a spokesperson for the advocacy group Grounded Kiwis, said the scheme’s resumption would prompt “disbelief” among New Zealanders overseas, who may lose out on MIQ spots to the investors. “The government is abandoning the needs of its citizens in favour of those who have enough money to be able to buy their way into the country.” Immigration New Zealand (INZ) recently granted 32 visas to people who pledged to invest at least $10m locally over three years and another 76 visas to individuals pledging to invest at least $3m, according to the news website Stuff. INZ is yet to decide on a further 816 applications across both categories. The visas add up to a financial commitment of at least $548m. According to an INZ spokesperson, the agency has begun processing applications for multiple visa categories – including the humanitarian and family categories – not just for investors. With their visas in hand, investors may apply to compete for spots in New Zealand’s congested MIQ system. A stay in MIQ is a prerequisite for entry to the country, which has been largely closed to non-quarantined international travel since March 2020 to protect against Covid-19. Due to a shortage of MIQ spots, thousands of New Zealanders have not been able to return home. Seerwan Ali Jafar, an Auckland resident whose mother has been unable to travel and visit her grandchildren due to MIQ difficulties, said the investor scheme’s resumption was “outrageous and offensive. Kiwis can’t enter to see family but the wealthy can buy their way in. It’s intolerable.” The scheme’s restart comes after a delay in the resumption of quarantine-free travel for New Zealanders. The Covid-19 response minister, Chris Hipkins, said the reopening day would be pushed from 17 January to the end of February due to uncertainty over Covid-19’s Omicron variant. The turnaround ensures that difficulties surrounding access to MIQ will continue into 2022. According to information released under the Official Information Act, New Zealand’s policy of granting visas to wealthy investors reached its height in 2016-2017 when 446 wealthy investors were granted visas. There has been speculation that at least some of these investors, like the American billionaire Peter Thiel, may have applied because they saw New Zealand as a safe haven for a potential doomsday scenario. Justin Pemberton, a documentary film-maker focused on economic inequality, said the scheme created a two-tier immigration system. “If you’ve got money, you can come through. If you don’t you can’t … It’s a very crude and reductive way to operate”. Due to the emergence of Covid-19 and the closing of New Zealand’s borders, just 51 investor visas were granted in 2020-2021. Some were controversial. The Google co-founder Larry Page applied for an investor visa in November 2020 and was accepted in February 2021. The rapid approval sparked frustration given the long delays many migrant workers have experienced getting visas for themselves or their families. Even as INZ resumes granting investor visas, that visa backlog for migrant workers continues: the government recently introduced a fast-tracked residency visa for such workers, with as many as 15,000 workers stuck in New Zealand eligible to apply.The celebrated woman of letters Joan Didion has died at the age of 87. The author and journalist made a profound mark on 20th and 21st century literature with her writing on culture, politics and the vagaries of human life. Her debut essay collection, Slouching Towards Bethlehem, captured the hazy disorder of a changing US in the 60s, and became a touchstone in the emerging New Journalism movement. Didion leaves behind a legacy that includes five novels, six screenplays and 14 works of nonfiction – one of which, The Year of Magical Thinking, she turned into a play. The former Observer literary editor Robert McCrum credited the book, which narrates the year after the death of Didion’s husband, John Gregory Dunne, with “chang[ing] the nature of writing about bereavement”. (Their daughter, Quintana, died soon after, a cruel loss chronicled in Blue Nights.) With cool, spare prose, Didion famously positioned herself as an onlooker – of incendiary trials, of Hollywood royalty, of her own life. An early “master of the personal essay”, her style influenced and inspired countless others – her name became a byword for good writing; her lines so-often quoted that they became cliches in themselves. Starting her career after winning an essay competition at Vogue, she was also feted as a style icon, a luminary of California cool. A writer’s writer, a cult figure of fashion, an intellect gazing unflinchingly at what most interested and troubled her – what do Joan Didion and her work mean to you? We’d love you to tell us in the comments.Rio Tinto will put its controversial western Serbia lithium project on hold, a news agency has reported, quoting the CEO of Rio’s Serbian arm. The mining group wants to develop the mine near Loznica in the western Jadar river valley to extract lithium, used in electric car batteries, and borates, used in solar panels and wind turbines. In recent weeks protesters have taken to the streets and blocked roads, demanding authorities end the project. The backlash is causing a political headache for the ruling coalition loyal to president Aleksandar Vucic ahead of April elections. The company’s $2.4bn project is part of Serbian government efforts to bring in more investment and create economic growth. Loznica’s municipal assembly last week scrapped the land allocation for the mine. A report from Beta News quoted Vesna Prodanovic, chief executive of Rio Sava Exploration, as saying Rio would put it on hold. “We want to call for a public dialogue, to acquaint residents with all aspects of our project. “It is extremely difficult in such an intense anti-mining and negative campaign to have a reasonable debate on any topic.” Prodanovic said Rio planned to “reconsider and possibly improve” technical solutions it wants to use for the mine. Earlier this year, Rio said any development would meet all domestic and European Union environmental standards. But opponents say it would cause irreparable damage. Vucic has repeatedly said opening the mine would depend on the outcome of an environmental study and a referendum on it. With ReutersThanks for joining us for today’s Covid live blog. Keep up with all the latest coronavirus developments by following our new blog which has just been launched here. Here’s a run-down of all the Covid news from the past day: Europe In England around 1.2 million people were infected with Covid last week, or 1 in 45 of the population - a pandemic record. London estimated 1 in 30 people were infected last week. UK health secretary Sajid Javid says there will be no further announcements on Covid restrictions in England before Christmas. Germany’s health minister said he expects a surge in coronavirus cases around new year and people will probably need a fourth vaccine shot. Germany also confirmed the country’s first death due to the Omicron variant. Greece banned public Christmas and New Year’s Eve festivities and mandated mask-wearing in open spaces. The measures will come into effect on Friday morning. Italy is planning to tighten restrictions including making mask wearing mandatory outdoors. The country has also banned public New Year’s Eve celebrations. Malta will ban all events where attendees are standing not seated, except weddings and funerals, from 27 December. Nightclubs in Scotland are to close from 27 December for three weeks. Denmark will require foreigners entering the country to provide a negative Covid-19 test from 27 December, regardless of vaccination status. Montenegro’s president, Milo Djukanović, tested positive for Covid-19 after being in contact with an infected person. The Spanish region of Catalonia will introduce a night curfew on Thursday. United States Emergency Covid testing sites are being set up in hard-hit areas across the US. The US Supreme court will hold a special session on Biden’s nationwide vaccine-or-testing Covid mandate for large businesses and a separate vaccine requirement for healthcare workers. The US Food and Drug Administration authorised Merck’s antiviral pill, molnupiravir, for Covid-19, after giving the go-ahead to a similar treatment from Pfizer a day earlier. Asia China locks down 13 million people in Xi’an after detecting 127 Covid cases. All residents are barred from leaving their houses except to buy living necessities every other day or for emergencies. Organisers of the Beijing Winter Olympics said they expect a “certain number” of Covid-19 cases in China due to foreigners arriving for the Games. South Korea set a new record for Covid deaths on Thursday. Australia reintroduced Covid curbs such as mandated mask wearing indoors, capacity limits and QR code check-ins to cover most of the population on Thursday as daily infections hit a fresh record. Australia will also shorten the interval for people to receive their booster shots to four months from five from 4 January. South America: Ecuador is making vaccination against the coronavirus mandatory. Middle East Covid infections are rising again across the six Gulf Arab states after months of low or falling figures. Federal officials have loosened rules that call on health care workers to stay out of work for 10 days if they test positive amid fears that a new Covid wave could overwhelm understaffed US hospitals, the Associated Press reports. Those workers now will be allowed to come back to work after seven days if they test negative and don’t have symptoms. Isolation time can be cut to five days, or even fewer, if there are severe staffing shortages, according to the new Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidance. CDC Director Rochelle Walensky said in a statement: As the health care community prepares for an anticipated surge in patients due to omicron, CDC is updating our recommendations to reflect what we know about infection and exposure in the context of vaccination and booster doses. “Our goal is to keep health care personnel and patients safe, and to address and prevent undue burden on our healthcare facilities.” Isolation is designed to keep infected people away from uninfected people, to prevent further spread of the virus. Samantha Lock here and back with you on the blog. I’ll bringing you the news from over here in sunny Sydney so let’s start with a quick snapshot of how Covid is unfolding in Australia. The nation’s most populous state of NSW recorded 5,612 new coronavirus cases, while Victoria recorded 2,095. Covid-19 booster shots have been brought forward to four months with plans to reduce the gap even further to three months on 31 January and restrictions have returned in most states and territories. The Czech Republic will require all foreigners visiting the country to have a negative PCR coronavirus test prior to entry starting from 27 December, unless they had a booster vaccine dose, the health ministry said. The measure is aimed at limiting the spread of the Omicron coronavirus variant during New Year’s celebrations, Reuters reports. Australia will shorten the interval for people to receive their booster shots to four months from five from 4 January, the country’s health minister, Greg Hunt, said, as the country grapples with record infections fuelled by the Omicron variant. The wait time will be further reduced to three months from 31 January, Hunt said during a media conference, Reuters reports. Brazil registered 3,645 new cases of coronavirus and 137 further Covid-19 deaths in the last 24 hours, the country’s health ministry said on Thursday, Reuters reports. Montenegro’s president, Milo Djukanović, tested positive for Covid-19 after being in contact with an infected person, Reuters reports. “The president has mild symptoms and feels well. In line with epidemiological measures he will remain in self-isolation from where he will perform his regular presidential duties,” said the statement posted on the presidential website. Ecuador’s government said it has made it obligatory for eligible people to be vaccinated against Covid-19, amid an increase in cases and the circulation of new variants of the disease, Reuters reports. About 12.4 million Ecuadoreans – or 77.2% of those aged 5 and over – have been fully vaccinated against the disease, the health ministry said in a statement. “Ecuador declares vaccination against Covid-19 to be obligatory. This decision was taken because of the current epidemiological situation: the increase in infections and the circulation of new variants of concern like Omicron,” the statement added. General Motors has joined a group of companies that will not send employees or top executives to the Consumer Electronics Show (CES) in Las Vegas in the US next month due to the growing concerns about Omicron variant, Reuters reports. The Spanish region of Catalonia won court approval for a night curfew on Thursday as Madrid pledged to distribute millions more test kits to tackle the Omicron variant that is driving up infections and overshadowing Christmas. Omicron’s arrival has sent daily cases soaring to a record of more than 72,900 on Thursday. Catalonia, which surrounds the city of Barcelona, will ban residents from leaving their homes between 1am and 6am from Thursday night, while other regions took a less stringent approach. Southern Murcia told non-essential businesses to shut at 1am, severely curtailing revelry in a country where bars and restaurants routinely stay open until the small hours, Reuters reports. Doctors in the UK have made an urgent plea to keep Christmas celebrations small as scientists said mounting evidence that the Omicron variant of coronavirus is milder may not be enough to stop the NHS being overwhelmed. In the first government study of its kind, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) found that the risk of being admitted to hospital is up to 70% less for people with Omicron compared with those infected with Delta. But the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) warned ministers that the new variant would have to be about 90% less severe for hospital admissions not to reach previous peak levels, “unless the wave peaks early for other reasons”, according to minutes published. The US administered 500,222,330 doses of Covid-19 vaccines in the country as of Thursday morning and distributed 611,897,975 doses, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said. Those figures are up from the 499,013,558 vaccine doses the CDC said had gone into arms by 22 December, out of 609,035,545 doses delivered. The agency said 241,520,561 people had received at least one dose while 204,740,321 people are fully vaccinated as of 6am ET on Thursday, Reuters reports. Anti-vaccination protesters who attempted to serve spurious legal papers to the former England football captain Alan Shearer delivered the documents to the wrong house, it has emerged. The former Newcastle United and Blackburn Rovers striker had encouraged people to get a Covid booster jab in a video promoted by the Premier League last week. Italy has banned all public New Year’s Eve celebrations as daily Covid-19 infections hit a record high, the government announced. Health minister Roberto Speranza said mask-wearing would be compulsory outdoors again and ordered people to use the more protective Ffp2 face masks on public transport and in public places such as theatres and cinemas and at sports events. In addition, concerts and open-air events will be banned until 31 January, and discos and dance clubs will have to shut their doors until that date, in an effort to prevent mass socialising during the holiday period, Reuters reports. US president Joe Biden’s steps to relieve hospitals and distribute 500m at-home coronavirus test kits, however welcome, are too little too late to stem a surge of Omicron-related coronavirus cases over Christmas and New Year’s, health experts said. A day after Biden outlined his plans, Anne Rimoin, a UCLA professor of epidemiology, praised his focus on testing, a “critical tool” that the US was “woefully” behind on. “Unfortunately, it’s late in coming and will be a small drop in the bucket compared to the tsunami of cases on the horizon.” The White House said it is grateful that former US president Donald Trump received and promoted getting the Covid-19 vaccine booster shot. The Republican former president recently said in an interview that he received a booster shot, and called the vaccines “one of the greatest achievements of mankind”. “We’re grateful that the former president got the booster, and we’re also grateful that he made clear in a recent interview that they work and they’re safe,” press secretary Jen Psaki told reporters in a briefing, Reuters reports. More than 35,000 British retailers and 20,000 bars and restaurants are facing significant financial distress, according to new data, while shoppers are forecast to spend almost a quarter less in physical stores this Boxing Day than before the pandemic. If fashion and footwear shops, furniture businesses and other “non-essential” retailers are allowed to remain open from 26 December, £3.94bn is expected to be spent in stores and online that day, 10% less than before the pandemic and 1% lower than last year. Spending in physical stores alone is expected to fall by 23% compared with 2019 as many shoppers avoid high streets, shopping centres and retail parks amid fears over the Omicron variant of coronavirus. Around one in 10 new cases of the Omicron variant of coronavirus identified in England have been linked with a previous infection of Covid-19, new analysis shows. Of 116,683 people with a confirmed or probable case of Omicron recorded between 1 November and 18 December, 11,103 (9.5%) were connected to a previous confirmed infection and were at least 90 days from previously testing positive. The UK Health Security Agency (HSA) said the findings showed that the population reinfection rate had “increased sharply and disproportionately” to the number of first infections, PA reports. The HSA said the ages of the cases linked with a previous infection ranged from infants to people in their 90s, while there were 69 people for whom Omicron was their third episode of infection, the HSA said. Here are all the key coronavirus developments in the world today: The risk of being admitted to hospital is 70% less with Omicron than with Delta, according to a new UK study that confirms earlier analysis. Meanwhile, South African data suggested the Omicron coronavirus variant is 70% to 80% less severe than the Delta. France, Italy and the UK all reported record daily tallies of coronavirus infections. Greece banned Christmas and New Year’s Eve festivities to curb the spread of Omicron, China’s city of Xi’an implemented a lockdown and Malta banned all events where attendees are standing, except weddings and funerals. Several countries tightened restrictions for tourism and visitors. Lebanon will require all tourists to show a certificate of vaccination or a negative PCR test within the previous 48 hours to enter restaurants and hotels, while Denmark will require foreigners entering the country to provide a negative Covid-19 test. I’m signing out for the end of the day; thanks for following the blog. We’ll be continuing coverage into the evening, with Nadeem Badshah taking over. Lithuania’s parliament has passed a law that will require lawmakers to have a Covid health pass starting from January in order to attend hearings, bringing them in line with broader immunity certificate rules in the country. AFP reports: Doors to the building will only be open to MPs who are fully vaccinated, have recently recovered from Covid-19 or have tested negative for the virus over the previous 72 hours. It is possible that lawmakers unable to attend parliamentary hearings because they do not have the health pass will see their salaries cut. More than 600,000 people will be forced to isolate with Covid across the UK on Christmas Day after a record 119,789 tested positive, the highest daily figure since the pandemic began, Jem Bartholomew writes. The surge triggered by the Omicron variant means that 608,000 people who have had Covid confirmed since 18 December in England and 15 December in the rest of the UK will still be in their isolation period on 25 December, Guardian analysis shows. France has just confirmed its tally of daily new coronavirus infections at 91,608, the highest in the pandemic so far. The risk of being admitted to hospital is up to 70% less for people with Omicron compared to those infected with Delta, according to the first UK government study of its kind. People with Omicron are estimated to be between 31% and 45% less likely to attend A&amp;E compared with those with Delta, and 50% to 70% less likely to require admission to hospital, according to the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA). The early findings, described as “encouraging” and “promising”, are consistent with analysis published on Wednesday by Imperial College London and the University of Edinburgh. The Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, has asked states to ramp up oxygen supplies and strengthen health infrastructure to curb a possible surge of Omicron cases ahead of the festive season. Reuters reports that India recorded 236 Omicron coronavirus cases across 16 states over the past 24 hours, more than double from last week. The government said in a statement: PM directed the officials to ensure that the health systems in the states, beginning from the district level, are strengthened to meet any challenge posed by the new variant. It is important for states to ensure that the oxygen supply equipments are installed and fully functional, he (Modi) instructed the officials. The federal government has also urged states to impose curbs lasting for almost two weeks should there be a risk of an outbreak. France is expected to announce 88,000 coronavirus cases, the country’s highest daily tally during the pandemic so far. The health minister, Olivier Véran, said that Covid rules in the country would be likely to change shortly. The country reported that 3,208 people were in intensive car units for Covid-19 on 23 December, versus 3,147 the day before. There have been an additional 179 deaths in the past 24 hours. Italy reports that the daily tally of new infections rose to 44,595 from 36,293, hitting a record high. Healthy ministry data also showed that 168 coronavirus-related deaths against 146 the day before. Reuters reports: Patients in hospital with Covid-19 – not including those in intensive care – stood at 8,722 on Thursday, up from 8,544 a day earlier. There were 93 new admissions to intensive care units, up from 92 on Wednesday. The total number of intensive care patients increased to 1,023 from a previous 1,010. Here are some more expert tips on how to have a Covid-safe Christmas, from cutting back on socialising to staying outdoors. A new Guardian Australia series, Inside Covid, is taking an in-depth look at the stories that have remained hidden from public view during the pandemic. This latest instalment hears from three intensive care workers about what life has really been like on the ward. Germany has added the US, Spain and Portugal to its list of high risk areas for Covid while removing Austria, Reuters reports. Honduras began giving booster shots to all adults on Thursday, in efforts to suppress Omicron after previously only offering boosters to healthcare workers and vulnerable people. “Today we’re giving the Pfizer vaccine to the population aged 18 and above who have already had a second dose three months ago. We have not confirmed the presence of the Omicron variant, but we must prevent it,” health minister Alba Flores said. The UK detected 119,789 new Covid infections in the past 24 hours, a 139% rise on the 50,023 new cases recorded on Thursday two weeks ago. A further 147 people died from Covid-related causes, compared to 146 deaths recorded on Thursday last week. The NHS England national medical director, Stephen Powis, said the NHS was “on a war footing and staff are taking the fight to Omicron”. The UK health secretary, Sajid Javid, said ministers would not be imposing any fresh restrictions in England before Christmas, despite new cases on Wednesday rising above 100,000 for the first time in the pandemic. Vatican City has announced tighter restrictions for all Vatican workers, requiring them to show a green pass of Covid vaccination or virus recovery due to a “worsening of the current health emergency”. Previously, the unvaccinated could enter workplaces if they had proof of a negative test, but this will no longer be acceptable. It comes after Italy moved to tighten restrictions to curb a sharp rise in Covid infections, including making mask-wearing mandatory outdoors again. (See our earlier post.) Early data suggested the highly mutated Omicron variant accounted for 28% of Italian cases on 20 December, health authorities said. Poland reported 17,156 new Covid cases in the past 24 hours, according to Polskie Radio, a 37.5% decrease on the 27,459 recorded on Thursday two weeks ago. Poland’s most recent wave saw cases spike in late November and early December before receding in recent weeks. But Omicron – with 14 cases detected far in Poland – has led to fears of a resurgence. A further 616 people died related to Covid on Thursday, a 10% increase on the 561 deaths two weeks ago. A total of 93,445 in Poland have died with the virus. This is Jem Bartholomew taking charge of the global blog for a while. Drop me an email or message me on Twitter with any tips or stories, it’s always great to hear from you. Zambia will introduce booster vaccines from 27 December as it battles the coronavirus, which has infected over 200,000 people and killed more than 3,000. Reuters reports: The southern African nation also plans to start vaccinating children aged 12-17, who until now have not been eligible for the Covid-19 jab, health minister Sylvia Masebo said at a media briefing. Masebo said primary vaccination, currently below 15% of the eligible population, would remain a priority as Zambia seeks to raise its coverage to 70% by June next year. Denmark will require foreigners entering the country to provide a negative Covid-19 test from 27 December, regardless of vaccination status. Reuters reports: The requirement follows similar announcements from Nordic neighbours Sweden and Finland earlier this week. Under the new rules, all non-citizens and non-residents seeking to enter the country will need to present a negative PCR test taken within 72 hours, or a negative rapid antigen test taken within 48 hours, the Danish ministry of health said in a statement. The rules are set to be in force until at least 17 January and failure to comply will result in a fine of 3,500 Danish kroner (£396). The US Food and Drug Administration has authorised Merck &amp; Co’s antiviral pill for Covid-19, after giving the go-ahead to a similar treatment from Pfizer a day earlier. Reuters reports: Merck’s drug, molnupiravir, developed with Ridgeback Biotherapeutics, was shown to reduce hospitalisations and deaths by around 30% in a clinical trial of high-risk individuals early in the course of the illness. The agency authorised the oral drug for the treatment of mild-to-moderate Covid-19 in adults who are at risk of severe disease. The north-eastern Spanish region of Catalonia will ban residents from leaving their homes between 1am and 6am from the morning of 24 December, although other regions continue to take a less stringent approach. Reuters reports that the region won court approval for a night curfew on Thursday as Madrid pledged to distribute millions more test kits to tackle the Omicron variant. Southern Murcia has also told non-essential businesses to shut at 1am, curtailing revelry in a country where bars and restaurants routinely stay open until the small hours. “The idea is to try to limit, during the Christmas season, social interactions where the mask is not used,” Murcia’s regional leader, Fernando López Miras said as he explained the measure, which northern Aragon was also considering. The Guardian’s US team have interviewed experts on how to make the Christmas holidays as safe from Omicron as possible, with useful advice that’s applicable to lots of other countries. Italy is planning to tighten restrictions to curb a sharp rise in Covid-19 infections, including making mask-wearing mandatory outdoors again. The prime minister’s office said that among other measures that look set to be approved when the cabinet meets later on Thursday will be an order making it compulsory to wear the more protective FFP2 face masks in public spaces such as theatres, cinemas and at sports events, Reuters reports. The statement said the government was also considering closing discos and clubs up until New Year’s Eve. The validity of Covid-19 health certificates, which give access to an array of places and services, will be cut to six months from nine months. In addition, the government is reviewing whether to speed up booster shots, seen as the most effective shield against the Omicron variant, by cutting the waiting time after the second vaccine to four months from five. Germany’s Robert Koch Institute for infectious disease confirmed the country’s first death due to the Omicron variant of the coronavirus on Thursday, Reuters reports. The person who died was between the age of 60 and 79, the institute said. There were 810 new Omicron cases reported, bringing the total number of cases with the variant to 3,198. The only cases counted are those that are detected by whole-genome sequencing or a diagnostic suspicion based on a variant-specific PCR test. Lebanon’s tourism ministry has ordered restaurants, hotels and entertainment venues to require a certificate of vaccination or a negative PCR test within the previous 48 hours from visitors from 17 December until 9 January. Malta will ban all events where attendees are standing rather than seated, except weddings and funerals, from 27 December, the Times of Malta reports. The Maltese health minister, Chris Fearne, also announced that from 17 January, bars, restaurants, clubs, gyms, pools and spas, casinos, gaming halls, cinemas, theatres and sport venues will be open only to those who have a valid vaccination certificate. All establishments will have a 1am curfew. Sports events may continue, but no spectators will be admitted. Visiting hours at hospitals will be reduced. All those over 18 will be able to apply for a booster jab from Monday. A new Guardian video is showcasing the voices of healthcare workers around the world, who have been on the frontline of the coronavirus pandemic for almost two years. Five doctors who have worked in hospitals in Uganda, New Zealand and the US, India, England, and Brazil share how the pandemic has tested them personally and professionally, but how they continue to find hope and resolve to keep working. China’s Xi’an city has implemented a lockdown for its 13 million residents to curb rising Covid-19 infections, Reuters reports. The daily count of domestically transmitted infections with confirmed symptoms in the north-western city has increased for six straight days since 17 December. That takes the tally of local cases to more than 200 over the period from 9 December to 22, smaller than many outbreaks outside China. No Omicron infection has yet been found in Xi’an, capital of Shaanxi province. But consistent with Beijing’s stance that no flare-up can be allowed to spread, Xi’an has made it hard for residents to leave. Those who want to leave must test negative before departure and get clearance from employers or community-level authorities. From Thursday, each household may send only one person to shop for necessities every two days, while others may not leave unless they have essential jobs. Around 1.2 million people in England are thought to have been infected with Covid-19 last week, representing 1 in 45 of the population and a new pandemic record, official estimates show. London was worst hit with an estimated 1 in 30 people infected with the coronavirus last week, according to the figures from the Office for National Statistics. The percentage of cases of the Omicron variant increased in all regions apart from the northeast. In Scotland, 1 in 80 people were estimated to be infected with COVID-19, a decrease from 1 in 70 the previous week. The estimates for Wales and Northern Ireland were unchanged at 1 in 50 and 1 in 55. Greece has banned public Christmas and New Year’s Eve festivities and mandated mask-wearing in open spaces to curb the spread of the Omicron coronavirus variant, its health minister said. Reuters reports: The measures will come into effect on Friday morning and will also require citizens to wear two masks or masks offering high protection on public transport and in supermarkets. Foreign visitors are “strongly encouraged” to take two PCR tests a few days after arrival. The health minister, Thanos Plevris, said additional measures were expected in the new year, mainly in entertainment and sports events, to avoid another lockdown. Coronavirus infections have started rising again across the six Gulf Arab states after months of low or falling figures, according to official health data. Reuters reports: The United Arab Emirates (UAE) has seen a particularly sharp increase in Covid-19 infections since announcing the arrival of Omicron early this month, with 1,002 cases of coronavirus recorded on Thursday, up from 68 on 2 December. The resurgence comes during the region’s peak tourism season, especially in the UAE which is welcoming millions of visitors to the Expo 2020 Dubai world fair and other seasonal events. All six countries have identified Omicron in their territories – though their daily tallies do not break down the infections by variant. The Gulf’s most populous country, Saudi Arabia, registered 252 new infections on Thursday, up from daily tallies of around 50 recorded since late September. Health authorities there advised citizens and residents this week to avoid all unnecessary foreign travel. The kingdom reported its first Omicron case on 1 December. Oman, Qatar and Bahrain are also seeing cases pick up, although less dramatically. Kuwait reported 143 new cases on Wednesday, its highest daily count since late August. The Omicron coronavirus variant is spreading rapidly in Italy, with early data showing it accounted for 28% of cases on 20 December, health authorities say. Reuters reports that the National Health Institute (ISS) has released preliminary data of a flash-survey showing it accounted for 28% of cases on 20 December, compared with just 0.19% of cases on 6 December. Comparison of the two reports shows the variant’s doubling time is about two days, in line with the pattern already found in other European countries, ISS said. “Although the results are still preliminary, the estimate confirms the great speed of diffusion of the variant, which is set to become dominant in a short period of time,” said the ISS president, Silvio Brusaferro. The data was provided in the morning to the government, which is expected to decide at a cabinet meeting later on Thursday on new measures to tackle the pandemic. Rachel Hall here taking over the live blog from Charlie Moloney for the rest of the day. I’ll be keeping you updated with all the latest developments around the world, but if you’ve got any ideas for things I’ve missed please drop me a line at rachel.hall@theguardian.com. Power cables are believed to have been stolen from a vaccination centre in the middle of a surge in Omicron cases. The leads, used for a generator at a site in Tonbridge, Kent, were reported missing by local MP Tom Tugendhat on Twitter on Thursday. Tugendhat took to social media to try to source new cables to get the centre up and running for the day. The Tonbridge and Malling MP, who has served as chairman of the foreign affairs committee since 2017, said: “Someone has stolen the leads to the generator of the vaccination centre on Sovereign Way, Tonbridge. We need to replace them urgently.” Data from South Africa suggests the Omicron coronavirus variant is 70% to 80% less severe than the Delta one, the head of the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) said on Thursday, but that should not be extrapolated to all countries. “We should interpret the data from South Africa with a lot of caution,” John Nkengasong told an online media briefing. “This is early days and public health practice is local.” He added that factors such as the young median age of the South African population could be playing a part in what was being observed in the country. Germany’s health minister said on Thursday that he expects a surge in coronavirus cases around new year and people will probably need a fourth vaccine shot to maintain the best immune response against Covid-19. Karl Lauterbach told public radio network WDR 2 that Germany hasn’t yet seen a big, rapid wave of new infections from the Omicron variant like some European countries. “That will change around new year and in the first week of January,” Lauterbach said. The government is urging Germans to limit their contacts over the holiday period and to get vaccinated, including with booster shots if they have already had their initial vaccines. Russia’s coronavirus death toll passed the 600,000 mark on Thursday, Reuters calculations based on official data showed, after a surge of infections linked to the Delta variant. Russia had the third highest toll in the world with 600,434 fatalities, behind the United States which has recorded around 813,000 deaths and Brazil with 618,000. The Omicron variant, which is spreading fast in other countries, has so far made little impact on the Russian data. Officials said this week they had detected only 41 cases. The calculations were based on figures from the Rosstat statistics service up to the end of October, and data from the Russian coronavirus taskforce for November and December. Rosstat figures usually exceed those given in daily updates by the coronavirus taskforce. It has yet to publish figures beyond October. It is possible that people may need to get a fourth dose of the coronavirus vaccine, a UK scientist has suggested. Adam Finn, a professor of paediatrics at the University of Bristol and a member of the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI), told LBC Radio: “I think there will be people probably who will receive a fourth jab – whether that will be everyone, I think, is still very much in doubt. “We do need to see how things go through this wave and beyond. “I think there may well be people who received their boosters early who are in the older more vulnerable age groups who may need a further jab – that has not been decided yet. “It is still under review and discussion, and we will be providing recommendations on that at some point in the new year.” Australia reintroduced COVID-19 curbs such as mandated mask wearing indoors, capacity limits and QR code check-ins to cover most of the population on Thursday as daily infections hit a fresh record, fuelled by the highly infectious Omicron variant. The changes for 17 million people two days before Christmas mark a reversal of the country’s plans for a permanent reopening after nearly two years of stop-start lockdowns as the new variant rages through the community in spite of double-vaccination rates of more than 90%, Reuters reports. Hospitalisations and deaths remained low, but the explosion of infections had created a risk of healthcare workers being furloughed by testing positive, the authorities said. The country recorded more than 8,200 new cases, by far its biggest daily rise since the pandemic began, from a previous record of 5,600 a day earlier, mostly in the states of New South Wales (NSW) and Victoria. Here’s a quick take on where New Zealand stands with its fight against Covid from our reporter in Wellington, Eva Corlett. As the Covid-19 pandemic hurtles towards its second anniversary, New Zealand will emerge from 2021 with some of the best health outcomes in the world, despite confronting its toughest few pandemic months. This year New Zealand experienced its longest lockdown, its highest daily case numbers (222 in mid-November), more hospitalisations than in 2020 and a pivot away from the government’s ambitious elimination approach to one of strict virus control. But it can now boast a 90% double vaccination for the eligible population and one of the lowest per capita death rates, while its cases in the current outbreak are trending downwards. As other countries reimpose restrictions alongside the Omicron variant’s emergence, New Zealanders can look forward to celebrating Christmas and the new year with family and friends. With no community cases of Omicron yet detected, restaurants, cafes, cinemas, sports venues and night clubs remain open with minimal constraints aimed mostly at the unvaccinated. Read the full story here. If you’ve just joined or you’re waking up over in the UK here is a quick snapshot of the how Covid is unfolding across the world: Omicron carries lower hospitalisation risk and does not cause more severe illness than previous variants, studies from the UK and South Africa suggest. China locks down 13 million people in Xi’an after detecting 127 Covid cases. All residents are barred from leaving their houses except to buy living necessities every other day or for emergencies. Australian states reimpose mask mandates with NSW and Victoria set to join Queensland, the ACT, Tasmania and parts of the Northern Territory in requiring masks for inside areas. Organisers of the Beijing Winter Olympics said they expect a “certain number” of Covid-19 cases in China due to foreigners arriving for the Games. South Korea set a new record for Covid deaths on Thursday. Emergency Covid testing sites are being set up in hard-hit areas across the US. Americans vaccinated and boosted who choose to attend large gatherings over the holidays may not be safe, even for those who received a booster dose, top US infectious disease expert Dr Anthony Fauci said. In Quebec, Canada, gatherings inside homes will be limited to six people or two family bubbles beginning the day after Christmas. Hello. Samantha Lock here as we continue to go through all the latest Covid developments from across the world. If you’ve just joined us it’s been a particularly fast-moving past 24 hours as researchers rush to understand the severity of Omicron and nations reimpose Covid curbs. Let’s start with some promising news that the Omicron variant - which has so far been detected in 106 countries - may be less severe than other coronavirus strains such as Delta. The latest data suggest Omicron does not cause more severe illness than previous variants, but soaring infection numbers could still cause more deaths. An Imperial College study analysed hospitalisations and vaccine records among both Omicron and Delta Covid cases in England between 1 and 14 December. Researchers found the Omicron variant appears to be milder, with a 20%-25% reduced chance of a hospital visit and at least a 40% lower risk of being admitted overnight. A separate, preliminary analysis of Omicron cases in Scotland pointed to an even greater reduction in the risk of hospitalisation compared with Delta. Scientists on the Eave II study, using hospital data from 23 November to 19 December, concluded that the risk of hospitalisation may be 70% lower with Omicron than Delta. While Omicron takes hold across Europe, parts of Asia are still battling the Delta variant. South Korea set a new record for Covid deaths on Thursday, reporting another 6,919 new coronavirus cases and 109 related deaths in the past 24 hours, according to data released by the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency. A record number of 1,083 people were also admitted to hospital with serious symptoms and in critical condition. The Asian nation is struggling to contain a surge in Covid-19 cases that is placing intense pressure on medical services, reportedly prompting the prime minister, Kim Boo-kyum, to commit to securing an additional 10,000 hospital beds for patients with moderate to serious symptoms by the middle of next month. In case you missed our earlier story, Rhoda Kwan has more on the Chinese lockdown as she reports from Taipei. Up to 13 million people have been placed into lockdown in the city of Xi’an in China’s north, as authorities move to clamp down on the community spread of Covid-19 after 127 infections were found in a second round of mass testing. The snap lockdown on Thursday comes little over a month before Beijing is set to host the Winter Olympics. All residents in Xi’an are barred from leaving their houses except to buy living necessities every other day or for emergencies, while travel to and from the city is suspended save for in exceptional circumstances requiring official approval. All non-essential businesses have also been closed. Authorities issued an order late on Wednesday, according to the state news agency Xinhua. The vice-premier, Sun Chunlan, has travelled to the region to oversee implementation of the lockdown. The lockdown measures are some of the most severe since China locked down 11 million residents in Wuhan in early 2020, where the Covid-19 virus was first detected. Read the full story here. India is reporting a daily increase of 7,495 new Covid infections. The south Asia country also recorded another 434 deaths with a cumulative death toll nearing half a million at 478,759, according to the health ministry. Speaking of Australia, here is a visual snapshot of where the country stands in its fight against the coronavirus. The premier of Australia’s most populous state of NSW, Dominic Perrottet, addressed the media on Thursday to confirm masks will be mandated for inside areas and density limits would also be imposed. As of midnight tonight, we will be requiring that masks are worn in indoor settings. We are encouraging people, particularly over the holiday period, if you can work from home, please work from home. We’ll be moving from hospitality venues indoors to two square metres from December 27 to January 27 ... And also the indoor face mask requirement will also be in place until January 27 as well.” Perrottet cautioned against mingling, saying: In addition to that, we’re encouraging people not to mingle and when you’re out and out at a restaurant or cafe and a pub or a club, please where possible don’t mingle. The news follows the state of Victoria, which recently reintroduced an indoor mask mandate on advice of the chief health officer. From 11.59 tonight, face masks will be required in all indoor settings, except private homes, for persons eight and over.Face masks will also be required at major outdoor events for people over 30,000 people. They can be removed when seated. Mask mandates are now, or will in the next 24 hours, be in place in NSW, Victoria, Queensland, the ACT, Tasmania, parts of the Northern Territory and certain high-risk settings in South Australia. Organisers of the Beijing Winter Olympics said they expect a “certain number” of Covid-19 cases in China due to foreigners arriving for the Games, and strongly urged participants to get vaccination boosters due to the spread of the Omicron variant, Reuters news agency reports. The Games, set to run from 4 February to 20 February, will take place in a “closed loop” in order to contain the spread of the virus in China, which has among the strictest Covid curbs in the world and has largely managed to contain local outbreaks. Han Zirong, vice president and secretary-general of the Beijing organising committee, told a press briefing on Thursday: A large number of people from different countries and regions will come to China and the flow of people will increase. Consequently, a certain number of positive cases will become a high probability event.” China will not allow overseas spectators at the Games and has reported five cases of the Omicron variant, including four from people entering the country from overseas. America’s National Hockey League yesterday announced that its players will not participate in Beijing. Meanwhile in neighbouring Japan, the government is not considering an immediate change to current Covid-19 restrictions, Chief Cabinet Secretary Hirokazu Matsuno said on Thursday, a day after community transmission of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus was discovered. The government confirmed on Wednesday that a family of three based in the western city of Osaka had the Omicron variant and the origin of how they had caught the virus could not be traced. Japan decided to extend strict border controls “for the time being”, the prime minister, Fumio Kishida, said yesterday despite criticism from students waiting to take up university places and families who say they have been unfairly separated by the restrictions. Kishida had originally said those measures would stay in place until early January. Japan is recording comparatively few daily cases, but Kishida warned of the need to remain vigilant, speed up the booster rollout and promote the use of orally administered Covid-19 drugs, the Kyodo news agency said. Thailand is reporting another 2,940 new coronavirus cases and 30 deaths. This is an increase on the 2,532 new coronavirus cases and 31 deaths on Wednesday, according to the ministry of health. Thailand has also reinstated mandatory Covid quarantine for foreign visitors and scrapped a quarantine waiver. The move was confirmed by the government, which said the action was being taken due to concerns over the spread of the Omicron variant. Malaysia is also reporting another 3,419 locally-transmitted Covid cases and 29 deaths, according to the ministry of health. South Korea has just released its daily Covid report, setting a new record for Covid deaths on Thursday. The east Asian nation reported another 6,919 new coronavirus cases for Wednesday and 109 deaths, according to data released by the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency. A record number of 1,083 people have been admitted to hospital with serious symptoms and in critical condition. The previous record high of critically ill patients was 1,063 recorded earlier this week. The number of deaths has also just surpassed 5,000 with 5,015 cumulative deaths reported. South Korea is struggling to contain a surge in Covid-19 cases that is placing intense pressure on medical services, prompting the prime minister, Kim Boo-kyum, to commit to securing an additional 10,000 hospital beds for patients with moderate to serious symptoms by the middle of next month, the Yonhap news agency reported. South Korea now requires citizens over 18 to present a quarantine pass, proof of Covid vaccination or negative PCR test to access indoor sports events, cinemas and concert halls. Other new restrictions include social distancing measures that will last until at least 2 January, limiting gatherings to no more than four people and forcing restaurants, cafes and bars to close by 9pm. Emergency Covid testing sites are being set up in hard-hit areas across the US. The first site opened in New York City on Wednesday, with more set to open next week. Sites such as the one just opened in NYC hopes to provide 25,000 free PCR tests a week. The new testing sites follow criticism of a widespread Covid testing shortage before the holidays. A surging demand for tests, driven by the new variant and the winter holidays, has led to long lines and shortages around the country. Pressed about US testing shortages amid the Omicron surge, US president Joe Biden conceded in an interview with ABC that “nothing’s been good enough”. “We’re nearly two years into the pandemic and a year into your presidency. Empty shelves and no test kits in some places, three days before Christmas … is that good enough?” asked ABC’s David Muir. “No, nothing’s been good enough,” said Biden. “I wish I had thought about ordering” the 500m at-home tests two months ago, the president later added. Americans vaccinated and boosted who choose to attend large gatherings over the holidays may not be safe, even for those who received a booster dose, top US infectious disease expert Dr Anthony Fauci said on Wednesday. Fauci told a White House briefing: There are many of these parties that have 30, 40, 50 people in which you do not know the vaccination status of individuals. Those are the kind of functions in the context of Omicron that you do not want to go to.” The seven-day average of Covid-19 cases in the United States rose 25% from the previous week to about 149,300 cases per day, said US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Rochelle Walensky, with average daily deaths up 3.5% at 1,200. Over in Canada, Quebec’s premier has just announced that beginning the day after Christmas, gatherings inside homes will be limited to six people or two family bubbles. Restaurants are already operating at half capacity and need to close their doors at 10pm. Now they will also have to limit groups at tables to six people or two families from 26 December. Premier Francois Legault said the “exponential” increase in coronavirus infections over the past week is continuing. He said Quebec will report about 9,000 news cases for Wednesday. “For the past week, the number of cases has increased very rapidly,” Legault said. Earlier this week, the French-speaking Canadian province abruptly closed bars, gyms and schools and warned that further restrictions could be coming while awaiting projections on the spread of the virus and its impact on hospitalisations. If you missed our earlier stories detailing the results of two recent studies out of the UK and South Africa, here’s a brief run-down on what it all means. An Imperial College study analysed hospitalisations and vaccine records among both Omicron and Delta Covid cases in England between 1 and 14 December. Researchers found the Omicron variant appears to be milder, with a 20%-25% reduced chance of a hospital visit and at least a 40% lower risk of being admitted overnight. A separate, preliminary analysis of Omicron cases in Scotland pointed to an even greater reduction in the risk of hospitalisation compared with Delta. Scientists on the Eave II study, using hospital data from 23 November to 19 December, concluded that the risk of hospitalisation may be 70% lower with Omicron than Delta. South Africa has also reported data on Covid cases driven by the Omicron variant that appears to give added impetus to claims Omicron carries a lower severity of disease. “In South Africa, this is the epidemiology: Omicron is behaving in a way that is less severe,” said Prof Cheryl Cohen of the country’s National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD), one of the authors of the study. “Compellingly, together our data really suggest a positive story of a reduced severity of Omicron compared to other variants,” she said during a news conference by a group of NICD scientists on Wednesday. Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog as we near the end of the week and the countdown to the holiday break really begins. I’ll be bringing you all the latest Covid developments from across the world. Let’s start with some promising news that the Omicron variant - which has so far been detected in 106 countries - may be less severe than other coronavirus strains such as Delta. The latest data suggest Omicron does not cause more severe illness than previous variants, but soaring infection numbers could still cause more deaths. “We do have some data suggesting that rates of hospitalisation are lower,” said WHO’s technical lead on Covid-19, Maria van Kerkhove, while cautioning against drawing conclusions from early data. Kerkhove’s statement seems to be backed by two studies out of South Africa and the UK. Researchers from the Imperial College in London found the Omicron variant appears to be milder, with a 20%-25% reduced chance of a hospital visit and at least a 40% lower risk of being admitted overnight. The findings follow a study from South Africa’s National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) which found “reduced severity” of Omicron compared to other variants. “In South Africa, this is the epidemiology: Omicron is behaving in a way that is less severe,” said NICD professor Cheryl Cohen. As Covid numbers continue to increase throughout practically all regions of the world, China is continuing to pursue it’s strict Covid-zero policy. Authorities in the northern city of Xi’an have imposed a stringent lockdown after 52 new reported infections were recorded. More than 13 million people will be ordered to stay at home except to buy necessities once every two days or in emergencies from midnight on Thursday. Here’s a run-down of all the Covid news you may have missed: Europe Covid booster drives are likely to prolong the pandemic, head of the World Health Organization has said. The WHO’s European chief has warned countries to brace for a “significant surge” in cases as Omicron spreads across the continent. The WHO also cautioned there is not enough data on Omicron severity yet. European countries including Germany, Sweden, Finland and Portugal announced they will reimpose Covid curbs just before or after Christmas. Italy’s prime minister Mario Draghi said the government is preparing new Covid restrictions, including the return to mandatory mask-wearing outdoors and the use of more protective FFP2 masks indoors. Wales will impose a rule of six in pubs, cinemas and restaurants from 26 December. France could soon have around 100,000 new Covid cases a day, health minister Olivier Veran said on Wednesday, up from around 70,000 currently as the country battles a fifth wave of the epidemic. France on Wednesday also opened vaccinations to children aged between five and 11. The UK recorded 106,122 new Covid cases on Wednesday, the highest daily figure since the beginning of the pandemic and the first time cases have passed 100,000. Britain has signed contracts to buy a further 4.25m courses of antivirals for its health service to help combat the Omicron variant. England cuts Covid self-isolation to seven days with a negative test. Denmark will tighten restrictions in schools from 5 January with pupils and staff taking two weekly tests, staff and parents urged to wear facemasks. Belgium is set to close cinemas and theatres close from this weekend in tightening of Covid measures. Face masks will once again be compulsory at all times outdoors in Spain. Germany’s new health minister Karl Lauterbach suggested a fourth Covid-19 vaccine dose would be required in order to protect against the Omicron variant. United States US regulators approve the first Covid antiviral pill. The US recorded the lowest rate of population growth in its history in the first year of the coronavirus pandemic, according to the US Census Bureau. Asia Japan has confirmed its first known local transmissions of the new Omicron variant of the coronavirus in Osaka. In northern China, the city of Xi’an has entered lockdown, ordering all 13 million residents to stay home from midnight on Thursday. Households may only “send one household member outside once every two days to purchase necessities” while everyone else must remain indoors except in the case of an emergency. Singapore will freeze the sale of tickets for arriving flights and buses under its quarantine-free travel programme for four weeks from Thursday. Africa A study from South Africa suggests Omicron carries a lower risk of hospitalisation and severe disease. Scientists from the National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) found the risk of hospital admission was roughly 80% lower for those infected with Omicron compared with Delta though high population immunity may also be a factor. Unvaccinated people in Kenya will be banned from public places, the health ministry said. Middle East Israel will offer a fourth dose of the Covid vaccine to people over the age of 60 or with compromised immune systems, and to health workers. In Nigeria, around a million AstraZeneca Covid doses donated by developed countries were destroyed Wednesday after they expired. AstraZeneca has said it is working with Oxford University to produce a vaccine for the Omicron variant.The family owners of Selfridges have sold out to a Thai retailer and an Austrian property company for an estimated £4bn ($5.36bn) in a deal which sees the return of the luxury department store’s former boss Vittorio Radice. Thailand’s Central Group and Austrian real estate company Signa Holding already jointly own major department stores in Italy, Germany and Denmark via a division run by Radice, who left Selfridges in 2002, the year before Canada’s Weston family bought it for £628m. The firms are thought to have beaten off rival bids from the Qatar Investment Authority, which owns Harrods, and Lane Crawford, a Hong Kong-based department store owner. The Thai group, which began with one store in Bangkok run by Tiang Chirathivat in the 1950s, last year listed part of the business on the Thai stock exchange, and has other interests in convenience stores, shopping centres and hotels. Signa is owned and run by René Benko, one of Austria’s richest men. The deal with the Westons includes Selfridges’ four UK stores – in London, Birmingham and two in Manchester – as well as Brown Thomas and Arnotts in Ireland and De Bijenkorf in the Netherlands. It also covers about £2bn of the chain’s prime property assets, including the freehold of its listed Oxford Street flagship store in London. A source told Reuters the new owners hope to build a luxury hotel alongside the site. The Westons, one of Canada’s richest families, first confirmed they might consider a sale of their European department stores in June after an approach from a mystery buyer. They are not selling their Canadian chain Holt Renfrew. The deal comes shortly after the death of the 80-year-old head of the family, W Galen Weston, who had spearheaded the purchase of Selfridges in 2003. Investment in Selfridges could be a boon for ailing Oxford Street, the home of its flagship London outlet, at a time when department stores across the country are downsizing or closing. London’s premier shopping street has seen visitor numbers and sales dive as international tourists have been kept away by Covid travel restrictions and businesses have switched to working from home. Department stores have been particularly hard hit across the country because of high business rates and rents on their large stores, which have faced increasing competition from specialists and online outlets. Among the stores currently lying empty on Oxford Street is Debenhams, the department store chain which collapsed last year, leading to the closure of more than 120 high street outlets. Fellow department store group Beales also went into administration last year, with only a handful of its 22 outlets since revived. John Lewis has closed 16 outlets in two years, while House of Fraser now has just 42 of the 59 outlets it had in 2018 when it was bought out of administration by Sports Direct boss Mike Ashley’s retail group. Its flagship store on Oxford Street is to close in January, and its Swindon site also recently closed.Selfridges’ new owners are taking control of a premium brand in a deal that will reunite the department store with its former boss. The Weston family, owners of Selfridges since 2003, have sold their European department stores to a Thai conglomerate, Central Retail group, and an Austrian property company, Signa Holding, which already jointly own upmarket department stores in Italy, Germany and Denmark through a division run by the former Selfridges head Vittorio Radice. The deal is the latest instalment of a rollercoaster history for the brand founded by a retail legend. After more than 20 years rising through the ranks of the Marshall Field’s store in Chicago, in 1906 the US entrepreneur Harry Gordon Selfridge arrived in the UK with one intention: to found a great department store. By some accounts, he was tempted to the UK by Liverpudlian Samuel J Waring Jr, who had built up a string of furnishings stores in London and wanted someone to run a neighbouring shop to his new Waring and Gillow outlet on Oxford Street. It was initially intended to be called Selfridge-Waring store, but Selfridge took control when his partner hit financial difficulties and the new store opened in March 1909 under his name alone. From the start, Selfridge embraced retail theatre and was determined his store would be “a civic centre, where friends can meet and buying is only a secondary consideration”. On the opening day, which drew enormous crowds, the store dazzled shoppers with live music, abundant floral displays and copious lighting in its airy halls. The store sold a huge range of goods but, out of respect for his early business partner, not food or furnishings. It housed a library, a rest room for ladies, a picture gallery and a restaurant linked to a roof garden. Selfridges set a new benchmark for UK department stores, ditching the tradition of housing staff above the shop and opting for large modern window displays more akin to advertising than the practice of piling up as many goods as possible. When the store was awarded one of English Heritage’s blue plaques in 2003, the charity said: “It is largely thanks to Selfridge that Oxford Street remains the commercial heart of the West End.” The store was originally much smaller than today but gradually extended backwards and westwards along Oxford Street through the 1920s, to consume almost two blocks. At one point it encompassed 100 departments, including a shooting range and an ice rink, and today houses a cinema. From the late 1920s, Selfridges expanded across the UK, but these provincial stores were sold off to John Lewis in the 1940s and the founder was ousted from its board. The Oxford Street flagship was bought up by the Liverpool-based owners of the Lewis’s department stores group. In 1965 Selfridges was bought by the Sears group, owner of a string of high street footwear brands including Dolcis and Saxone. It was used as the launchpad for the Miss Selfridge chain and opened a food hall and hotel, but gradually became fusty and unloved. The department store was demerged from the ailing Sears in 1998, two years after appointing Radice, an Italian retail expert and previously the boss of Habitat, as managing director. Radice led a bold £100m reinvention of the store as a “house of brands”, taking it more upmarket. Just like Gordon Selfridge, he courted publicity with elaborate events, and launched the brand’s re-expansion outside London. In 2003 Selfridges, then listed on the London Stock Exchange, was bought by the Canadian billionaire Galen Weston for more than £600m, just after Radice’s 2002 exit for an unsuccessful stint running Marks &amp; Spencer’s furniture division. The Westons, one of Canada’s richest families, first confirmed in June this year they may consider selling their European department stores after an approach by a mystery buyer. The deal includes Selfridges’ four UK stores – in London, Birmingham and two in Manchester – as well as Brown Thomas and Arnotts in Ireland and De Bijenkorf in the Netherlands. It also covers about £2bn of the chain’s prime property assets, including the freehold of its listed Oxford Street flagship store in London, but not the family’s Holt Renfrew department stores in Canada. It is not clear why the Westons decided to sell during a pandemic. However, the auction began shortly after the death of Galen Weston, 80, head of the family. Central Retail group and Signa Holding are taking ownership just as the business is likely to require an influx of new funds. In the year to February 2020, Selfridges’ sales rose by 7% to £1.97bn, but profits fell 10% to £88m. Since then, department stores, especially in London, have suffered from a drop in international travel, while their large expensive buildings continue to attract high property taxes and they have been forced to close for lengthy periods during high street lockdowns.Australians will soon be able to access Covid-19 vaccine booster shots four months after their second dose, then the wait will be shortened again. The government has said the minimum interval will be cut from five to four months on 4 January, and reduced to three months on 31 January. The move, announced on Friday, follows calls from state premiers to speed up the shots to better protect against the more infectious Omicron variant. The Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation said maximising booster coverage – if combined with “enhanced public health and social measures” – may prevent a large surge in case numbers, hospitalisations and deaths. The chief medical officer, Prof Paul Kelly, said the decision was “based on the science and the medical advice” but acknowledged it also took into account logistical challenges, such as the exhaustion of the health workforce. “It’s just not feasible to suddenly give those large numbers their doses during this period,” Kelly told reporters in Canberra. He said it was important to continue to prioritise groups who would be most at risk of severe illness from Covid-19. The health minister, Greg Hunt, said the changes to intervals would increase the number of people who were eligible for boosters from 3.2 million now to 7.5 million as of 4 January. Shortening access to three months on 31 January would mean 16 million Australians would then be eligible. Hunt said the decision was “all about following the medical advice and making sure that there’s an orderly staged process”. “So, of course, there has to be a priority program,” Hunt said, joining the press conference by video link from Melbourne. “The alternative of suddenly putting an extra 4 million people who would displace the older or more immunocompromised and less presently vaccinated is absolutely at odds with the right way.” Hunt said Australia had “more than enough supply of the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines to roll out booster doses to the newly eligible cohort from 4 January”. In its formal advice, Atagi recommended bringing forward the minimum interval from five months to four months for over-18s “as soon as practical, noting the holiday period”. “It is understood that this is achievable from 4 January, although some providers may have flexibility to administer before that time,” the advice said. “In addition, as soon as practicalities allow, Atagi recommends providing boosters to all eligible adults from a minimum of 3 months following the second dose of the primary course.” Atagi said it expected an earlier booster does would reduce the risk of symptomatic infection, severe illness and death from Covid-19, and could play a role in reducing impacts on the health system. The advisory body said while some early data indicated the risk of hospitalisation due to Omicron was lower than with the Delta variant, “this difference would not be enough to offset the impact of high case numbers on the health system”. “Atagi expects that booster vaccination alone will not be sufficient to avert a surge due to Omicron,” the body said in advice published on Friday. “However, maximising booster coverage by expanding eligibility and encouraging high uptake, in combination with enhanced public health and social measures, may prevent a large surge in case numbers, hospitalisations and deaths.” New South Wales on Friday reported 5,612 new cases of Covid, while Victoria had 2,095 cases and numbers in other states and territories also continued to rise. Kelly told reporters Australians should expect to see a continuation of the “very rapid rise in cases” as a result of Omicron – but the country had “three main weapons” to use against the variant. In addition to the vaccination and booster program, Kelly cited public health and social measures – such as mask mandates – and noted that the states were now in “pretty close alignment”. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, on Wednesday declined to specifically endorse mask mandates – contrary to the latest health advice – but instead “highly recommended” that Australians to wear them in indoor settings. The following day the NSW government – which had similarly been emphasising “personal responsibility” performed a U-turn and reintroduced mask mandates. Many other states and territories have also tightened restrictions. Kelly said the third weapon in the fight against Omicron was test, trace, isolation and quarantine arrangements. He and the state and territory chief health officers have been asked to report back to national cabinet in early January to consider policy changes in response to Omicron, including the definition of close contacts and who should be told to stay at home. The announcement comes a day after the federal Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, predicted Atagi would recommend bringing forward boosters, and called on the government to prepare for it. Hunt had on Thursday branded Albanese’s comments as “utterly irresponsible, utterly inappropriate, utterly unworthy of somebody who wants to be a PM”. But on Friday the health minister said the bringing forward of booster shots should come as “no surprise”. Albanese welcomed the announcement, but said it was another example of the government “always playing catch up”. “This is a government by echo. Labor says something, then we wait a couple of days to hear it back from the government as if it’s its own idea,” Albanese told reporters on Friday. “When it comes to getting boosters, when it comes to wearing masks, when it comes to getting tested, or QR codes, what the Australian people want, particularly during this Christmas period, is certainty, clarity and leadership. They’re not getting it from this government.” Hunt and Kelly both made the point the changes did not mean people were “overdue” for the booster the day they became eligible. The minister said the vaccination program for children aged five to 11 years – due to begin on 10 January – was “proceeding precisely according to the schedule”. He said the Therapeutic Goods Administration was making “great progress with batch testing”, and he hoped no Australians “would want us to delay or defer childhood vaccination”.Shane Delia knows what it’s like to juggle a busy life better than most. Between running his wildly successful “finish at home” foodery Providoor, heading up a group of Melbourne restaurants and bars, being a hands-on dad and attending to a host of other commitments, he manages a packed diary. How does he stay flexible enough to deal with it all? Up and at ’em Every day is different in Delia’s house, but his mornings always start the same way: with self-care. Bright and early, he’s out the door and into the car to train at his favourite gym. Keeping his mind and body strong helps Delia deal with any unexpected surprises. “I think being mentally, emotionally and physically healthy is the best preparation for any busy person.” With his workout done, Delia comes home to make sure his children, aged 11 and 8, are ready to go. “I train in the morning, and I do it at 6.30am so I have time to spend time with the kids,” he says. “That’s important.” With kids’ uniforms on and lunchboxes packed, all three jump in the car for the morning school run. Knowing he has a dependable car - with the right tyres - is a must. Today’s family man has so many priorities to manage; a versatile tyre such as the MICHELIN LTX Trail can take them on-road and off, and provide safety for the family long term. No such thing as a regular day With his day underway, Delia catches up with his “amazing” personal assistant, running through who he’s seeing, what’s on and where he needs to be. Delia splits his time between multiple foodie projects, including his renowned Delia Group of restaurants, which includes Maha, Maha East, Maha Bar, Biggie Smalls and Middle Ground. A typical day can find him in the kitchen, undertaking media appearances, being an enthusiastic ambassador, working on Providoor and supporting underprivileged communities. It’s a hectic schedule that keeps him on his toes. The concept behind Providoor reflects the versatility and innovation by which Delia lives his life. With Melbourne and Sydney spending months in lockdown, he found a solution to customers’ mobility being limited - but not their hunger for a delicious high-end meal. “I’d say the first half of my morning is spent on Providoor, working through the multitude of challenges there. Every day is different, [but] with TV appearances, the brand partnerships I have, and restaurants, the rest of my day is filled up.” The same ethos of quality, agile thinking and flavour exists throughout the hospitality industry, and is celebrated globally by Michelin’s passion for travel and dining as well as keeping people safe on the road. Whether entrepreneurs are juggling school drop-off or planning a pristine menu, Michelin supports them at every step of a busy day. Evenings with family Three nights a week, Delia lives the fast-paced chef life in one of his award-winning restaurants, where he can find himself working pretty late. For three other nights, he’s at home with his family, wrangling kid business and getting everyone organised before he puts his feet up. “I’m very lucky; I do the drop-offs and my wife does the pick-ups. I try to be home around five o’clock, which gives me time to get dinner ready - I like to cook for the kids. Then it’s after-school homework, all the other bits and pieces and getting them to bed so I can have some downtime on the couch with my wife.” That leaves Monday night, which is always dinner at his mum’s house, where 20 to 30 people gather every week for a meal. Then, with the evening over, Delia reflects on his busy, fulfilling life. “I use it as an opportunity to be thankful for what’s transpired during the day.” Finding a balance Delia says the working day never really ends for him, and that’s the way he likes it. “Structure is important. I’m a routine guy - if I don’t have things calendared in my diary, they don’t happen. Then, when things do pop up, I’m ready for it because I’ve got a good structure.” A self-confessed “list guy”, he also keeps a hand-written rundown of everything that needs to happen the next day. He’s old-school - it all goes into his beloved Moleskin notebooks, of which he fills up about 10 a year. It’s not just the big things on his list; it’s all the small stuff that keeps his life running smoothly, too, such as checking in with an employee or making sure his tyres are in good nick. While he’s run off his feet some days, he also has the flexibility to show up when it’s most important - such as starting work early so he can pick up his son for footy practice after school. Every Friday afternoon, he meets up with one of his best friends for a walk to clear their heads and debrief. Choosing an incredible team and having the right tools for the job makes striking a balance possible. “I’m just the front man, really. I’ve got an amazing team of people, hundreds of staff that work autonomously. It’s really satisfying to be in a team that’s performing so well.” And what happens when the day is over? “I don’t finish up my day,” he laughs. “I never finish up my day.” Whether you’re managing your daily activities or finding new weekend trails, the MICHELIN LTX Trail tyre keeps you going.Is your Christmas cheer evaporating? Are you doomscrolling yourself into a complete funk? Try putting the phone down, making an eggnog and getting into some tasty online content from Australian arts companies to help inoculate you against the onset of festive season blues. These gorgeous shows are streaming right now. Brandenburg Orchestra’s Noël! Noël! Recorded in Sydney’s City Recital Hall, conducted by Paul Dyer, played on period instruments and featuring the Brandenburg Choir, this is a Christmas-on-a-stick concert of hymns, Baroque cantata, excerpts from Handel’s Messiah and the occasional cheeky surprise. And the mood boost you need right now looks as good as it sounds. Available to stream here until 4 January. Pinchgut At Home A season or single show pass to Pinchgut Opera’s At Home series makes for a great present for a loved one – or for yourself. Among the current offerings from the Sydney-based company include A Delicate Fire (a celebration of the life and music of the remarkable Venetian composer Barbara Strozzi), The Loves of Apollo &amp; Daphne (Cavalli’s opera very wittily directed by Mitchell Butel, which premiered earlier this year) and Messe de Minuit, a concert of the French 17th-century composer Marc-Antoine Charpentier’s joyous music for the festive season. Digital season passes are $50. Find out more here. Sydney Opera House The Sydney Opera House has partnered with the British Council to present Who Are We Now, a suite of on-demand digital goodies (some to pay-per-view, others free) from some of the UK’s leading theatre companies and choreographers. The current headliner is the National Theatre of Scotland’s Edinburgh festival hit Adam, a play inspired by the life of Egyptian trans man Adam Kashmiry (he also stars) and the obstacles – cultural and geographic – he faced on the journey to becoming himself. Also available is Lady Blackshirt, a film from the Bristol-based dance theatre company Impermanence exploring the lives of the early feminist Mary Richardson; and Fevered Sleep’s 8 Tender Solitudes, a film created during Britain’s third wave lockdown featuring seven extraordinary dancers working solo to explore loss, loneliness and sensuality in extraordinary times. More titles will be dropping throughout January, including choreographer Corey Baker’s pandemic take on Swan Lake. The Opera House is also offering – to rent – a digital stream of Matthew Bourne’s 1997 production Cinderella. Head to Sydney Opera House’s streaming platform here. The Australian Ballet’s Merry Widow Featuring Lisa Pavane, Steven Heathcote, David McAllister and Colin Peasley, this ABC recording – captured in 1993 in Melbourne, and available on the Australian Ballet’s digital platform – is a comfort viewing time capsule. If you are looking for something more representative of the way things are now under artistic director David Hallberg, check out the Australian Ballet’s free-to-view Bodytorque channel. Watch The Merry Widow for free here, or below: Melbourne Symphony Orchestra Over the past couple of years of pandemic interruption, the Melbourne Symphony Orchestra has become one of Australia’s leaders in live and on-demand digital programming. Its archive of concerts, captured in high definition video and audio in Melbourne’s Hamer Hall, is as extensive as it is impressive. Among the shiniest baubles on offer are Rachmaninov’s Symphony No 2, under the baton of Lawrence Renes; a great series of Jams for Juniors; and conductor Nicholas Carter’s partnering of Schubert’s Unfinished Symphony with Franz Schreker’s Kammersymphonie. Head to MSO.live here for their full suite of offerings. Opera Australia TV The OA’s on-demand channel has the Opera on the Harbour extravaganzas free-to-view. You miss the sensations of a summer night breeze in your hair but the audio and video quality is excellent and there are fireworks with every show. Our pick? The bold and brilliant 2014 Madama Butterfly starring Hiromi Omura. Watch Opera Australia’s Opera on the Harbour here.A group of third-grade students were treated to an early Christmas surprise when their teacher made an impressive basketball shot from across the court and celebrated the win with hot chocolates. Kathleen Fitzpatrick, known as Ms Fitz to her students, promised hot chocolates for all if she made the improbable shot in Washington DC earlier this week. Celebratory scenes from the Holy Trinity School playground show a group of students eagerly watching on and then erupting into fits of joy the moment the ball effortlessly sails into the basket. “In case you needed proof that teachers were superheroes,” the school wrote alongside the video in a social media post which has since gone viral. “Ms Fitz threw a Hail Mary and promised all the 3rd graders hot chocolate if she made the shot.” Photos later uploaded to the school’s Facebook page on Tuesday show the students enjoying the drinks inside a classroom of the Catholic elementary school. The school has since provided an update after staff said they were “overwhelmed” by the response from the public. “We are overwhelmed by the messages and comments we have received and feel blessed that Ms Fitz gave us permission to share this video, which has brought a smile to so many people all over the world,” an addendum reads on the school’s Instagram page.Two more Hong Kong universities have removed works of art marking Beijing’s deadly 1989 crackdown on Tiananmen Square democracy protesters, as authorities move to erase memorials to the event. The removals come a day after Hong Kong’s oldest university took down a statue named the Pillar of Shame, commemorating the events of 1989, sparking outcry by activists and dissident artists in the city and abroad. Hong Kong used to be the one place in China where mass remembrance of Tiananmen was still tolerated, with thousands gathering each year to mourn the hundreds of democracy protesters killed by Chinese troops in 1989. The city’s university campuses have sustained the memory of the crackdown, with statues commemorating the events a vivid illustration of the freedoms the semi-autonomous territory enjoyed. But early on Friday, the Chinese University of Hong Kong (CUHK) removed the Goddess of Democracy from its campus. The sculpture by Chen Weiming – a 6.4-metre (21ft) high replica of the giant statue that students erected in Tiananmen Square – had become a potent symbol of Hong Kong’s local democracy movement. Around the same time, the Lingnan University of Hong Kong removed another relief sculpture marking the Tiananmen crackdown. The removals took place on Christmas Eve, when most students were on break and away from campus. CUHK said it removed the “unauthorised statue” after an internal assessment, adding that the groups responsible for moving it to the campus in 2010 were no longer functional. Lingnan University said it had taken down a wall relief, also created by Chen, after having “reviewed and assessed items on campus that may pose legal and safety risks to the university community”. Chen told Hong Kong Free Press he would be speaking to his lawyers about the removal of his work. “It is a major regret,” he said. “I am concerned about whether the monuments are damaged and where they are placed currently. When I have more information. I will contact my lawyers in the US to see if any legal actions can be taken.” “They acted like a thief in the night”, he told AFP. “They were afraid of exposure and of a backlash from students and alumni.” The move sparked anguish among former students of CUHK. “I feel heartbroken and shocked,” said Felix Chow, a former Chinese University student and district councillor. “This statue represents the school environment is open. It’s a symbol of academic freedom ... It makes people doubt whether the school can still ensure the space is free and people can speak freely,” he told Reuters. On Thursday the removal of the Pillar of Shame at Hong Kong University was decried by dissidents and activists living overseas. “They have used this despicable act in an attempt to erase this bloodstained chapter of history,” Wang Dan, one of the Tiananmen student leaders who was jailed after the crackdown, and now lives in the US, wrote on Facebook. Samuel Chu, the president of the Campaign for Hong Kong, said: “Its creation in 1997 was a touchstone for freedom in Hong Kong; its destruction in 2021 would be a tombstone for freedom in Hong Kong.” Beijing is remoulding Hong Kong in its own authoritarian image after democracy protests two years ago, and commemorating Tiananmen has become effectively illegal. An annual candlelight vigil to mark the 4 June crackdown has been banned for the last two years, with authorities citing security and pandemic fears. There is no official death toll for the Tiananmen massacre but activists believe hundreds, possibly thousands, of people were killed. With Agence France-PresseAboriginal health services in the Northern Territory are shutting down over Christmas, prompting calls for the federal government to step in and provide local health support to communities that have been exposed to Covid. Health centres such as Anyinginyi health Aboriginal corporation, which is based in Tennant Creek and the Barkley region, where more than 130 people have tested positive, will close on Friday afternoon and remain closed until Wednesday morning. Northern Territory senator Malarndirri McCarthy says the shutdown was foreseeable and the federal government should step in to provide holiday cover. “It’s concerning that some health clinics in remote Central Australian communities are shutting down over the Christmas period,” the Yanyuwa woman told Guardian Australia. “The federal government should have had contingency plans to support the health of remote communities through the holiday period.” The NT recorded 10 new cases on Thursday, five of which were in Tennant Creek. Tennant Creek is now under a lockout order, which means that double-vaccinated people can move around provided they wear masks. Unvaccinated people, or those who have only received one dose, are still in lockdown. People who are fully vaccinated and can produce a negative rapid antigen test are allowed to leave the town, but only double-vaccinated essential workers are allowed into remote communities. The Northern Territory’s second dose vaccination rate currently sits at 83.7% for people aged 16 and over. But vaccination rates are much lower in the regions. As of last week, just 37% of people aged 16 and over in the Barkley region had received two doses of a Covid-19 vaccination. Vaccination rates in communities such as Epenarra and Canteen Creek were even lower, with double dose rates of 20% and 26% respectively. “We have to be mindful that while the territory as a whole has reached its vaccination target, many remote communities are lagging behind,” McCarthy said. First Nations people were part of the first phase of the vaccine rollout, but lack of supplies combined with misinformation campaigns slowed the uptake. McCarthy said that misinformation would have been countered earlier if the federal government had funded public health campaigns in language at the start of the rollout. “It’s great to see First Nations health and media groups providing in-language messaging about vaccines, but we need to see a consistency of funding for this from the federal government,” she said. Anyinginyi has provided daily video updates on social media to explain the restrictions. Chair Ross Jakamarra Williams said that people who have been identified as close contacts of positive cases will be taken to Howard Springs to quarantine. “We know Covid is around us,” he said, in a message posted on the health service’s Facebook page on Thursday. “The government mob, police are doing contact tracing to check on whether some of us might be in close contact with someone who had Covid. Don’t panic, they are doing it for our safety and to protect our community for the virus. They will be taking us to Howard Springs for safety and for safety of our family and community. “Pack your bag with things that you really need and follow the instructions of the police. And once you’ve been tested negative you can come back. Remember we are in a pandemic. We are doing all of this for the safety of our family and our community.”A Philippine family set to be deported from New Zealand on Christmas Day after the father used a false address to claim food vouchers out of desperation has been granted a last-minute reprieve in what they described as the “best present”. Jeffrey Santos had used a false address to claim $1,600 in vouchers because he lost his job when the Covid lockdown struck in March 2020 and was ineligible for New Zealand’s income relief payment, which wasn’t available to migrant workers. As a result, Jeffrey, his wife, Marjorie, and 8-year-old son James were to be deported back to the Philippines on Christmas Day. “I couldn’t pay rent for two weeks, I had to do something,” Santos told Stuff on Thursday. “I wish I hadn’t done this, but it is too late.” Except it wasn’t. In a reversal which Green MP Ricardo Menéndez March described as a “Christmas miracle”, Santos has been granted a 12-month work visa after an outpouring of anger from New Zealanders. “This is the best present I have ever seen,” said Santos. “This is the first time in our lives we have got a big present!” He said he had invited his son’s two best friends to come round to their house for a Christmas party after hearing the news. “Right now we’re having a Christmas celebration. We’ll sort everything else out later on.” Santos’ current boss Anita Brodie heard the news partway through a call with the Guardian. “Everyone knows that what he did was wrong, but he was absolutely desperate and took the only option available to him,” she said, before pausing. “Oh, this is Jeffrey now. Just give me one second.” After a few moments, Brodie began to shout. “Are you serious? Are you serious Jeffrey? That’s incredible! I’m so happy for you!” When New Zealand went into lockdown last year, Santos – a carpenter – lost his job. By April 2020 his family were struggling financially, prompting him apply for food vouchers using a false Queenstown address. Santos took full responsibility for his actions and has repeatedly apologised. The turnaround in the Santos’ case came after news of their deportation prompted outrage around New Zealand. Max Harris, a Rhodes scholar and left-wing writer, said that when he read about the situation on Thursday he immediately knew it was “unduly harsh” since “the family couldn’t pay rent, couldn’t receive the wage subsidy or the income relief payment and in the Philippines hospitals have been overwhelmed by Covid.” Harris and others began organising a social media campaign encouraging people to write to immigration minister Kris Faafoi urging him to exercise discretion and allow the Santos family to stay. Hundreds of people did so. Jeffrey’s previous appeals had won support from Menéndez March, a former anti-poverty activist, and advocacy group Migrante Aotearoa. But the appeals failed after Immigration New Zealand decided the family did not have “exceptional humanitarian circumstances”. By Thursday Santos had exhausted his normal rights of appeal. But on Friday, under significant public pressure, associate immigration minister Phil Twyford – who initially refused Santos’ appeal – intervened. Although he is relieved the Santos family won’t be deported, Menéndez March says their case illustrates wider difficulties with New Zealand’s treatment of migrant workers. “What Jeffrey and his family went through was a direct result of government decisions which meant that migrant workers didn’t have adequate income support systems during an incredibly challenging time … Santos did what I think many parents would have done, which is to find any avenue possible to feed your child. Santos’ survival was effectively criminalised.” “At all stages of the way, we’ve chosen not to support migrant communities. This decision illustrates those systemic failures. While I’m elated about the individual outcome, I hope this serves as a call to action for government to address those barriers for migrants so they have access to a life with dignity.” Immigration New Zealand has been approached for comment.To me, the Christmas season doesn’t start when offices close. It’s not when the first person on the street turns on the Christmas lights, or even once the Christmas pageant has been held. It’s the first day I hear a carol. Everyone’s got their favourites. It might be a classic or a cover, religious or secular, joyful or sad. Whatever it may be, and however much we might roll our eyes, it’s a great time for music. Which means a great time for musicians. Christmas music has long been helping artists make money. In fact, the Guinness Book of World Records calls Bing Crosby’s 1942 White Christmas the bestselling single of all time, with more than 50m sales worldwide. There was a time when releasing a Christmas album was an artist’s best hope at making a few dollars, and while there’s no exhaustive source of album releases, Allmusic data suggests there were more than 230 Christmas albums released in 2001. Source: author calculations based on Allmusic By 2011, that number had plunged to a little over 90. A rough early count suggests that this year, the tally will be about 60. What’s with the decline of Christmas albums? First, it’s symptomatic of the slow demise of albums more broadly. As musical technology and formats have changed, so too have preferences. In the 2010 calendar year, Australians bought 33m CD albums. By 2020, the number had dropped to 3.3m – one-tenth of the value it was 10 years ago. In a return to retro, forecasts suggest that in 2021, we probably spent more on vinyl than on CDs. CDs defined the album format. A CD can fit 74 minutes of content – the length of Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony. Fans were willing to pay a premium for an album ($20-$30) over a single ($5-$10). Labels and artists designed albums with two to three hopeful hits (which would be spun out in to singles), and a balance of filler tracks. The practice was both common and common sense. Now, of course, there is streaming. According to 2020 figures, streaming represents 89% of total recorded music sales in Australia by value. By all accounts, you’re more likely to see a subscription gift card in your email this year then you are to see a CD wrapped underneath a tree. Artists and labels have adapted accordingly. Under streaming models, music makers get paid every time someone listens to a track – or the first 30 seconds of it. The result is more focus on singles, and shorter track lengths. You could break a three-minute song in to two one-and-a-half minute songs, or three one-minute songs, and get paid double (or triple) as much for your efforts. The other contributor is that streaming provides better access to a wider catalogue. In a physical music store, constraints around distribution and physical space meant that artists were very reliant on labels and networks to get access to consumers. Whether a single or an album, you could only take up shelf space for so long. Music had a short half-life. Online, however, there are few limits. Musicians can reach audiences of millions without labels – a Scottish man singing a Kiwi folk song on a social media platform became the song of a pandemic, with more than 75m views. It’s also enabling access to golden oldies – and increasing focus on them. Older Christmas songs have become increasingly prominent on Spotify charts over the last five years. As an example, consider the most streamed songs in Australia on 20 December from 2017 (the first year Spotify chart data is available) onwards. In 2017, every song in the Top 10 had been released that year. In 2018, Mariah Carey’s 1994 festive hit All I Want for Christmas Is You made the list – and it has featured in the Top 10 every year since. Three out of the Top 10 streamed songs on Spotify in Australia on 20 December 2021 were from previous years. This is not to say that there have been no new contenders. This year, Ed Sheeran, Kelly Clarkson and Megan Thee Stallion have all thrown their hats in to the ring. Yet none have made the Christmas week Top 50. It’s no wonder that festive new releases have declined. Nostalgic Christmas listening is not limited to streaming. Consider the classic crooners making money from beyond the grave. There has been at least one Christmas album release from Bing Crosby, Elvis Presley, Dean Martin, Frank Sinatra or Nat King Cole every single year for the last decade. Not bad considering none of them have not seen a Christmas in more than two decades. Source: author calculations based on Allmusic Love them or hate them, Christmas songs are here to stay. So turn it up and make the most of it while it lasts – January is only a week away. • Jessica Mizrahi is an economic consultant and commentator. She has taught, researched and applied economics for over a decade • The author previously served on the board of the Australian Live Music Business Council and has previously co-authored research commissioned by the Australian Independent Record Labels Association. All opinions and analysis are her ownKing Felipe is expected to try to turn the page on another turbulent year for Spain’s royal family in his annual Christmas Eve address, amid speculation that his father, Juan Carlos, hopes to return to the country soon. The former monarch abdicated in favour of his son seven years ago and left Spain abruptly for the United Arab Emirates in August 2020 in an attempt to protect the crown from a series of damaging allegations about his financial dealings. Felipe had sought to stem the damage months earlier by stripping Juan Carlos of his annual stipend and renouncing his personal inheritance from his father in response to reports that he was in line to receive millions of euros from a secret offshore fund with ties to Saudi Arabia. This month the Spanish newspaper El Mundo cited sources close to Juan Carlos earlier as saying the 83-year-old was keen to return to Spain on a temporary basis as early as January. The report came hours after Geneva’s top prosecutor’s office said it had closed a criminal investigation into allegations of money laundering stemming from a $100m (£75m) payment from Saudi Arabia, because of insufficient evidence. Juan Carlos was not among the five indicted suspects in the case. The prosecutor’s office said the investigation had established that Riyadh made the payment to a Panama-based foundation whose beneficial owner was Juan Carlos, but it had been unable to clearly link the payment to a 2011 deal under which a Spanish consortium was awarded a €6.7bn (£5.7bn) contract to build a high-speed rail line in Saudi Arabia. The Swiss investigation was one of several launched in recent years into the financial arrangements of the former king, undermining the Spanish monarchy’s fragile grip on power and denting the popularity of a leader who played a pivotal role in restoring democracy to Spain after the death of Gen Francisco Franco in 1975. Supreme court prosecutors in Spain continue to examine allegations of kickbacks from the Saudi Arabia deal and potential tax fraud. Juan Carlos has said he never told his son he was to benefit from two offshore funds, but has made no further comment on the allegations. Spain’s Socialist prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, brushed off suggestions of an imminent return this month, saying the government had not had any conversations with the royal household about it. “We’re talking about two different institutions, which obviously collaborate and cooperate in an extraordinary way, but the Spanish government has not been consulted on this question,” Sánchez said. “Of course, I believe that King Juan Carlos has to provide explanations.” The former king’s wish to return to Spain could be further complicated by a case playing out in a high court in London, where a former lover has alleged she was subjected to a campaign of harassment by state agents directed by him. In a skeleton argument presented to the court in early December, lawyers for Corinna zu Sayn-Wittgenstein said she was seeking damages for the “great mental pain, alarm, anxiety, distress, loss of wellbeing, humiliation and moral stigma she has suffered.” Juan Carlos’s lawyer argued that sovereign immunity should apply in the case. In written arguments before the court, Daniel Bethlehem QC said the former king “rejects the allegations made against him, and any alleged wrongdoing by the Spanish state is denied in the strongest of terms.”The spike in cases caused by Omicron is forcing states that had previously adopted Covid-zero approaches to confront their first major outbreaks since the beginning of the pandemic, with South Australia recording more infections per capita on Friday than Victoria. On Friday, SA recorded 688 new Covid-19 infections, with the state’s premier, Steven Marshall, revealing about 70% of them were from the Omicron variant. “What we are very concerned about is the very significant increase in transmissibility. We do have to take action,” Marshall said on Friday. The SA government has responded by overturning a ban on rapid antigen testing, as well as continuing with a number of restrictions that had been due to end on 28 December. In Queensland, where 589 new cases were recorded on Friday, the health minister, Yvette D’Ath, warned residents to “get ready for Covid”. In Western Australia, the last Australian state to cling to a Covid-zero approach before a planned border reopening in February, there were five new cases on Friday after a French backpacker returned a positive test. One of the new cases is a close contact of the man, while the others were casual contacts from an event in Perth. The state’s premier, Mark McGowan, initially reported that there were four new cases but said a fifth had been confirmed during his press conference. Two of the five cases were unvaccinated, while one was unconfirmed. McGowan, who has staked his political reputation on keeping WA Covid-free and has employed tough and controversial border measures throughout the pandemic, announced a number of changes, including upgrading Queensland and South Australia to high-risk locations. But even McGowan hinted the possibility of changes to that approach on Friday, saying the 5 February border change may be “redundant” if the state saw significant spread of the virus. “It may well come forward because if we have community spread of the virus … it may well be that February 5 becomes redundant,” he said. But in New South Wales, where case numbers began to dramatically spike as a result of the Omicron variant earlier in December, early reports from some frontline doctors have provided reason for optimism. On Thursday, the state’s premier, Dominic Perrottet, said emerging data from NSW suggested the Omicron variant was “five times less severe” than the Delta variant. The NSW chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, said evidence from both here and overseas indicated “infection with Omicron is likely to be milder than infection with Delta, with the risk of hospitalisation being about 60% to 80% less than for Delta”. That was supported by a UK government study released on Friday, which suggested the risk of being admitted to hospital was up to 70% less for people with Omicron compared to those infected with Delta. General practitioner Ziad Basyouny helped to establish out-of-hospital care for Covid-19 patients in western Sydney during the Delta wave and has continued to work in that team during the Omicron outbreak. Basyouny was unequivocal about the difference in presentations between the Delta and Omicron strains, saying the latter had so far seen most patients develop “very, very minor symptoms”. “It’s so apparent. Tomorrow I will have about 20 patients who are at high risk. Of those 19 will have no symptoms. It’s so different to Delta. During Delta, I’d call maybe 60 people a day and out of those all 60 would have symptoms,” he said. “People say it’s too early to call it milder and I know it’s too early for epidemiologists, but clinically I can’t say anything else. I can’t change the fact that these patients are presenting as less severe.” Despite that, the pace of the outbreak in NSW has seen increasing pressure on the health system. About 1,500 healthcare workers have been forced to isolate either because they have contracted the virus or are deemed a close contact. At the same time, the number of people receiving care outside hospital has fallen. On 14 December there were 3,300 people receiving some form of care out of hospital, about 65% of active cases. By the 22 December that figure had dropped to only 38% of active cases. According to Basyouny that was both a result of the variant’s milder outcomes, but also the ballooning case numbers. “The system would not cope if we continued to monitor all people who were infected even if they did not have symptoms, so we have to risk stratify people,” he said, adding that he had “no doubt” case numbers in NSW would reach 25,000 a day in the coming weeks. On Friday New South Wales recorded another 5,612 cases of the virus, as indoor mask mandates were reintroduced following a surge in cases of the Omicron variant – it now accounts for about 80% of the state’s cases. Despite reports of the strain’s mildness, the rapid increase in Omicron cases has still seen hospitalisation rates rise as many more people catch the virus. In the past 10 days the number of people in hospital with Covid has increased from 168 to 382. The state’s paramedics have also sounded the alarm about record numbers of triple-zero calls, leading to significant delays in response to emergency calls. The outbreak has also led to increased pressure on the state’s testing system, prompting a shift in the government’s messaging to urge people not to get tested unless they had symptoms or had been in close contact with a Covid positive person. “NSW Health reminds people that when you receive that notification from the QR check-in, that just lets you know someone was in that vicinity or premise who subsequently tested Covid positive,” Chant said on Friday. “What we’re stressing is that’s a prompt, a reminder for you to monitor for symptoms, so please get tested if you’re unwell but don’t get tested unless you are feeling unwell. “It is important we keep those testing resources focused on people that have symptoms or people that we’ve directed from public health to get tested or where you know you’ve had close contact with a case.” Victoria reported 2,095 new Covid-19 cases and eight deaths on Friday. A total of 397 patients are in hospital, including 75 in intensive care, with 40 on ventilation. The seven-day hospitalisation average is steady at 392. An indoor mask mandate for people eight years and older came into effect in Victoria on Friday. Masks will also be required at all major events with more than 30,000 patrons, including the Boxing Day Test at the MCG, but can be removed while seated outdoors. Masks are already required in retail settings, for hospitality workers and on public transport. The government is also recommending Victorians work from home over the festive season and hospitality venues are being asked to consider providing seated-only service. With Australian Associated PressThousands of Australians have had their domestic flights cancelled in the hours leading up to Christmas, as frontline staff were ordered to test and isolate amid a rise in Covid cases. At least 117 domestic services scheduled to fly to various cities from Sydney and Melbourne were cancelled on Friday. A Sydney Airport spokesperson told Guardian Australia that 80 of the 500 domestic services scheduled to arrive and depart Sydney on Friday had been cancelled. Many flights cancelled on Friday are Jetstar services, with the airline unable to staff all of its planned services because employees were sidelined due to Covid testing and isolation requirements. “Unfortunately like many people in Sydney and Melbourne, a large number of our frontline team members are being required to test and isolate as close contacts, given the increasing number of cases in the general community. As a result we have had to make some late adjustments to our schedule,” a Jetstar spokesperson said. The spokesperson said the airline had rebooked “the vast majority” of displaced passengers “within a few hours of their original departure time so they can get to their destination in time for Christmas”. “We appreciate the frustration these schedule changes cause and sincerely apologise for the impact to customers’ travel plans,” she said. While Jetstar was forced to make last-minute cancellations, both Qantas and Virgin Australia informed passengers earlier this week that their flights scheduled for Friday had been cancelled. It is understood that most of Qantas’s cancellations had been made to consolidate services due to lower-than-expected demand during the Christmas period, and that the airline is not suffering from staff shortages. A Virgin Australia spokesperson said there had been only one unplanned flight cancellation announced on Friday, with passengers booked on other cancelled services for Friday informed earlier this week and most moved on to other flights within an hour of their original booking. Meanwhile, the requirement for tourists to show a negative PCR test within 72 hours of entry to states including Queensland and Tasmania is contributing to growing queues at Covid-19 testing clinics and long delays for results across the country. Late on Thursday, the Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, said no final decision has been reached on substituting PCR tests for rapid tests on border crossings, despite the New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, saying she had already agreed to such a measure to help his state address the burden of “tourism testing”. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Demand for fast-turnaround PCR tests offered by private pathology providers for a fee has spiked in recent days, with some tourists unable to wait days for results before travelling. Histopath, a company that offers PCR test results within 90 minutes for a $79 fee, has been forced to limit customers at its clinics inside Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane airports to only international tourists travelling that day.‘Tis the season for jolly juice, guilty pleasure cinema and for mum to do something sweet. We asked readers what weird and wonderful Christmas traditions they would be bringing to life this year. Here’s how they responded. Several families enjoy raising their heart rates. But, such is the dichotomy of man, some choose to exercise their bodies We play volleyball. None of us really know how to play volleyball – Rinaldaaay Hiking the biggest mountain we can find – Olivercnwright Backyard Olympics! Team of two, games played around the yard. Grand prize is a rusty rat statue – Blue_eyed_grey While others choose to exercise their Dan Murphy’s reward cards Everyone must bring one party drink and one classic drink per person aka tequila and wine – Elle.Smith__ Pimm’s in the morning – A_mo5 Getting blind drunk on Xmas eve at the Polish in-laws place. Probably not a safe idea lol – Keegan.james.thomson Chocolate and champagne for breakfast – Georgie_22 A lot of people’s Christmas traditions revolve around quality screen time I have to watch the muppets Christmas movie on the day – Loushinie Christmas night, I take my little sister to see an advanced screening of an animated movie – Mjackson_91 National Lampoon’s Christmas Vacation – watch it with dad – Ebonyjgill Family viewing of The Grinch with Jim Carey – Nickheynsbergh Watching Love Actually every December – Its.cashonly Christmas tunes also topped these family charts Must open gifts to the Hi-5 Christmas album – Annablcy Being woken up by Little Drummer Boy at 6am blasting on full volume – _Sophielouise_do Act out and sing The 12 Days of Christmas along with other carols – Leoneeariel From beef pho to croissants – all sorts of delicacies will be filling plates this Christmas My late grandad’s plum tree gives us Christmas plums for plum pie every year – Xanya_baker_and_food_makerbi Viet restaurant in Fairfield for Xmas meal. Pho Dac Biet every time – Allie.chau To cook some curry for family &amp; friends … come on! Curry on Xmas day – Wazeemhasan84 Breakfast with croissants from the French bakery, the best fruit salad ever, plus coffee – Aesophia Cinnamon rolls for breakfast! – Marieevans A few people seemed a little confused about which hemisphere we are in My uncle has to “rip up the wrapping paper” and say it’s snowing every year – Ivealwayslovednoodles My brother and I make snow angels out of discarded wrapping paper on the floor – Lucymurrie And finally, proving mums are a real Christmas miracle, several respondents shared stories of their mum being cute My mum brings out these terrifying La Befana dolls my sister and I made as kids – Melaniejsimpson A week before Christmas my mum cooks a “practice pork” for part of our extended family – Sophiechristine183 Mum would always put a mango and a packet of chips in my stocking – Jufrecks Last-minute mass because mum’s Catholic guilt hits – Simonetimbrell1 35, still get mini boxes of cereal from my mum and still love it – InstaashleaQueensland restaurants looking forward to a bumper Christmas as tourists return are instead shutting their doors as Covid case numbers increase in the state. Some 300,000 people from Victoria, New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory, which have been experiencing high case numbers, travelled into Queensland after it opened its borders on 13 December. The hospitality industry was already crippled by staff shortages caused by closed borders and a lack of migrants and backpackers. Now restaurants are being forced to close as staff found to be close contacts must quarantine for a week. Noosa has been hit hard because of the small population pool, the dominance of the tourism industry, and the influx of tourists from other states. In one venue, Sum Yung Guys, 23 staff have been deemed close contacts after another tested positive, and has closed for a week. Popular restaurant Bistro C has stopped serving breakfast due to staff shortages until 27 December, but is otherwise open, Paradise Arcade has closed until further notice and Theo’s Social Club has closed until 30 December. Wes Lambert, Restaurant and Catering Australia’s chief executive, said people were frustrated seeing tourists enter the state from Covid hotspots without isolating while staff had to quarantine. “The hospitality industry in Queensland was one of the hardest hit industries and continues to be so as we enter into the fourth wave with the Omicron variant,” he said. “There are inconsistencies in rules, where business owners are confused about why you can enter the state with a test within 72 hours while their staff must isolate at home for seven days even after a test. “This has led to mass [closures] … as many businesses face an even more critical staff shortage and are unable to trade.” Sum Yung Guy’s Matt Sinclair revealed on Facebook that the entire crew from a night shift had to isolate for a week, making it impossible to open during the “busiest week of the year”. “It’s not really the roadmap we saw coming out of the borders opening, the rebirth of the Queensland economy, getting businesses going again,” he said. “Losing staff because we had to enforce the mandate of them being double-vaxxed, turning away people who aren’t vaccinated, for what? I don’t know, right now, because we’ve ended up in the same place.” More than 12,000 people have signed a petition on Sum Yung Guys’ Facebook page calling for “business as usual” with no more contact tracing or restrictions. Michael Fowler, manager of Locale restaurant, said two of his staff were already isolating and another was getting tested. “We’re just being hammered with the opening of the borders,” he said. “The majority of people here are from Melbourne and Sydney, we’ve been flooded with people from there. Restaurants were hanging on until Christmas, and now they have to shut.” Indoor mask mandates were introduced for a range of Queensland venues including restaurants on Thursday as the state recorded 369 new Covid cases. Asked about the hospitality sector, the premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, said the government was aware it was at a “critical juncture”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Which is why we are mandating masks in hospitality. This is an added measure to keep our businesses open,” she said. A government spokesperson said the quarantine period for fully vaccinated close contacts had already been reduced from 14 days to seven. Visitors did not have to isolate but close contacts did, because they had “a higher risk than other people in the community of developing Covid-19,” the spokesperson said. • This article was amended on 24 December 2021 to clarify that Bistro C had only closed its breakfast service, not its entire operation.The Hawaii Bowl was canceled Thursday on the eve of the game after Hawaii withdrew because of Covid-19, season-ending injuries and transfers. “We are disappointed our season has to end this way,” Hawaii coach Todd Graham said in a statement. “As competitive as we are and as much as we want to play the game, we cannot put the health and safety of our student-athletes at risk.” The game was scheduled for Friday at the Clarence TC Ching Athletics Complex. Hawaii athletic department spokesperson Derek Inouchi said about 30 players and staff recently tested positive for Covid-19. Cases have been surging in Honolulu for the past two weeks. Oahu’s seven-day average of new cases was 11 times higher on Thursday compared to 8 December. “The health and safety of our student-athletes is the most important part of this decision,” Hawaii athletic director David Matlin said in a statement. “The recent surge in Covid-19 cases has forced us to not participate in the game. We are disappointed for our players, coaches, and fans. ESPN and the EasyPost Hawaii Bowl staff did everything they could for us and we appreciate their valiant effort throughout the week. We want to thank the Memphis Tigers for making the long trip to Hawaii. We are disappointed we can’t compete on the football field.” The Hawaii Bowl is one of several postseason games ESPN owns and operates. “While we are disappointed that the bowl will not be played despite considerable efforts from our many stakeholders, sponsors, supporters, and volunteers who worked tirelessly to make this game a reality, we thank the University of Memphis and its fans for making the long trip, and we hope they were able to enjoy the unique experience that this event offers in the Aloha state,” ESPN said in a statement. Hawaii finished the season 6-7, getting into the bowl because there were no available 6-6 teams. Memphis finished 6-6. “We are very disappointed to hear that Hawaii will be unable to participate,” Memphis coach Ryan Silverfield said in a statement. “We hope that Hawaii players and staff get healthy soon. I’m upset for our seniors and the rest of the team that battled this season to earn this opportunity. We’ve had terrific time here in Hawaii as a program and we are sad our trip ended this way.”The days before Christmas being short, and fine ones rare, I was inclined to make the most of this one: a present to myself. So when the sun slid below the horizon, I still had another hour to walk across the darkening moor of Redmires. Its name is entirely apt. In the last embers of a clear winter’s afternoon, the moor glowed with the copper of sedges and rushes, the bronze of bracken gone over in the first winter frosts. Up close, of course, that overall effect of redness disappeared. When I bent to look, there was green everywhere: dull patches of spiky crowberry, the lime freshness of sphagnum, and in one flush a vibrant growth of pennywort as fresh as a bowl of salad. But straightening again, the moor was once more intensely red, almost humming now in the fading light, as though I might hear it if I tried hard enough. With the red there was black too, in the squelch of peat and the black ponds I skirted, their depth a secret that I was struggling to leave undisturbed. In fact, the entire hillside seemed to be deliquescing, threatening to slide off downhill towards the three Redmires reservoirs below. I wondered at the generations who worked this marginal ground, the challenge they faced, captured in place names that tease out its soggy nuances in the same way that Inuit words do for snow: moss and mire, carr and sitch, or, round here, sick, which explains how I grew up in a neighbourhood called Carsick. Nor is it a coincidence that so many of the gritstone blocks that pepper this landscape, silhouetted now against the dusk, have names – solid reassurances in a spongy, shifting world. Underfoot, the rocks offered security among the gloop. Ahead, Venus shone more or less where the sun had set, the strip of sky above the horizon the colour of a peach’s skin, fading rapidly to purplish blue. Higher up the moor, from the darkness, the cackling rattle of two grouse broke the silence, meaning to chase me off down to the reservoirs, their surface quicksilver in the gibbous moon rising behind me. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiary‘Colonialism had never really ended’: my life in the shadow of Cecil Rhodes – Simukai Chigudu After growing up in a Zimbabwe convulsed by the legacy of colonialism, when I got to Oxford I realised how many British people still failed to see how empire had shaped lives like mine – as well as their own ‘A managerial Mephistopheles’: inside the mind of Jeff Bezos – Mark O’Connell The Amazon founder’s relentless quest for ‘customer ecstasy’ made him one of the world’s richest people – and now he’s looking to the unlimited resources of space. Is he the genius our age of consumerism deserves? Hunting the men who kill women: Mexico’s femicide detective – Meaghan Beatley Although femicide is a recognised crime in Mexico, when a woman disappears, the authorities are notoriously slow to act. But there is someone who will take on their case The student and the algorithm – Tom Lamont Josiah Elleston-Burrell had done everything to make his dream of studying architecture a reality. But, suddenly, in the summer of 2020, he found his fate was no longer in his hands The rich v the very, very rich: the Wentworth golf club rebellion – Samanth Subramanian When a Chinese billionaire bought one of Britain’s most prestigious golf clubs in 2015, dentists and estate agents were confronted with the unsentimental force of globalised capital The clown king: how Boris Johnson made it by playing the fool – Edward Docx Johnson is the archetypal clown, with his antic posturing and his refusal to take anything seriously. So how did he end up in charge? Out of thin air: the mystery of the man who fell from the sky – Sirin Kale In 2019, the body of a man fell from a passenger plane into a garden in south London. Who was he? Letting go: my battle to help my parents die a good death – Kate Clanchy My parents were determined to avoid heroic medical interventions in their dying days, even before the pandemic. Why wasn’t anybody listening? Cruel, paranoid, failing: inside the Home Office – Daniel Trilling Something is badly wrong at the heart of one of Britain’s most important ministries. How did it become so broken? ‘We are witnessing a crime against humanity’: India’s Covid catastrophe – Arundhati Roy It’s hard to convey the full depth and range of the trauma, the chaos and the indignity that people are being subjected to – while Modi and his allies tell us not to complain ‘The Silicon Valley of turf’: the UK’s pursuit of the perfect pitch – William Ralston They used to look like quagmires, ice rinks or dustbowls, depending on the time of year. But as big money entered football, pristine pitches became crucial to the sport’s image – and groundskeepers became stars ‘We tried to be joyful enough to deserve our new lives’: what it’s really like to be a refugee in Britain – Zarlasht Halaimzai As a child, I fled Afghanistan with my family. When we arrived in Britain after a harrowing journey, we thought we could start our new life in safety. But the reality was very different The clockwork universe: is free will an illusion? – Oliver Burkeman A growing chorus of scientists and philosophers argue that free will does not exist. Could they be right? The secret deportations: how Britain betrayed the Chinese men who served the country in the war – Dan Hancox During the second world war, Chinese merchant seamen helped keep Britain fed, fuelled and safe – and many gave their lives doing so. But from late 1945, hundreds of them who had settled in Liverpool suddenly disappeared. Now their children are piecing together the truth The last humanist: how Paul Gilroy became the most vital guide to our age of crisis – Yohann Koshy One of Britain’s most influential scholars has spent a lifetime trying to convince people to take race and racism seriously. Are we finally ready to listen? The disastrous voyage of Satoshi, the world’s first cryptocurrency cruise ship – Sophie Elmhirst Last year, three cryptocurrency enthusiasts bought a cruise ship. They named it the Satoshi, and dreamed of starting a floating libertarian utopia. It didn’t work out ‘Iran was our Hogwarts’: my childhood between Tehran and Essex – Arianne Shahvisi Growing up in Essex, my summers in Iran felt like magical interludes from reality – but it was a spell that always had to be broken How two BBC journalists risked their jobs to reveal the truth about Jimmy Savile – Poppy Sebag Montefiore Listening to the women who alleged abuse, and fighting to get their stories heard, helped change the treatment of victims by the media and the justice system What lies beneath: the secrets of France’s top serial killer expert – Scott Sayare An intrepid expert with dozens of books to his name, Stéphane Bourgoin was a bestselling author, famous in France for having interviewed more than 70 notorious murderers. Then an anonymous collective began to investigate his past Burying Leni Riefenstahl: one woman’s lifelong crusade against Hitler’s favourite film-maker – Kate Connolly Nina Gladitz dedicated her life to proving the Triumph of the Will director’s complicity with the horrors of Nazism. In the end, she succeeded – but at a cost And finally: In case you’re curious, these were our Top 10 most read pieces of 2021 and these were the 10 most read pieces from our archive. • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, sign up to the long read weekly email here, and find our podcasts here • Show your support for the Guardian’s open, independent journalism in 2021 and beyond, including the long read20 Harsh Reality Combining a prescient story with unparalleled access to the people at its heart, Wondery and Novel’s co-production was a revelation. Miriam Rivera – the trans woman whose identity was the secret at the heart of the 2003 reality series There’s Something About Miriam – is no longer the object but rather the subject here, as the perpetrators and participants of the original, highly problematic, series wrestle with their complicity and naivety. 19 The Bias Diagnosis Does your race really affect your outcomes in the British medical system? Dr Ivan Beckley investigated the shocking inequalities in the health system, from conditions diagnosed incorrectly or perilously late, to the racist stereotypes which lead some clinicians to underestimate their patients’ pain. Without blood, guts or a hint of sensationalism, this standout series painted a horrifying picture of prejudice. 18 Pieces of Britney This fortuitously-timed podcast (it launched in July, days after Spears appeared in court protesting her conservatorship) didn’t simply act as a much-needed explainer for a complex legal situation – it also did a great job of contextualising the popstar’s plight. Amid archive recordings and the dramatisation of key events, host Pandora Sykes offered a potted history of the disturbing ways 00s celebrity culture preyed on young female stars. 17 Teach Me a Lesson Bella Mackie and Greg James – media personalities, married couple, keen students – grew a devoted audience with their series about getting to grips with the lessons they didn’t learn at school. Is love at first sight real? Are people born evil? And, er, did exploding rodents help Britain win the second world war? There was never a dull moment. 16 Dear Me Hosted by comics Katy Wix and Adam Drake, this gentle, meandering travel miniseries returns comedian guests to their childhood homes to commune with their former selves. Liam Williams thoughtfully reflects on 00s life in Leeds, the reliably daffy Lou Sanders travels to Broadstairs to surprise an old pal, and Wix’s Stath Lets Flats co-star Kiell Smith-Bynoe takes a trip back to London’s East Ham. 15 Death at the Wing Adam McKay (Vice, The Big Short, Succession) hosted this look at the US basketball stars of the 80s and 90s who shone brightly but whose lives were cut short, tying in individual tragedies to wider societal issues in Reagan’s America. From drugs to gun violence and the pressures of celebrity, each chapter smartly weaved the personal with the political to devastating effect. 14 The Line Apple’s gripping non-fiction series explored the controversial war crime trial against former US Navy Seal Eddie Gallagher. Was Gallagher – accused by his colleagues of erratic, aggressive behaviour – responsible for killing an Iraqi prisoner in Mosul in 2017? And what does the case tell us about the conflict at large? Dan Taberski (Missing Richard Simmons) was our guide to this most murky of cases. 13 Prison Break When Josie Bevan’s husband was convicted of fraud and sentenced to nine years in jail, prison – previously a barely-considered prospect – became her new obsession. Upon Rob’s release, Bevan interrogates the very foundations our justice system is predicated on. Is prison a cure? A deterrent? A safety measure? If not, then what exactly is it for? This thoughtful, personal and empathetic podcast investigates. 12 The 33 ⅓ Podcast This companion podcast to the literary series of the same name – a collection of brief, insightful books on era-defining albums – sees producer Prince Paul (best known for De La Soul’s seminal debut, 3 Feet High and Rising) dissect the same records with a roster of musician guests. Hole’s Patty Schemel examines Metallica’s Metallica, Danny Brown surveys Bowie’s Low, and Victoria Monét celebrates Janet Jackson’s The Velvet Rope. Nerdy insight and enthusiasm unite in a succession of fascinating deep dives. 11 The Battersea Poltergeist During the making of his ghost story podcast Haunted, Danny Robins stumbled upon this extraordinary story of a violent, 12-year haunting in 1950s London. Amazingly, the teenage girl at its centre, Shirley Hitchings, is alive to tell the tale. Alongside her testimony, re-enacted with the help of actors Toby Jones and Alice Lowe, Robins tries his damnedest to offer a rational explanation with the help of sceptics and scientists – but it turns out to be no easy task. 10 The Witness In 2005, Joseph “Joey” O’Callaghan became the youngest person to enter witness protection in Ireland when his testimony put two gang members behind bars for murder. He was 19 at the time, and has now spent nearly two decades with a new identity. This striking series saw O’Callaghan outline his harrowing experiences in Dublin’s criminal underworld, which began when he was just 11 years old. 9 Things Fell Apart With his 2015 book, So You’ve Been Publicly Shamed, Jon Ronson proved himself a cultural oracle, anticipating the way social media cancellations would soon grip the public imagination. In this typically fascinating show, the documentarian traces some of the root causes of America’s current internet-based culture wars: namely, the individual – and often surprisingly arbitrary – protests that became tangled up with the Christian right, prompting mass hysteria in the process. 8 The Daily Michael Barbaro and the New York Times team kept the bar high through another year of pandemic drama and ever-changing news agendas. The Daily’s in-depth reporting on everyone from Ghislaine Maxwell to Britney Spears has been impressive, alongside copious amounts of Covid analysis – recently evidenced in an episode dedicated to the scientific questions provoked by Omicron. 7 Grounded with Louis Theroux Multiple books, TV shows, merch, podcasts: it can sometimes feel as if the bespectacled documentary-maker has saturated pop culture on all fronts. But Grounded, his Zoom-conducted interview series, proved once again that you can never have too much Louis Theroux. This second outing hosted everyone from zeitgeisty cultural figures (Michaela Coel) to past rivals (Ruby Wax), overlooked TV mainstays (Rylan) and family members (Justin Theroux), each conversation as revelatory as the last. 6 Unread In 2019, writer and university professor Chris Stedman received a scheduled email from his friend Alex, informing him that he had killed himself. The message also contained a link to some recordings of a Britney sound-alike Alex had met on one of the popstar’s fan forums. In this incredibly moving series, Stedman attempts to uncover the woman’s significance, all the while meditating on grief, friendship, fan culture and his friend’s life. 5 Day X A loaded gun found in a toilet in Vienna in 2017 led to the discovery of a military officer with a dramatic double life, as told in this chillingly brilliant show from the New York Times. “Franco A” assumed the identity of a Syrian refugee, seemingly looking to place the blame for an upcoming attack on his false persona. How deep into the German military did such far right influences extend? 4 Slow Burn Not one but two series of Slate’s acclaimed podcast were released in 2021, zooming in once again on little-known aspects of major events in US history. Noreen Malone hosted a smart look at the shaky moral judgments that led to the Iraq war, while Joel Anderson expertly examined the events triggered by Rodney King’s beating by the LAPD in a series dedicated to the LA riots. 3 Comfort Eating with Grace Dent In her capacity as the Guardian’s restaurant critic and Masterchef guest judge, Grace Dent is well-versed in cutting-edge cookery – but here she is confronted with culinary experimentation like never before. From Scarlett Moffatt’s Wotsit-sprinkled toast to Laura Whitmore’s raw mushroom-and-mayo combo, celebrities’ bizarre snacking habits prove the perfect conversation-starter in this charming interview podcast, which journeys onwards into (even) more serious topics. 2 Welcome to Your Fantasy The Chippendales were an unlikely source of pop culture inspiration in 2021, with the male strippers inspiring an Amazon docuseries, a Hulu drama (currently in development) and this podcast from Pineapple Street Studios and Gimlet, hosted by historian Natalia Petrzela. Welcome to Your Fantasy deftly balanced the camp mayhem of this “Disneyland for adults” and its colourful cast of characters, with the insalubrious true crime story behind it all. 1 Sweet Bobby Catfishing – the act of misleading somebody with a fake internet persona – is a well-known phenomenon, but as our lives move ever more online, it remains far too little understood. This initially shocking, consistently riveting series chronicles one such outrageous deception, in which a woman genuinely believed herself to be in a decade-long relationship with a non-existent man. Once the perpetrator is revealed, host Alexi Mostrous begins conducting his own investigation into the catfisher’s motivations – as well as the seemingly lacklustre police response to this disturbing and distinctly modern criminal activity.It’s a tragic story, with a happy ending. Until I was seven, I had a goldfish called Algernon. He wasn’t the most exciting pet, but I was quite upset when I found him floating one morning on the surface of his little tank. This, or so I thought, was the end of a short and uneventful existence. But a few weeks ago, I wrote a column about the failure to regulate waste disposal in the UK. It showed how millions of tonnes of waste, some of it extremely hazardous, are now being handled by organised criminal networks, and illegally dumped or burned, presenting major hazards to our health and to the living world. It showed how the Environment Agency in England and its equivalents in the rest of the UK have lost control, to the extent that anyone can now get themselves officially licensed as a waste disposer, using false information that can remain unchecked. Some people found this hard to believe. But as chance would have it, at that very moment, the spirit of my dead goldfish spoke to me. With a clarity he had never exhibited in life, he explained that he wished to be registered as an upper-tier carrier, broker and dealer in waste. This would ensure that anyone paying him to dispose of waste materials could be confident that he had met the requisite standards, and was not the kind of fishy operator who would take your money, dump your waste illegally, evade landfill tax and potentially land you, the unwitting householder, with a £5,000 fine for failing to exercise your “duty of care”. Perhaps motivated by a sense of guilt, as I had neglected him in life, I sought to fulfil his wishes. On the Environment Agency’s website, I affirmed that he was a, ahem, sole trader and had no unspent convictions. I gave his name as Algernon Goldfish, of 49 Fishtank Close, Ohlooka Castle, Derby, and paid the requisite fee. It took less than four minutes. A month on, my long-deceased goldfish remains on the register as a bona fide upper-tier waste dealer. If you want your rubbish safely removed, no job too big or too small, Algernon is your man. Or your fish. Already, in other words, the system has fallen apart. The government says, “We have pledged to reform the licensing system for waste carriers”, but this has been going on for a long time, and the situation is likely to get worse. Last month, the Environment Agency circulated two memos to its managers. They explained that while reports of pollution, illegal dumping and other kinds of damage are rising, grants for incident management have been reduced in real terms “by 90% in 10 years”. The only events to which it can still respond are those it is specifically funded to investigate, which means incidents at “regulated sites” (such as places handling radioactive waste, certain kinds of illegal waste and those involved in flood control) and water companies. The memos instructed staff to “not routinely spend time” on anything other than acute catastrophes caused by other businesses. Members of the public reporting incidents at unregulated sites should be “reassured that their report is useful to help us prioritise our work”, and are effectively advised to take the law into their own hands, by speaking directly to the perpetrator. The agency’s officers are then instructed to “shut down report”. In other words, unless you run a regulated site or are a water company, you can do what you damn well like. Mind you, as a constant stream of filth suggests, if you are a water company or a regulated site you can also do what you damn well like. Everything is fishy now, except our rivers. There are two categories of crime in this country: those for which you can expect to be prosecuted, and those for which you can’t. There’s no consistent connection between the seriousness of the crime and the likelihood of prosecution. Bag snatchers stealing a couple of hundred pounds a week are more likely to be caught and charged than fraudsters emptying the bank accounts of elderly people. Carrying a few grams of cannabis is more likely to land you in trouble than dumping hundreds of tonnes of hazardous waste. On one estimate, aside from the fake companies registered on the Environment Agency site, there are more than 250,000 unlicensed (in other words outright illegal) waste disposers in the UK. The number of con artists involved in ripping off vulnerable people and in white-collar fraud must also be high. According to the latest report by the auditors Crowe UK and the University of Portsmouth, in 2020 fraud cost people and businesses in the UK £137bn. Their estimate has risen by 88% since 2007. Yet only 0.4% of fraud is believed to result in a criminal sanction. Many tens of thousands of people are likely to be involved in the industrial-scale money laundering, tax evasion, shell companies, corrupt practice and concealment of assets in the City of London and its satellites, and the UK’s property market. Large numbers are running coercive labour rackets in farming, car washes, nail bars, restaurants and other businesses. Altogether, it would not be surprising if more than a million people in the UK were engaged in the kind of organised crime that seldom leads to prosecution. This is what you get from 40 years of deregulation. While good citizens are bound by ever more oppressive laws, “the market”, according to neoliberal theory, should be released from regulatory constraint. Deregulation is a euphemism for destroying the effective capacity of the state to protect us from chancers, conmen and criminals. Empowered to cut corners, fishy businesses outcompete responsible ones and we begin to shift towards an organised crime economy. As crime syndicates extend their reach and expand their wealth, they become politically powerful. Eventually, mafias become embedded in public life. This is what happened in the US during prohibition. You can see it at work today in Russia, Italy, Mexico and Lebanon. There is no obvious mechanism to prevent it from happening here. When Steve Bannon, Donald Trump’s chief strategist, announced that his aim was “the deconstruction of the administrative state”, people were horrified. But in reality, it has been happening for years, on both sides of the Atlantic. It’s just that they do it subtly. Our government couldn’t simply close down the Environment Agency: people would be up in arms. Instead, it hacks the budget and creates an institutional culture of demoralisation and failure. The same goes for the other regulatory bodies. Probity, integrity, trust? They sleep with the fishes. George Monbiot is a Guardian columnistFor most of the winter of 2011-12, I was a slightly reluctant member of the Guardian’s spin-off dating site, Guardian Soulmates. I was still in my 20s, just about, and pouring the energy and naivety of youth into a busy social life, a career as a writer of newsprint ephemera and a room in a shared flat. I think I was also a bit lonely and rudderless – a manchild still making sense of life 10 years after the sudden death of my dad. Whatever it was, something was missing. By late February, I had been on half a dozen first dates – and no second dates. I was getting tired of the whole thing. It was all so procedural. But I’d agreed to meet a girl called Jess, whose profile handle – “good_grammar_is_hot” – had somehow not entirely put me off. Temperatures in London that night were due to hit freezing, so I wore two unattractive jumpers under an unattractive coat. I was not anticipating a hot date. Jess and I both had house parties to go on to. We planned to meet for a quick drink at a sub-Wetherspoons pub by Victoria station. It would be handy for a prompt underground getaway. It turned out Jess had low expectations too. She’d been on Soulmates for a bit longer. In the early days of the site, an algorithm ranked matches for compatibility. Jess’s top match, with a rating of 99.7%, turned out to be her own brother. It was downhill from there. I cannot picture now the moment our eyes first met, but I do remember feeling a warming spark and an immediate sense of ease. We drank bad lager and sweet white wine. As shoppers and theatregoers swirled about the tables around us, waiting briefly for trains home, we held fast like rocks in an eddy. Later, when Jess popped to the loo, we furtively texted our respective flatmates. “Like her a lot,” my message said. It helped that we had basically zero degrees of separation – Jess was a journalist too and we had mutual friends – but it was more than that. Death is not always good chat fodder for a first date – even for oversharers like Jess and me. But at some point we learned that we had both lost fathers way too soon. We had both been on the brink of adulthood when that earthquake hit, and the crockery was somehow still rattling. It was the first time I’d met someone who had gone through something similar, and it strengthened our bond. I don’t know what else we talked about – the usual cringey first-date stuff – but it quickly became clear that neither of us would make our next engagement. We braved the cold to go on instead to a sub-Wagamama noodle place round the corner, and kept chatting. We lived at opposite ends of the Victoria line. We waited between platforms for the first train to arrive, squeezing every last second out of the evening. As a rumble approached from the north, we agreed, before a chaste hug and a dash, that we should meet again. Inbox archaeology can be an embarrassing pursuit, and I can see now that I waited until 10.17 the next morning before emailing: “Is this too soon for post-date correspondence?” A year later, I moved into Jess’s flat in Brixton. It was in a development that had been advertised as a converted Victorian school. Jess later discovered that this had been an estate agent’s fudge. When she found an old photo of the building in the council archives, she gasped when she saw the huge white letters that had once stretched under the roofline: “BRIXTON ORPHANAGE FOR FATHERLESS GIRLS”. The word “fatherless” had been painted directly above Jess’s windows like a label. It was a spooky slice of history, but then felt like serendipity as the flat became a happy refuge for a fatherless couple. We would not be schooled in Bible stories or domestic service, as the residents 150 years earlier had been (Jess would have appalled an orphanage matron), but we would learn how to be settled adults. Ten years ago, we found each other – and love – on a cold and unpromising winter’s night in a terrible pub. Then we found ourselves. In 2015, we got married and later moved into a house with space for Jake and Betty, now four and one. The photo of the orphanage, which Jess had framed, hangs on the wall just inside our front door.Nasa’s Imaging X-ray Polarimetry Explorer (IXPE) has successfully extended its 4-metre boom arm to assume its operational configuration. Launched on 9 December atop a SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket from the Kennedy Space Centre in Florida, IXPE is a space observatory designed to study X-rays from black holes, neutron stars and other exotic celestial objects. To bring X-rays into focus requires a long telescope because mirrors cannot bend the highly energetic rays by large amounts. Instead they have to be coaxed into focus with a device called a grazing incidence telescope. IXPE has three of these. Each sits on the end of the boom arm and directs light into the instruments in the body of the spacecraft. By measuring the polarisation of the X-rays, IXPE will reveal information about the magnetic environment of their targets. At launch the spacecraft was roughly cubic, about 1-metre long on each side, with the 4-metre-long boom arm folded into a canister 0.3 metres in length. This allowed the IXPE to fit into the nose cone of the rocket. On 15 December, the spacecraft extended the boom. Mission personnel are now working to commission the telescope, ready for science observations to begin in the new year.The Morrison government has been accused of using the cover of Christmas to politicise research funding, after a federal minister vetoed grants for six recommended projects. Proposed research relating to climate activism and China were among the projects recommended through Australian Research Council processes but blocked by the acting education minister, Stuart Robert. Robert has argued the projects he rejected “do not demonstrate value for taxpayers’ money nor contribute to the national interest” – but the decision, announced on Christmas Eve, has drawn criticism from education figures and the federal opposition. The vice-chancellor of the Australian National University, Prof Brian Schmidt, said that in a liberal democracy it was “completely inappropriate for grants to be removed by politicians, unless the grant rules were not followed”. The Victorian Labor senator Kim Carr said the government was using Christmas Eve to “sweep under the carpet” its “further politicisation of the ARC and research” in Australia. Carr, a former minister for research under the Rudd and Gillard governments, tweeted: “Their McCarthyism subverts research which was recommended by the ARC.” The winning Discovery Projects for next year were finally revealed on Friday, with a report published on the ARC website saying it had received 3,096 applications for funding commencing in 2022. The report said 587 of those projects had been approved for funding, totalling $259m over five years. “Of the unsuccessful applications in 2022, 51 were found not to meet eligibility requirements and six were recommended to, but not funded by the minister,” the report said. A spokesperson for Robert said the minister had approved “98.98%” of the 593 Discovery Projects the ARC recommended, but had not accepted the following six: Playing conditions: how climate shaped the Elizabethan theatre National forgetting and local remembering: memory politics in modern China China stories under Xi Jinping: popular narratives Finding friendship in early English literature Cultural production of religion by science fiction and fantasy novels New possibilities: student climate action and democratic renewal Robert’s spokesperson said the minister “believes those rejected do not demonstrate value for taxpayers’ money nor contribute to the national interest”. “After going through a peer review process, it is clear to the minister the application of the national interest test is not working in every case,” the spokesperson said. “This test should ensure taxpayer-funded Australian government research funding is directed to areas of national importance and delivers public value. It’s why in his letter of expectation the minister asked the ARC to strengthen the test.” In a media release, the ARC chief executive, Prof Sue Thomas, welcomed Robert’s approval of funding for 587 new projects. “This investment will see expanded knowledge base and research capacity in Australia, and economic, commercial, environmental, social and/or cultural returns for Australia,” Thomas said. The successful projects included ones looking at why gender inclusion efforts in Australian sport have not yet led to gender parity in leadership roles; ways to advance economic opportunities for Indigenous communities across northern Australia; and better planning for the future capacity for public health programs. Several China-related projects did receive funding, including one looking into “how Xi Jinping-era legal ideology guides policy and decision-making in China”. Another successful project will investigate how the international expansion of China’s belt and road initiative is shaped by cultural factors alongside economic and political diplomacy. The cleantech transition in China and Australia will also be studied. The opposition’s education spokesperson, Tanya Plibersek, wrote to the auditor general earlier this week asking for an audit into why it was taking the government so long to announce next year’s funding recipients. In the letter on Monday, Plibersek said the “unacceptable” delays were causing uncertainty for thousands of Australian researchers “who don’t know whether they’ll have a job next year or whether their projects will have funding”.The Amazing Mr Blunden 7pm, Sky Max Tamsin Greig and Simon Callow star in this TV special based on Antonia Barber’s fantasy novel. The ghost story with a time-travel twist follows what happens when a mysterious old man enters the lives of teenagers Jamie and Lucy, offering their mum the opportunity to be the caretaker of a suspiciously haunted country house. Perfectly festive family fun for the night before Christmas, with Callow revelling in his eccentric role. Hollie Richardson Carols from King’s 6.15pm, BBC Two The last word in traditional Christmas Eve ambience as you get the mince pies ready and the squeaky-voiced Cambridge choirboys bust out the festive bangers. Expect excitement to peak with a showstopping rendition of O Come All Ye Faithful. Time to crack out the mulled wine. Phil Harrison A Ghost Story for Christmas: The Mezzotint 10.30pm, BBC Two In the mood for something a bit spooky? MR James’s classic ghost story is brought to life by Mark Gatiss in a chilling half-hour adaptation boasting a cast of Rory Kinnear, Robert Bathurst and Frances Barber. In 1922, Edward Williams receives a curious engraving of an unknown country house … but what exactly is it? HR Shaun the Sheep: The Flight Before Christmas 6pm, BBC One Hard-to-resist family fun with a familiar, friendly face from the makers of Wallace and Gromit. In this year’s festive adventure, Shaun needs to rescue little cousin Timmy after he is taken away accidentally. HR The Greatest Snowman 8pm, Channel 4 A simple and silly format that, surprisingly, hasn’t been done before: celebrities in a snowman-building contest. Sue Perkins presents, while Laurence Llewelyn-Bowen, Johnny Vegas, Dani Dyer and Liam Charles get grafting. HR Christmas Comedy Club With Lost Voice Guy 10.30pm, ITV Better known as Lost Voice Guy, the uniquely talented Lee Ridley (who this year found a new voice courtesy of a geordie voiceover artist) hosts a beautifully diverse and inclusive comedy bonanza. It features some of the best British standup acts: Bill Bailey, Rosie Jones, Omid Djalili and the future Masked Singer live-show host Joel Dommett. Ali Catterall Film choices Encanto (Jared Bush and Byron Howard, 2021), Disney+ Featuring songs by composer-of-the-moment Lin-Manuel Miranda, Jared Bush and Byron Howard’s Colombia-set animated musical fantasy has built-in family appeal and a rainbow of colours bursting from every frame. Stephanie Beatriz (Brooklyn Nine-Nine) voices Mirabel, the only member of the Madrigal clan without a special ability (and that includes their house). However, she discovers that the magical home – created after the family escaped armed conflict – is under threat of destruction. Simon Wardell Frozen (Chris Buck and Jennifer Lee, 2013), 1.30pm, BBC One One of the highest-grossing films of all time, Disney’s animated feature is a fantastical triumph. It moves traditional fairytale material such as The Snow Queen into new territory: the relationship between two sisters, Elsa (Idina Menzel), who can turn things to ice, but fears her powers will alienate those she loves, and the naive Anna (Kristen Bell). Add in the songs (including Let It Go, of course), a beautifully created frosty world and Josh Gad’s comic snowman, Olaf, and what’s not to love? SW Home Alone (Chris Columbus, 1990), 6pm, Channel 4 Forget the fun but mostly forgettable recent reboot, Home Sweet Home Alone, and return to the source for all your Christmas slapstick needs. Chris Columbus’s 1990 comedy, scripted by John Hughes, takes the routines of silent comedy greats Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton and gives them to a scarily sadistic small boy, Kevin (Macaulay Culkin), and the two bungling robbers (Joe Pesci and Daniel Stern) trying to get into his home when he is left behind by mistake on Christmas Eve. SW Amazing Grace (Alan Elliott, 2018), 11pm, BBC Two Aretha Franklin’s 1972 live gospel album, Amazing Grace, recorded at a Baptist church in Los Angeles, was meant to be accompanied by a concert film. But technical difficulties with the sound, and Franklin’s reluctance, meant that only in 2018 did the remarkable footage get released as this documentary. Any footage of the great soul singer is to be treasured, but here she is in her pomp, wringing out every emotion, her brow beaded in sweat. She is in thrall to the religious message in the songs, but also the power of the music to move us. SWAustralian man Carl Stanojevic might be the world’s most considerate neighbour after he was asked to “take the bins out” and dutifully followed the request – to the letter. The practical joke began when the 54-year-old photographer from Mackay, in Queensland, received a late-night text message from his neighbour, Nick Doherty – who works remotely – asking if Stanojevic “would be able to take my bins out please”. Stanojevic then joked about taking the bin out to local restaurants and bars. The next morning, after it was emptied and cleaned, Stanojevic decided to follow through on the banter. “I’ve known Nick for two years,” Stanojevic said on Friday. “We catch up for a beer when we can and have a chat and a few laughs. He’s a beautiful person. You’d do anything for him. He said take my bin out. If he had said put my bin out it would have been just a normal day in Mackay.” Grabbing his camera equipment and thinking like a tour guide, Stanojevic proceeded to take the number 6 wheelie bin on a big day out on Wednesday. To start with, they took a walk by the duck pond before taking care of some chores, stopping at a hardware store to pose with the staff, doing some shopping at the local supermarket and making a quick trip to the local tip. After this, they took in some sightseeing and a bit of self-care. “We went for a massage and then to the tattoo parlour to get a couple of extra 6s on the bin. A bit of a tattoo, then stopped at the pub for a coldie,” Stanojevic said on Friday. Along the way, the bin stopped for a selfie with a band of local cleaners, a surf lifeguard and a garbage truck driver. There was a quick trip through the drive-through at three separate restaurants and to make a call at a phone booth. “It wasn’t really talking to anyone,” Stanojevic said. “It was just talking trash.” Stanojevic said that though he and number 6 were on their best behaviour, at one point they were approached by two local council workers who were concerned they might have stumbled across a theft. Stanojevic said after a five-hour jaunt he reported back to Doherty to say he had completed his task. As proof, he sent through an album of photos he had taken to preserve the memories. Doherty was reportedly blown away by the favour, though Stanojevic says that since his bin has become a celebrity, Doherty is now afraid to put it out again for fear it may wander off on another adventure. “The whole idea was to put a smile on a few people’s faces, but I wasn’t expecting this to go around the world,” Stanojevic said of the media coverage his joke has attracted. Stanojevic, who often works for free documenting local events in the 80,000-person town almost 1,000km north of Brisbane, said Mackay had been hit hard by a loss of tourism during the coronavirus pandemic. “It’s good that it’s taken the focus off all this heartache with these lockdowns and Covid and that’s the idea of it,” he said. “We’ve definitely put a hell of a lot of smiles on people’s faces.”In the attic of a cottage in the woods near the Polish village of Narewka, a young Iraqi Kurd crouches, trembling with cold and fear. Through the skylight, the blue lights of police vans flash on the walls of his hiding place. Outside, dozens of border guards are searching for people like him in the snowstorm. Downstairs, the owner of the house sits in silence with his terrified wife and children. The young Kurd is one of thousands of asylum seekers who entered Poland across the border with Belarus, where countless others have become trapped on their way to Europe. The Polish family have offered him shelter. But if the Polish police find him, he risks being sent back across the frontier into the sub-zero forests of Belarus, while his protectors risk being charged for aiding illegal immigration. As people fleeing conflict or starvation have become trapped on the Poland-Belarus border in the middle of a freezing winter, Polish families have been secretly hiding hundreds of desperate people in their homes. Fears of the knock at the door as border police launch a manhunt bring back terrible echoes of the second world war, when thousands of Polish Jews were given refuge by their neighbours during the Nazi occupation. “Let’s make one thing clear, this is far from being the Holocaust,” says a Polish woman who has sheltered a Syrian family in her home for five days. “At the same time … when you have six people hiding in your attic forced to stay in the dark to avoid being sent back, as a Pole you can’t help thinking of the similarities with that time.” Every day since early October, Jakub*, 38, from Narewka, has searched the forests near the border to find people in need of water, food and a safe place to sleep. With his dog, Jakub follows signs of the presence of people who attempted to cross the frontier: nappies, damp blankets, or makeshift huts built with tree branches. During the war one of his uncles, who died a few years ago, helped dozens of Jewish families in Warsaw avoid deportation. Now, 80 years later, Jakub has hidden and helped at least 200 people who risked being herded back over the border to Belarus. “I’ve never compared what I’m doing today to what my uncle did,” Jakub says. “I help these people because they need help. It’s that simple.” The European Union has accused Belarus of deliberately provoking a new refugee crisis by organising the movement of people from the Middle East to Minsk and promising them with safe passage to the EU, in reprisal for sanctions that Brussels has imposed on its regime. Poland, in turn, has been accused by human rights organisations of violently pushing back thousands of people across the border. People such as Jakub, seeing the desperate families huddled in the snow, have taken it on themselves to help. Often it is a race between local volunteers and police to find the border crossers first. In his room in a small home a few miles from Sokółka, Bartek, 14, has invented a device to locate people at risk of being sent back into Belarus. “I opened accounts to connect migrants’ phones,” he says. “I set up their accounts on Google and WhatsApp and linked their phones to one of my accounts. This way I can see where they have recently logged in and send help.” Bartek and his aunt, Ewa, aided a Syrian family whose oldest child was five. They had been pushed back to Belarus 17 times. “What is happening here is totally unacceptable,” says Ewa, 40, whose grandmother smuggled pork fat and potatoes into the Jewish Ghetto during the second world war. “My grandmother hid Jewish children in her house too,” she says. “The flap in the floor was covered with a bed on which my great-grandmother lay. I feel like I am carrying on my grandmother’s work.” Ewa has bought thermal cameras to locate people at night. “When you go to the forest, you don’t know what awaits you, if someone is behind you,” she says. “Next year when you go to the forest to pick mushrooms, you don’t know whether you will find mushrooms or dead bodies. Some people said they found bodies of refugees torn apart by animals. In the area where migrants are camping, sometimes you can smell an intense smell of decay.” At least 19 people have died since the beginning of the border standoff between Poland and Belarus. Most of them froze to death. Some of their bodies were buried in the Muslim graveyard in the village of Bohoniki, near Sokółka, in the heart of the forest that claimed their lives. As temperatures dip near freezing, Bartek, Jakub and Ewa belong to a network of Poles who are working desperately to prevent more deaths. “We’re doing something normal to help others,” says Ewa, “but they make you out to be a criminal.” Since Poland imposed a state of emergency, all help for the people in the woods is on the shoulders of local residents and activists. In recent weeks more and more aid workers and citizens have been stopped by police forces, who have searched at least three homes looking for migrants. “The situation seems to have escalated and officers became more violent towards aid workers,” says Witold Klaus, a professor at the University of Warsaw’s Centre for Migration Law Research. “This is part of intimidation and is probably calculated for its chilling effect – a discouragement to offer help to immigrants. Providing humanitarian assistance is not a crime. But this is the law in books and it doesn’t stop authorities from breaking it.” On 14 December a group of activists were stopped by military personnel in the forests near the village of Zabrody. They were forced to lie face down on the ground and searched. On 15 December Polish armed police forces raided one of the humanitarian aid hubs in the border region of Podlachia, seizing mobile phones and laptops. “They suspect us of organising illegal border crossings”, says Anna Alboth, from the NGOMinority Rights Group. ‘’But if anybody is creating a space for illegal crossing the border it is Belarusian and Polish authorities, who forced freezing and hungry people without any choice to cross the frontier.’’ The Polish ministries of interior and defence did not comment when approached by the Guardian. During recent pro-migration protests in Michałów and Hajnówka, young activists met elderly people who had sheltered fugitives during the second world war. Jakub says: “They said that they had hidden Jews during the war and that they had something in common with us.” In 1939, Tatiana Honigwill, a young Polish Jew from Warsaw, was deported to the German concentration camp in Ravensbrück. After Russian liberation in 1945, Tatiana returned to Poland. She died a few years ago, survived by several granddaughters. One of them is Maria Przyszychowska, 43, a painter, who now lives near the border town of Hajnówka. She and her husband, Kamil Syller, 48, have started an unofficial network of local residents and activists who have placed green lights in their windows to show that their home is a temporary safe space for refugees. At first it was a symbolic gesture. Then, suddenly, the first people started to show up at their doors. The couple welcome them into their home and give them basic necessities. “We are trying to protect asylum seekers and now our activity has become a form of resistance,” says Kamil. “But we don’t want to be heroes. And it’s becoming really frustrating.” For weeks, Maria and Kamil’s home has been under surveillance. Border guards patrol the streets around their building. Green lights have also started to attract the guards, who hide in the forests and wait for people to come out and then push them back. Prohibiting an individual from the right to apply for asylum is an infringement of human rights. Despite individuals expressing their intention to apply for asylum, arrivals in Poland have been forced back in systematic mass expulsions. “Maybe someday, when this is over, we’ll be able to talk openly about what the police did to migrants and what we went through to help them,” says Jakub. “I don’t know when, but I’m sure that day will come. Until then, we’ll continue to work in the dark. In the end, we are what they called us: secret guerrillas.” (*Some names have been changed to protect people’s identities)Plans for the expansion of an underground coalmine in Wales could be approved imminently despite pledges made at the Cop26 climate conference to move away from the dirtiest fossil fuel. The Coal Authority is imminently expected to decide whether the conditions have been met to allow work to begin at a recently active deep-shaft site in the Neath Valley, south Wales. The plans would see an extension to the existing Aberpergwm drift coalmine site that is thought to be Europe’s biggest source of anthracite. A row has emerged since Cop26 between ministers at Whitehall and the devolved Welsh administration over which government office holds responsibility for reviewing and making a final decision on the impending permit. In 2016, Energybuild Ltd was given a conditional mining licence that would allow the firm to extract up to 40m tonnes of anthracite over the coming two decades. But the company says that if the Aberpergwm project were to go ahead, it would seek to dig up only about 7.3m tonnes at a rate of about 350,000 tonnes a year. Anthracite (sometimes referred to as “hard coal”) has the highest carbon content of all coal varieties, although it has relatively low levels of sulphur and produces less particulate matter than other forms of coal. It can be used for a number of industrial purposes, but is also burned as a domestic fuel. According to Wales’s deputy climate change minister, Lee Waters, the Aberpergwm scheme could emit 100m tonnes of CO2 over its lifetime, along with considerable quantities of methane. He says the date of the licence means that new devolved powers – which came into force in 2018 and have been used to block new opencast mining applications – do not apply to this case. Waters has written to the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, in which the Coal Authority is housed, to request the licence be cancelled. “We want to keep this coal in the ground,” he told the Welsh parliament. “But the UK government, because of the powers in place, threaten to sit by and watch this coal being extracted in the face of our wishes.” The project would see the expansion of the only anthracite mine operating anywhere in the UK, with the country’s only other major ongoing coal scheme, the surface mine at Ffos-y-Fran, also located in south Wales. Aberpergwm may come to represent a serious unforeseen headache for Boris Johnson’s government, as the UK pledged to lead international coal phase-out efforts when hosting November’s UN climate summit. “There should be no question of extending coalmines anywhere in the UK,” said John Ashton, a former climate envoy. “It beggars belief that this should even be under consideration at Aberpergwm, with so much at stake after the Glasgow climate Cop for both Cardiff and Westminster. This has all the hallmarks of a decision that has not yet received the high-level attention it urgently needs.” More than 3,500 emails about the Aberpergwm project have been sent this week to the offices of Waters and Michael Gove at the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities. Gove is also due to rule early next year on plans for a controversial new deep coalmine in west Cumbria. Energybuild says the Aberpergwm project would sustain 160 jobs and dozens more in the supply chain. It has promised to gradually move away from supplying steelworks at Port Talbot, where about half of the coal it produces currently goes. The UK government intends to decarbonise domestic steel production by 2035. Tata’s Port Talbot and British Steel’s Scunthorpe Steelworks are the country’s second and third biggest single-site emitters of carbon, and the global steel industry is estimated to produce 11% of the world’s total CO2 emissions. Energybuild aims to have a greater share of its coal destined for other end uses such as water filtration, which at present accounts for about 15% of its market. A spokesperson for the firm said: “We are the only producer of anthracite for filter media in Europe.” Daniel Therkelsen, from the Coal Action Network, said: “We hear EnergyBuild Ltd recycling the same greenwash of other coal operators, but the bottom line is the more coal we mine, the more we use – driving localised air pollution around mines and steelworks, and global climate change. “It’s vital that the Welsh and UK governments resolve which has the powers to stop this climate wrecking extension – and use those powers immediately, as this pending licence may be deconditionalised imminently.” A UK government spokesperson said: “The Coal Authority and Welsh ministers are continuing to discuss the matter but no decisions have been made yet on whether the mining project can progress.” • This article was amended on 24 and 26 December 2021 to clarify that the plans are for the expansion of an existing mine, not the creation of a new one; also, the spelling of Aberpergwm was corrected in the subheading.Expectation is growing that Donald Trump might face charges for trying to obstruct Congress from certifying Joe Biden’s election this year as a House panel collects more evidence into the 6 January attack on the Capitol, former prosecutors and other experts say. Speculation about possible charges against the former US president has been heightened by a recent rhetorical bombshell from Republican representative and 6 January panel vice-chair Liz Cheney suggesting the House panel is looking at whether Trump broke a law that bars obstruction of “official proceedings”. Former prosecutors say if the panel finds new evidence about Trump’s role interfering with Congress’ job to certify Biden’s election, that could help buttress a potential case by the Department of Justice. In varying ways, Cheney’s comments have been echoed by two other members of the House select committee, Republican Adam Kinzinger and Democrat Jamie Raskin, spurring talk of how an obstruction statute could apply to Trump, which would entail the panel making a criminal referral of evidence for the justice department to investigate, say DoJ veterans. Cheney’s remarks raising the specter of criminal charges against Trump came twice earlier this month at hearings of the committee. Experts believe the charges could be well founded given Trump’s actions on 6 January, including incendiary remarks to a rally before the Capitol attack and failure to act for hours to stop the riot, say former justice department officials. “Based on what is already in the public domain, there is powerful evidence that numerous people, in and out of government, attempted to obstruct – and did obstruct, at least for a while – an official proceeding – i.e., the certification of the Presidential election,” said former DOJ inspector general and former prosecutor Michael Bromwich in a statement to the Guardian. “That is a crime.” Although a House panel referral of obstruction by Trump would not force DOJ to open a criminal case against him, it could help provide more evidence for one, and build pressure on the justice department to move forward, say former prosecutors. Attorneygeneral Merrick Garland has declined to say so far whether his department may be investigating Trump and his top allies already for their roles in the Capitol assault. The panel has amassed significant evidence, including more than 30,000 records and interviews with more than 300 people, among whom were some key White House staff. The evidence against Trump himself could include his actions at the “Stop the Steal” rally not far from the White House, where he urged backers to march to the Capitol and “fight like hell [or] you’re not going to have a country any more”. Trump then resisted multiple pleas for hours from Republicans and others to urge his violent supporters to stop the attack. Recent rulings by Trump-appointed district court judges have supported using the obstruction statute, which federal prosecutors have cited in about 200 cases involving rioters charged by DOJ for their roles in the Capitol assault that injured about 140 police officers and left five dead. Still, experts note that the House panel’s mission has been to assemble a comprehensive report of what took place on 6 January and work on legislation to avoid such assaults on democracy. They caution that any criminal referral to DOJ documenting Trump’s obstruction of Congress will take time and more evidence to help bolster a DOJ investigation. Some DOJ veterans say that any referral to DOJ by the House panel for a criminal case against Trump – and perhaps top allies such as ex chief of staff Mark Meadows, whom the House last week cited for criminal contempt for refusing to be deposed – might also include Trump’s aggressive pressuring of federal and state officials before 6 January to block Biden’s win with baseless charges of fraud. Bromwich stressed that “the evidence is steadily accumulating that would prove obstruction beyond a reasonable doubt. The ultimate question is who the defendants would be in such an obstruction case. Evidence is growing that, as a matter of law and fact, that could include Trump, Meadows and other members of Trump’s inner circle.” Cheney teed up the issue about Trump’s potential culpability first at a House panel hearing last week, when she urged that Meadows be held in contempt for refusing to be deposed, and then hit Trump with a rhetorical bombshell. “We know hours passed with no action by the president to defend the Congress of the United States from an assault while we were counting electoral votes,” Cheney said. “Did Donald Trump, through action or inaction, corruptly seek to obstruct or impede Congress’ official proceeding to count electoral votes?” Cheney’s comments about Trump were very precise, including language from the criminal obstruction statute, and she stated that her question is a “key’ one for the panel’s legislative tasks. Raskin too has told Politico that the issue of whether Trump broke the law by obstructing an official proceeding is “clearly one of the things on the mind of some of the members of the committee”. “The possibility of obstruction charges is legally valid,” said Paul Rosenzweig, a former DOJ prosecutor who worked on Ken Starr’s team during the impeachment of former President Bill Clinton, noting that two district judges appointed by Trump “have recently said that the statute covers the efforts on January 6 to stop the electoral count”. For instance, Judge Dabney Friedrich in a recent opinion rejected the claim by some defendants who were challenging the DOJ view that the 6 January meeting of Congress fit the legal definition of an “official proceeding”. Rosenzweig posited that given Trump’s various attempts before 6 January to undermine the election results, a broader conspiracy case may be another option for prosecutors to pursue. Should DOJ look at broader conspiracy charges, Trump’s persistent pressures on acting attorney general Jeffrey Rosen and his top deputy for help blocking Biden’s victory wouldprobably be relevant, say ex-prosecutors. On one call on 27 December 2020, Trump pressed Rosen and his deputy to falsely state the election “illegal” and “corrupt” despite the fact that the DOJ had not found any evidence of widespread voter fraud. Paul Pelletier, a former acting chief of the fraud section at DOJ, said that Cheney’s statements were “carefully crafted and obviously based upon evidence the committee had seen. Should Congress ultimately refer the case to DOJ for investigation and prosecution, the DOJ’s investigation would not be limited to a single obstruction charge, but would more likely investigate broader conspiracy charges potentially involving Trump and other key loyalists.” The panel has accelerated its pace recently by sending out dozens of subpoenas for documents and depositions, some to close Trump aides. Meadows has become a central focus of the inquiry, in part over tweets he received on and near the insurrection that are among approximately 9,000 documents he gave the panel, much to Trump’s chagrin. As Trump’s efforts to thwart the panel from moving forward have had limited success, he has relied on sending out splenetic email attacks, including one last month that read: “The Unselect Committee itself is Rigged, stacked with Never Trumpers, Republican enemies, and two disgraced RINOs, Cheney and Kinzinger, who couldn’t get elected ‘dog catcher’ in their districts.” Despite Trump’s angry attacks on the panel, some ex-prosecutors say that prosecuting Trump – if enough evidence is found to merit charges – is important for the health of American democracy. Former Georgia US attorney Michael J Moore told the Guardian: “I hate to think of a legal system that would allow the most powerful person in the country to go unchallenged when he has abdicated his highest priority, that being to keep our citizens safe. Trump’s conduct that day was not unlike a mob boss.”The sprawling 419-bed Oscott Gardens in north Birmingham was once home to hundreds of first-year university students. From January, however, in a first-of-its-kind project for the city, the student halls will become temporary accommodation for homeless families as the council buckles under the strain of a national housing crisis. “We’re seeing around 300 families a month present to us as homeless, enough to fill a whole tower block,” said Sharon Thompson, Birmingham city council’s cabinet member for vulnerable children, families and homelessness. “Having been a councillor since 2014, I’ve never seen local communities hit in the way they are at the moment.” About 3,800 households are currently in temporary housing across the city, and 580 of those are in a bed and breakfast or hotel, where families are often crammed into one room with no access to cooking or washing facilities. Oscott Gardens will house up to 300 families who will each be given their own self-contained flats with en suite bedrooms, and former student common rooms will be turned into support centres so families can easily access council services. “This will be more modern, more comfortable. No council wants to put people in a bed and breakfast, but there’s not enough housing stock. And when people come to us in crisis, they’re coming to us with their clothes in black bin-bags and two or three children, and we need to find them somewhere now,” Thompson said. With the eviction ban, brought in during the Covid pandemic, having ended in May and rent in the city expected to rise by 16% over the next five years, the council is bracing itself for the numbers to increase. “The profile of people that are coming forward as homeless is very different nowadays. We’re seeing more professionals who have been on furlough and found themselves in a pickle,” said Thompson “We always said, in housing terms, we wouldn’t see the real impact of the pandemic until towards the end of it – and that’s what is happening now.” Frustrations are erupting in the community, too. In November, the housing charity Shelter launched the Birmingham Fair Housing campaign, calling for more social housing and better rights for people in temporary accommodation. Clare Caudery joined the campaign after spending 18 months in temporary council accommodation with her two young children during lockdown. “In that 18 months, we moved 12 times. Once we had to leave a Travelodge we were staying in with a day’s notice. It was really distressing,” said Caudery, who had lived in a privately rented flat for six years but was forced to leave when it was declared unfit to live in. Moving around the city meant the family were often forced to make long journeys involving multiple buses to get to school and had to rely on takeaway food that left one of her children ill. “I did learn how to do pasta in a Thermos flask, just letting it sit there in the water,” she said. “But you can’t even sneak a microwave or toaster in because the electrics can’t handle it or you set the smoke alarms off and everyone ends up out in the freezing cold. Some families did it because they were so desperate.” She said being housed somewhere like Oscott Gardens would have been significantly better, but she has some doubts over the long-term impact of the project. “It sounds like a much better alternative to B&amp;Bs, but a lot of it depends how it’s managed and I don’t think it’s going to be enough unless we actually start building social housing again. Before you know it, it’s going to be 600, 800. It’s investing money in the plaster, not in preventing the wound.” Research has estimated that Birmingham needs 4,000 new homes a year over the next decade to meet demand, but average supply has been approximately 900 homes a year since 2010. The number of people on the waiting list for social housing has soared to 19,500, up from about 14,000 last year. The council’s housing stock has fallen from more than 120,000 units in the 1980s to about 60,000, largely as a result of schemes such as right to buy. In 2019, the city council launched a 10-year housing plan committing to building 2,708 new homes but admits the scale of the problem is huge. “Birmingham city council is the biggest council house builder in the country, and we still can’t meet our demand,” said Thompson. “We have built on as much council land as we can. It’s estimated by 2031 we’ll have an additional 158,000 people living in the city, which equates to nearly 90,000 properties. Now we’re starting to look outside the city boundary.” The council’s main priority now is trying to prevent homelessness in the first place. “We can very quickly fill Oscott Gardens and anything else we get, and we’re back to square one and we’re filling up hotels again,” said Stephen Philpott, head of housing solutions at the council, adding they’re recruiting 123 staff to try to reach families before they hit a crisis. “When we get an opportunity to do prevention, 75% of the time we’re successful in it.” For campaigners such as Caudery, the main focus is ensuring families don’t have to experience what she went through. “No child should be stuck in temporary accommodation in a country that is so wealthy. I just find it appalling. Our leaders should be ashamed that this is going on,” she said. “My own child, she was nine and able to recognise that the way we’d been treated was inhumane. “It feels like wherever you turn, you’re just smashing your head against brick walls. Sometimes it’s very compassionate people but all they can say is there’s a housing crisis, there’s no houses, there’s nothing they can actually do. We need a huge overhaul of housing in this country.”The Republican assault on free and fair elections instigated by Donald Trump is gathering pace, with efforts to sabotage the normal workings of American democracy sweeping state legislatures across the US. A year that began with the violent insurrection at the US Capitol is ending with an unprecedented push to politicize, criminalize or in other ways subvert the nonpartisan administration of elections. A year-end report from pro-democracy groups identifies no fewer than 262 bills introduced in 41 states that hijack the election process. Of those, 32 bills have become law in 17 states. The largest number of bills is concentrated in precisely those states that became the focus of Trump’s Stop the Steal campaign to block the peaceful transfer of power after he lost the 2020 presidential election to Joe Biden. Arizona, where Trump supporters insisted on an “audit” to challenge Biden’s victory in the state, has introduced 20 subversion bills, and Georgia where Trump attempted to browbeat the top election official to find extra votes for him has introduced 15 bills. Texas, whose ultra-right Republican group has made the state the ground zero of voter suppression and election interference, has introduced as many as 59 bills. “We’re seeing an effort to hijack elections in this country, and ultimately, to take power away from the American people. If we don’t want politicians deciding our elections, we all need to start paying attention,” said Joanna Lydgate, CEO of the States United Democracy Center which is one of the three groups behind the report. Protect Democracy and Law Forward also participated. One of the key ways that Trump-inspired state lawmakers have tried to sabotage future elections is by changing the rules to give legislatures control over vote counts. In Pennsylvania, a bill passed in the wake of Trump’s defeat that sought to rewrite the state’s election law was vetoed by Democratic governor Tom Wolf. Now hard-right lawmakers are trying to bypass Wolf’s veto power by proposing a constitutional amendment that would give the legislature the power to overrule the state’s chief elections officer and create a permanent audit of election counts subject to its own will. In several states, nonpartisan election officials who for years have administered ballots impartially are being replaced by hyper-partisan conspiracy theorists and advocates of Trump’s false claims that the election was rigged. In Michigan, county Republican groups in eight of the 11 largest counties have systematically replaced professional administration officials with “stop the steal” extremists. Several secretaries of state, the top election officials responsible for presidential election counts, are being challenged by extreme Republicans who participated in trying to overturn the 2020 result. Trump has endorsed for the role Mark Finchem in Arizona, Jody Hice in Georgia and Kristina Karamo in Michigan who have all claimed falsely that Trump won and should now be in his second term in the White House. Jess Marsden, Counsel at Protect Democracy, said that the nationwide trend of state legislatures attempting to interfere with the work of nonpartisan election officials was gaining momentum. “It’s leading us down an anti-democratic path toward an election crisis,” she said.José Galvão does not look much like an elf. At 79, he has the weather-burned face and strong labourer’s hands of a man born in the mountains of central Portugal. Yet, for months he’s been beavering away behind the scenes to bring to life what must be one of the world’s friendliest and least showy Christmas celebrations. Every Christmas for the past eight years, the 170 or so residents of Cabeça in the Serra de Estrela mountain range transform their remote village into a rustic winter wonderland. The idea sprang from a competition run in 2013 by the local council, but has since taken on a life of its own, attracting a growing flow of visitors from across Portugal every year. Sitting just off the central plaza with some of his old-boy friends, José breaks off his chinwag to show me the three-inch folding knife in his pocket. “I’m no expert, but I do a bit of carving,” he chortles through a gap-toothed smile. “We’ve all got to muck in, certo? Cabeça is the Christmas Village after all.” He is right on every count. Following his directions, I walk 100 metres or so down one of Cabeça’s narrow streets. Pop-up stores and market stalls line the route, which is busy with Portuguese day-trippers on the hunt for festive fun. I briefly stop at Loripão, a bakery from the next-door village, which has rented a villager’s front room for the fortnight’s celebrations. It’s a paradise of all things sweet and sugary, and its biggest seller by far is the bolo rei (king cake) – the rounded sugary bread topped with crystalised fruits that adorns every Portuguese sideboard at Christmas. Outside, decoration are strung between the square granite houses that characterise the local architecture. Everything is homemade, from the heart-shaped frames swaddled in ferns to the moss-covered stars studded with red berries. The only exception is the thin string of tiny, white Christmas lights that flows higgledy-piggledy between the houses, over the parish church, and around Café Dias – the only business in Cabeça that is open year-round. When the sun sets and the switch is flicked, the hilltop village – hemmed in as it is by steep forested slopes and blanketed in mid-winter darkness – lights up like the Star of Bethlehem. By the steps up to an ancient stone house, I find José’s yuletide contribution. It’s a loving attempt at creating the nativity family, with each figure, carved roughly from a thin tree trunk, about waist height. Pine-tree straight, they don’t have arms or legs, but each has a beatific countenance, graced with crossed eyes, wonky noses and winsome whittled smiles. Joseph even has a flowing, pine-leaf wig, while the baby Jesus is crowned with a nest of autumn leaves. Leaving the happy family, I head up the stairs into what an etched wooden sign describes as the Oficina de Natal (Christmas workshop). The single-room space is quite different from the tat-filled, depot-style emporiums that are the popular image of Santa’s workplace. There’s no shiny tinsel or tacky garlands, nor any plastic packaging or – praise the Lord and the Angel Gabriel – Christmas jingles or mawkish piped carols. Instead, as with the decorations that deck the village, the products for sale are resolutely artisanal. All are made from materials available in the hills around: painted pine cones and woollen baubles, wooden angels and bracken wreaths. It doesn’t take long for Portugal’s only “Christmas Village” to work its magic. Within minutes, the stresses of last-minute shopping and present wrapping dissipate. With an average age of about 68 and only three children under 15, Cabeça knows everything there is to know about taking things slow. I get into the groove with a gentle hike down into the valley. The steep, circular route takes me over terraces of crooked-armed olive trees and down to an ice-cold river. Abandoned stone settlements dot the path, a reminder of the centuries that this secluded community has lived through. The walk leaves me hungry. On Christmas Eve, millions of Portuguese sit down to an evening feast of bacalhau (salt cod) and boiled potatoes, followed by aletria (an egg-noodle dessert). But in landlocked Cabeça, hearty mountain fare dominates; caldo verde (vegetable broth), morcela (black pudding), alheira (a garlicky sausage stuffed with breadcrumbs), and pica pau (seasoned fried beef). I grab a rickety table in a pop-up restaurant in the basement of a two-storey house. Not so long ago, the low-roofed eatery would have been a home for cattle and sheep. The straw and manure are gone, but the stable-like atmosphere feels appropriate. Portugal’s Christmas Village may be steeped in back-to-basics nostalgia, but it’s far from staid. As well as soaking up the atmosphere (and the local aguardente liquors), visitors can enjoy a series of programmed events throughout the two-week season. Highlights include choral concerts, cooking classes and craft workshops. But Cabeça is not the only rural hideaway in Serra da Estrela that throws open its doors to visitors. The 42-strong Mountain Villages network arranges cultural celebrations throughout the year, such as a folk festival in Lapa dos Dinheiros in June, and summer sheep-blessings in Foldosa da Madalena. “It’s a way of not just keeping the traditions alive in these remote villages, but celebrating them,” says Célia Gonçalves, director of the Mountain Villages network and coordinator of the original competition that gave life to Portugal’s Christmas Village. “The pride the villagers get from showing off their culture like this is amazing.” With the night now long drawn in, it’s time to take my leave. Before going, I return one last time to pay my respects at Senhor Galvão’s nativity scene. The baby Messiah is still grinning gayly, his mountain home evidently glad tidings of great joy. The Christmas Village runs until 2 January. The trip was provided by the Center of Portugal Tourism Board (guided by Madomis Tours). Cabeça is a 20-minute taxi ride from Seia, which is well served by buses (Lisbon 4 hours, Porto 3.5 hours). Hotel Casa de Baixo, half an hour away in Alvoco das Várzeas, has doubles from €100 B&amp;B Five more Christmas-y places in Europe Vilnius, Lithuania Lisbon’s Praça do Comércio, New York’s Rockefeller Center, Strasbourg’s Place Kléber and Rio de Janeiro’s Rodrigo de Freitas Lagoon are all famed for their annual Christmas tree extravaganzas. But vying to outdo them is the Cathedral Square in Vilnius, which since 2015 has played host to increasingly discombobulating arboreal creations. Featuring giant snowflakes, this year’s stunning exhibit comprises a 27-metre, icicle-white cone topped by a huge shining star. Past themes have included fairytales, chess and the colour purple. Tallinn, Estonia Every neighbourhood has that one house that is fully decked out with twinkly lights and illuminated reindeer. Well, in Tallinn, make that every house. And park. And square. And street. Estonia’s walled capital defies the seasonal darkness by drenching its medieval centre with more than 300 light installations. Especially luminescent is Vabaduse Square, where light fountains shoot upwards into the winter sky. Bruges, Belgium A favourite Christmas destination for decades, the canal-crossed Belgian city is pushing the boat out even more than usual this year with its city-wide Winter Glow festival. Take a stroll along the glittering “Light Trail” as it winds through the city’s cobbled, Christmas tree-lined streets. Take your pick from three Christmas markets: Market Square, Simon Steven Square and Zand Square. Colmar, France Don’t go to Disneyland Paris for a fairytale Christmas; the ancient Alsatian town of Colmar offers the real thing. With five separate markets, the town embraces the yuletide spirit with elfish gusto. As well as an 800 square-metre ice rink and an old-school carousel, check out the Christmas-themed wine cellars and gondola-riding children’s choir. Look out for the night watchman who walks the ramparts every night, as his predecessors have done since the middle ages. Prague, Czech Republic Many Christmases ago, Good King Wenceslas looked out over Prague and – so the carol goes – saw the snow lying “deep and crisp and even”. Today, few places are more lively than the Czech capital at yuletide, with the streets thronging with partygoers, shoppers and tourists throughout December. The city’s famous Christmas market is officially postponed this year, but pop-up Christmas stalls still abound and fixed venues such as Havel’s Market are tinselled up to the nines. One tradition not to miss is the lighting of Charles Bridge’s gas lamps at dusk (around 4pm) each day.Some readers may remember, perhaps with a certain fondness, a song called Lily the Pink by the Scaffold (alias John Gorman, Mike McGear and myself) that was No 1 in the charts in 1968. The song was based on an old American folk song, and celebrated efficacious cures for mild ailments. Backing vocalists included some lesser-known figures from the world of music: Graham Nash (of the Hollies), Elton John (then Reg Dwight) and Tim Rice. Jack Bruce (of Cream) played bass guitar. It was the night before Christmas Eve, the year the song hit its peak. We were driving to Liverpool from London after recording it for an Eamonn Andrews show earlier that afternoon. The show was to be broadcast that night on the BBC. Time was very tight. In those days, of course, you couldn’t press record or save on the remote, you couldn’t “watch again”. Once the programme was transmitted, that was it. If you missed it, you missed it for ever. And we were running late. Would we get home in time to watch ourselves on television? Unlikely, as we were still on the foggy outskirts of Nantwich. Suddenly, seeing a light on in one of the houses, we parked outside, rushed to the door and rang the bell. A man in his late 20s opened it. “Excuse me, do you have a telly?” asked John, politely elbowing his way into the living room. “Blimey!” the man said, “It’s the Scaffold! But you can’t be here – you’re there on the TV screen!” Sure enough, there we were, bounding on to the set at Lime Grove in our white suits. The man ran to the foot of the stairs. “Janet,” he called. “Guess who’s down here? The Scaffold!” From upstairs came a muffled scream. “Janet is your biggest fan – she’ll be down as soon as she’s changed and put on her makeup. I’m Dave by the way.” When the song ended, we took a bow in the living room, thanked Dave for his kindness, shouted our goodbyes upstairs and drove back home to Liverpool. Many years later, the white suits long since hung out to dry, I was approached after a poetry reading at a headteacher’s conference in Coventry by a lady who introduced herself as Janet. She told me that she had never believed her husband when he told her about our flying visit. “Was it true?” she asked. “Oh, yes,” I said. Janet raised an eyebrow and came over all headmistressy. “Then why didn’t you wait a few minutes, knowing that I wanted to meet you?” “We wanted to, but we had to be back in Liverpool before it closed for the night.” “It doesn’t matter,” she said. “At first I was tempted to bin all your records. Then, remembering it was Christmas – a time for giving and forgiving – I forgave you.” As I walked away, suitably reprimanded, I remembered more clearly how John, Mike and I felt as we drove home that night. Thrilled at seeing ourselves on telly, of course, but also guilty about not saying hello to our biggest fan. We also vowed that next time, we would ask the BBC to book us into a decent hotel for the night. Safety in Numbers by Roger McGough is published by Penguin, £9.99Wine industry suppliers have been warned to plan ahead amid rising costs and international shortages of a key ingredient in the winemaking process. The sector has been affected by reduced supplies of diammonium phosphate (DAP), a nitrogen fertiliser commonly used during grape fermentation. Jason Amos, the chair of Wine Industry Suppliers Australia (Wisa), told Guardian Australia that shipping delays and a reduction in supply of DAP from China had combined to increase costs. “I’ve seen prices up to five times more expensive for us in the wine sector,” he said. Amos estimates that previously, between 65 and 80% of the DAP used by the Australian wine industry was imported from China. “The quantities that are required in the wine sector are nowhere near as great as … [for] broadacre agriculture,” he said. While there are European and local suppliers of DAP, Amos said it was more expensive to source the product from these markets. Wisa is most concerned that small-to-medium wine producers such as family businesses may not be able to secure supplies of DAP ahead of the harvest for the 2022 vintage. “What we’re also seeing is that the big corporate companies … they’ve got big tenders and they’ve been able to secure continuity of supply,” Amos said. Grape picking will begin in warmer regions at the end of January and last until April in cooler areas. Why is DAP needed to make wine? Grapes are high in sugar when harvested. Strains of yeast are used to ferment that sugar into ethanol – drinking alcohol – and carbon dioxide. Yeast are living organisms that use nitrogen as a food source. “If they don’t have enough nitrogen … the ferment won’t go to completion,” Amos said. “Also, the nitrogen has a big impact on flavour and aroma.” The nitrogen the yeast consume can either come from inorganic sources – those that do not contain carbon, such as DAP – or chemically organic (carbon-containing) sources. Supplies of organic nitrogen, such as those produced by other yeasts – are available and could be used as alternatives to DAP, but winemakers will not be able to rely on them wholly. “If the conditions are poor – and we don’t know that until harvest time – winemakers need a mix of both inorganic and organic nitrogen to optimise the winemaking process,” Amos said. “It’s not one or the other.” He said it was too early to say what impact the DAP shortage would have on consumers. “In terms of quality of wine produced, I don’t have any concerns,” he said. “Technically the winemakers will have to work really hard.”Fresh from his crushing victory over Ian Nepomniachtchi in Dubai, Magnus Carlsen opens his defence of his world rapid and blitz titles in Warsaw starting at 2pm GMT on Boxing Day. The 31-year-old Norwegian faces a serious double threat to his ambition to hold three crowns – classical, rapid and blitz – simultaneously, and will need all his legendary skills. Games and commentaries will be viewable live and free online. The tournament is being staged at the PGE Narodowy Stadium, the home of Poland’s national football team. In October 2015, the five-times US champion Hikaru Nakamura was briefly ranked No 2 behind Carlsen at classical chess, apparently fulfilling his tweet made two years earlier that: “I am the only person who is going to stop Sauron in the context of chess history.” The juxtaposition of Carlsen and the title character of Lord of the Rings went viral. They had already fought it out in a private all-night, six-hour, 40-game blitz match played in Moscow in 2010, which Carlsen won 24.5-15.5. There is also recent history between the pair in their frosty exchange of tweets after Nakamura won at St Louis in August this year. Nakamura started his Twitch stream in March 2020 with 2,000 followers. Now he has 1.3 million, as his brand of playing all-comers at fast speeds, including bizarre openings like the Bongcloud, and the way he combines instructional nuggets with expressive phraseology, all attract huge audiences. The 34-year-old has not played a rated classical game for two years, but is as deadly as ever at speed play. Apart from the world blitz and rapid, the Blue Riband of fast events is chess.com’s online speed championship, which has just ended its sixth season. Its knockout format is testing: 16 invited grandmasters, 90 minutes of 5/1 blitz, 60 minutes of 3/1 blitz, and 30 minutes of 1/1 bullet. Carlsen won the first two finals in 2016 and 2017 but lost to Maxime Vachier-Lagrave in the 2020 semi-final. Nakamura won in 2018, 2019 and 2020, and did it again in Monday’s 2021 final, when he crushed Wesley So 23-8. Earlier he eliminated Peter Svidler, Anish Giri and Ding Liren, the last only after tie-breaks and Armageddon. Victory by such a wide margin over So, who was Carlsen’s main competitor on the online Meltwater Champions Tour, is a clear statement of intent that Nakamura is ready for a serious challenge to the No 1 at Warsaw in the coming days. His performance was highlighted by an 18-move miniature, which is featured in this week’s puzzle, and where So was losing as early as move 10 Ba3? e4! Carlsen faces an equally dangerous challenge in Warsaw from Alireza Firouzja, the player widely viewed as heir apparent to the throne. The 18-year-old former Iranian, who now lives in Chartres and represents France, has long been bracketed with Carlsen and Nakamura as the world’s best in three-minute blitz and one-minute bullet. Firouzja, like Nakamura, has history with Carlsen, notably in the controversial finish to their game in the 2019 world blitz in Moscow. Two years on from Moscow, Firouzja is the world No 2, has triumphed impressively in Riga and in the European teams, and is the only player who Carlsen would be interested in taking on in his next championship defence in 2023. The world No 1 confirmed his stance and explained it further in a new blog this week: “I found that the negative has started to outweigh the positive, even when winning. I have by now played against the previous generation and three leading players of my generation. Being result-oriented has worked out for me in these matches, but it doesn’t feel sustainable long term. Passion must be the main driver. It is unlikely that I will play another match unless maybe if the next challenger represents the next generation.” There are plenty of others in the Warsaw field of over 150, the great majority of them grandmasters, who can upset the big three. David Howell, seeded 46th, is the only English GM entered, while there are no British players in the women’s championship, where the top three seeds are all Russian. Tata Steel Wijk aan Zee, the “chess Wimbledon”, is currently still set to go ahead, despite beginning on 15 January, just one day after the planned lifting of the new Netherlands Covid-19 lockdown. The regulations allow major sporting events, although without spectators, and all Wijk’s amateur sections have been cancelled. Wijk will be the first test of Carlsen’s stated ambition to aim for an all-time record 2900 rating as a target for his future events in place of his probable retirement from future world title matches. Carlsen’s current rating after Dubai is 2865, and Wijk is one of his favourite events, where he has won seven first prizes over the years. Next month he will need to score 9/13 there just to gain a single rating point, while 10/13 will take his rating to 2876. His lifetime official peak is 2882 from 2014 and 2019, and his highest unofficial live rating is 2889. On the plus side for Carlsen, the field for Wijk 2022 is less heavyweight than usual, with only Fabiano Caruana and Giri from the current top 10. Russia’s Andrey Esipenko, 19, who beat Carlsen at Wijk 2021, and India’s Rameshbabu Praggnanandhaa, 16, are the rising talents. What of Firouzja, the biggest teenage talent of them all, already the hero of many chess fans, and the youngest ever world No 2? There is zero chance of him competing at Wijk next month. The reason is Firouzja’s continuing spat with the Wijk organisers, dating back to the final round of Wijk 2021, when he was disturbed by the moving of tables to prepare for the Giri v Jorden van Foreest first prize speed tie-break. Firouzja was invited to Wijk 2022 several months ago, but negotiations via his father stalled on a demand for financial compensation for the 2021 disturbance, plus a much larger start fee for 2022 than the organisers offered. This is a scenario with echoes of Bobby Fischer in the 70s and Gata Kamsky in the 90s, so chess fans will watch future developments with interest and concern. 3795: 1...Nxf2! and White resigned. If 2 Rxf2 Rxe3, or 2 Qxf2 Bxe3, or 2 Nd2 Rxe3 3 Qxf2 Re2, all with decisive material gain for Black.Russia is threatening war on Ukraine, but in Kyiv the city council is putting up Christmas trees rather than bomb shelter notices, and organising concerts rather than army recruitment drives. Amid a Russian military buildup on Ukraine’s eastern border and in annexed Crimea, hostile rhetoric between Russia and the US and its allies is edging towards a cold war high, with Ukraine the battlefield for any actual fighting. Ukrainians, however, just emerging from Covid quarantine, are enjoying ice rinks and markets put up for the holiday season and would rather think about how to celebrate the coming new year. “I’m going to spend New Year with family and friends at home, although I’m sure there will be lots of parties in Kyiv,” said Olya Simbirova, 25, who works in a hairdressing salon in the centre of the capital. “In my circle of friends, no one is talking about a war.” Kyiv is over 700km from the frontline, although some reports suggest Russia, after moving troops into Belarus, may encircle the capital along with other large cities to the east of the city, or use targeted airstrikes. But it is thought to be more likely that eastern and southern areas nearer the frontline will be a target, with Kyiv having to deal with interrupted supplies and communications, as well as Russian sabotage and increased cyber and information warfare. Although a nationwide poll published on 17 December by Kyiv International Institute of Sociology found that half of Ukrainians would resist a Russian invasion by taking up arms or through civil resistance, not many believe they will be called on to do so, or are rushing to prepare. After losing swaths of territory to Russia and Russian-backed forces in 2014, and enduring a simmering armed conflict in east Ukraine ever since, not to mention economic hardship and the impact of Covid, many Ukrainians are so inured to threatened disaster they no longer believe politicians and media who, they say, have cried wolf too often. “We’ve heard it all too many times over the last few years,” said Simbirova. “And usually it’s just hype.” Earlier this year the Russian troop buildup on the border began to invoke the spectre of impending invasion, inspiring Simbirova’s mother to announce she was moving to Spain to be safe. The invasion came to nothing at that point, and her mother stayed in Ukraine. More recently, at a November press conference, the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, devoted as much time to talking about an alleged 1 December coup plot as he did to Russian invasion. The coup never happened, and many hope the invasion will be similarly chimeric. An international development project in Kyiv recently circulated recommendations among staff for what to do in case of invasion, such as to have a suitcase packed and to check the location of the nearest bomb shelter. But Yevheniya Burdiyan, who works as an accountant, has not heeded the advice. “I haven’t packed a suitcase,” Burdiyan said. “Because I didn’t pack one back then either.” Burdiyan, 49, is from Donetsk in east Ukraine, now under de facto Russian control after fierce fighting in 2014-15. Seven years ago, unable to believe in a war that was already raging, she was the last in her street to tape over her windows against shelling. She left the city in July 2014 on the last train out before the railway line was destroyed. Now she lives in a small settlement just outside Kyiv, built by families similarly displaced from east Ukraine. She says she is too busy to think about another possible war, and her neighbours never discuss it either. “After Donetsk and all the pain we went through, now we live in a little world of family, home, repairs. I’m just happy if I can buy some shelves, because when we moved in we just had bare walls,” she said. “Life goes on and we have to live it, with these little pleasures, and war is somewhere there, in the subconscious.” In Mariupol, 20km from the frontline of the east Ukraine conflict and a likely target of any possible invasion, many residents are also largely ignoring the threat and the council has gone all out on seasonal decorations and events. “They’re planning lots of concerts. City hall is trying to make Mariupol an example of security and cultural development of Ukrainian towns, in contrast to towns on the other side of the frontline,” said Galyna Balabanova, an activist and project manager in Mariupol. Alongside developing military capacity, one of Ukraine’s strategies to counter the Russian threat is to develop cities such as Mariupol so as to win the “hearts and minds” of Ukrainians sympathetic to – or still living in territory de facto controlled by – Russia. Balabanova and her friends are following the news and trying to analyse where Russia might attack, but they are not worried. “We trust in our army and our volunteers,” she said. As Ukrainians continue to focus on the near and dear, Burdiyan knows she cannot influence events anyway. “What we want and what happens are two different things; it doesn’t depend on us,” she said. Meanwhile, she does have something immediate to plan for. Her daughter, who lives in Estonia, is coming home for the holidays. “I have to plan what to cook,” she said, “and make up the bed for her.”Rose Matafeo is arguably the breakout star of 2021. Her BBC Three sitcom Starstruck became the channel’s best-performing comedy within weeks of launch, racking up 3m views and earning a second series before it even premiered. The impact was so huge and immediate that you could be forgiven for thinking she had dropped from the sky fully formed. This couldn’t be further from the truth. After winning a New Zealand international comedy festival award for standup in 2007, at the age of 15, Matafeo has conquered just about everything she has ever attempted. She has written for Daily Show-esque satirical news programmes. She has presented entertainment shows. She co-created and starred in a sketch series, and has directed sitcoms. In 2018, her show Horndog – detailing, in part, how she was kicked off a Franz Ferdinand messageboard for being “too racy” – won an Edinburgh comedy award. And last year she was the lead in the film Baby Done, executive produced by Taika Waititi. And yet, even for those of us who knew her work, Starstruck was the perfect showcase for all of Matafeo’s talents. Despite a premise that wasn’t entirely novel – like Notting Hill before it, it told the story of a civilian who accidentally fell in love with a movie star – Matafeo’s presence helped to reset and update a number of hoary old romcom tropes. Equal parts confident and anxious, for a few weeks in April, she was more or less all anyone could talk about. She’s a big deal now. She is also exhausted. “I’m having a lie-down,” says the 29-year-old New Zealander over the phone from London. Series two of Starstruck is almost complete, marking the end of a two-year treadmill for her, and she is deliberately choosing to pause. “I’ve got no work plans for next year and it’s great,” she says. “I really want to watch about a hundred movies and possibly, I don’t know, just chill out.” It’s a nice idea, but Matafeo isn’t convinced it’ll stick. “I will hate it,” she sighs. “I’ll hate it because I have nothing to do and it will kill me.” Part of the issue seems to be that, as wildly as Starstruck was received, she didn’t have any time to enjoy its success. “I had one day,” she says. “Not even one day. The first series came out on iPlayer at 6am the day before we started shooting the second series.” To compound things, the entire series showed up at once and people quickly discovered that the best way to consume it was in one sitting, like a movie. “Straight away the audience was like, ‘Great! When’s the next one coming out?’,” recalls Matafeo. “I thought, this is like a gut punch! It’s really flattering, like, that’s great! But oh my God! It freaks me out, you know?” Ultimately, though, the lack of a break can only be good for Starstruck. With no downtime between series, Matafeo and her writing partner Alice Snedden didn’t have time to bow to the pressures of fan service, so they didn’t have to second-guess themselves. “It’s scary because you go, ‘Maybe we didn’t write what the audience wanted’,” she says. “You know, people really love the show and you see a lot of series step it up extensively for series two. But it’s actually nice not having that, because it means that we’ve made a second series that we like. It was consistent and in keeping with the spirit of the first one. I’m a terrible people-pleaser so I think it was good not to have that little voice in my head.” Since we’re here to talk about Matafeo’s 2021, it made sense to ask her about the things she enjoyed watching. The short answer is “nothing current” – she caught up with 2019’s Watchmen in February, and adored it – but for the most part she fell back on old favourites. “I became kind of emotionally reliant on Dawson’s Creek,” she says. “I think I still am. Honestly, I got in deep with that and it saved me. It pulled me out of some dark places.” Fittingly, for a woman whose character worked in one, Matafeo has also been taking advantage of the cinemas reopening. “I’ve been going back to the BFI, back to the Prince Charles [cinema in Leicester Square], where I’ve been doing some screenings of Beverly Hills Cop one and two, my favourite films. And been really diving into my interest in more obscure 60s movies that you have to find on some bootleg weird zone on DVD. “But, yeah,” she continues, “it’s been a year of doing hobbies and stuff. When you’re making TV in particular, you look at a screen all day and then when you come home, you’re like ‘I don’t want to look at a screen’. So it’s been a year of getting into model making. I bought a bass guitar. I’m trying to shred on bass guitar. I just got into 16mm film cameras and learned all about that, so it’s been a year of nerd-dom, and I love it.” That’s real self-improvement territory, I say. “It’s borderline,” she says, laughing. “Self-improvement slash self-sabotage in terms of now I spend my money on cameras and I’m not seeing anyone.” Our time is coming to a close, and I’m concerned that Matafeo doesn’t realise how much people enjoyed Starstruck. So I reassert the notion, going on at some length about all the ways I loved it. And I really did. In another year that has been marked by a general sense of gloom, the unapologetic loveliness of Starstruck felt like the shot in the arm we all needed. “Aw, that’s really kind! I’m so glad so many people have liked it, and I hope when the second series comes out, they’ll still like it,” Matafeo replies. She pauses, and checks herself. “But also I don’t care because, you know, whatever.”When Apollo 11 launched in July 1969, Bill Nelson was an army lieutenant on leave behind the iron curtain, listening with colleagues to the BBC on shortwave radio. “There were three young Americans standing on the hills overlooking Budapest, screaming at the top of our lungs, cheering as that rocket lifted off,” Nasa’s new administrator recalled in a video interview. By the time Neil Armstrong stepped on to the lunar surface, Nelson was at a London hotel, watching on a grainy black and white TV at three in the morning. “This was all extremely fascinating to me and never in a million years did I think that I was going to end up being able to fly in space. Much more so, never in a million years would I have thought that I would try to offer some leadership to Nasa.” Nelson, who at 79 is two months older than Joe Biden, was the first member of the House of Representatives to go into space. He went on to serve as a Democratic senator for Florida for 18 years. In May he was appointed by Biden to lead Nasa and earlier this month he was in the spotlight when Vice-President Kamala Harris chaired her first meeting of the National Space Council. Nelson’s priorities include the $10bn James Webb Space Telescope, a successor to the Hubble telescope aiming to launch on Saturday after years of costly delays. Astronomers are on edge because a lot could go wrong. “There are some 300 things that have to work perfectly on this telescope,” Nelson says. “And that’s after a successful launch.” Then there is Nasa’s high stakes effort to return to the moon after half a century. The Artemis programme, a sequel to Apollo, aims to put astronauts back on the lunar surface in 2025 or soon after, establishing the first “long-term human-robotic presence” on and around the moon and laying the groundwork for the first crewed mission to Mars in the late 2030s. “Why the moon?” Nelson says. “Because the goal is Mars. What we can do on the moon is learn how to exist and survive in that hostile environment and only be three or four days away from Earth before we venture out and are months and months from Earth. That’s the whole purpose: we go back to the moon, we learn how to live there, we create habitats.” In 2023 a probe will dig down at the south pole of the moon to learn how much water there is beneath the surface. “Because if there’s water, then we’ve got rocket fuel, we’ve got hydrogen and oxygen.” Last time around the US was spurred to the moon by the Soviet Union, which had beaten it to putting the first satellite (Sputnik) and first person (Yuri Gagarin) in space. Today the principal rival is China, which Biden has made an organising principle of his presidency, and space is no exception. China established its own space station with alacrity and is only the second country to have landed a rover on Mars. Is a new space race under way and, on the basis that competition breeds success, might that be a good thing? “Yes to the space race,” Nelson replies. “I think their intention is to bring back a sample from Mars earlier than ours. I think their intention is to try to land on the moon before we land. The facts are the facts and America better pay attention. “But is that a good thing? Not really. What would be a better thing is if they were a partner like Russia has been since 1975.” Leaders of the American and Russian space agencies had a constructive relationship during the later part of the cold war; can Nelson establish a similar channel to his Chinese counterpart? “If I had my druthers I would, but you can’t have a relationship if the other party doesn’t want to have a relationship. It takes two to tango. They have indicated no interest in the two of us doing the tango.” He adds: “They’re good but they’re secretive. They’re not collaborative. They’re not transparent.” All 12 people who walked on the moon between 1969 and 1972 were white American men. In his public remarks, Nelson typically makes a point of saying that Artemis will put the first woman and first person of colour on the moon. Nasa has also produced a graphic novel, First Woman, about a fictional character called Callie Rodriguez who achieves both distinctions. What impact does he think that moment would have on girls and children of colour around the world? “Well, look what female and minority astronauts have already done. It’s caused little girls to dream dreams that they didn’t ever think possible before. Same thing with minorities.” But for now many of the headlines are stolen by billionaire white men such as Jeff Bezos, Richard Branson and Elon Musk. Nelson does not seem perturbed about Nasa’s thunder being stolen, however. “I think it’s great they are spending their money advancing technology. They are opening up press attention and excitement by American people and then, when you add that to the Nasa programme, of which SpaceX is a big part now, it’s all the more exciting.” Musk’s SpaceX is developing a “Starship” lunar lander that can carry a gamechanging 100 tons of cargo. Enough to start building a moon base? “I hope so, but it hasn’t flown.” An unsuccessful legal challenge by Bezos’s rocket company, Blue Origin, caused a delay but Nasa is still targeting February for the first test flight of its moon rocket, the Space Launch System. Raised in Melbourne, Florida, Nelson studied at the University of Florida, Yale and University of Virginia Law School and served on active duty in the army. He began practising law then went into politics, first in the Florida state legislature, then in the US Congress. In 1986 he went from the Washington swamp to the stars on the space shuttle Columbia, orbiting the Earth 98 times over six days and conducting 12 medical experiments, including the first American stress test in space. (Just 10 days after he landed, another shuttle, Challenger, launched and almost immediately exploded, killing all seven crew members.) Michael Collins, the Apollo 11 command module pilot, once described Earth as “blue, white, very shiny … such a beautiful tiny thing, nestled in this black velvet of the rest of the universe”. William Shatner, 90, famed for playing Captain Kirk in Star Trek, rode aboard a Blue Origin rocket in October to become the oldest person in space and was struck by “the covering of blue, this sheet, this blanket, this comforter of blue that we have around us”. Nelson, too, has vivid memories of seeing Earth from afar. “It is so beautiful. It is so colourful. It is suspended in nothing. There’s home and yet it looks so fragile. That experience informed a lot of my public life because I wanted to be, when I returned, a better steward of our planet. “So I think you can just basically boldly say I became more of an environmentalist when I went into space, and that has informed my environmental record now going on 44 years of public service. “It also struck me as a politician that when I looked, as we orbited the Earth every 90 minutes, I didn’t see racial divisions and I didn’t see religious divisions and I didn’t see political divisions – the things that bedevil us here on the face of the Earth. What I saw, we were all citizens of planet Earth, and that’s informed my public service as well.” By way of example he describes Nasa as “the point of the spear” on the climate crisis, designing, building and launching instruments that measure the delicate balance of the environment. Nelson reveals that the agency is planning to set up a “mission control” for climate change at a still-to-be-determined location. “We’re going to allow the public to access it virtually. We’re going to encourage state and local governments as well as our fellow agencies and the federal government to access the data and make it easy for everybody so they can have informed decisions.” Whatever the shortcomings of Cop26, Nelson believes there has been a perceptible shift in public and political opinion on the issue. He notes that Republican senator Ted Cruz – who was the first to call him when news of his nomination for Nasa was leaked by the White House – “was an absolute out and out climate denier and you don’t hear him saying that that much now”. Another subject that has gone increasingly mainstream in Washington is unidentified flying objects. In June a report found that although intelligence officials do not believe aliens are responsible for dozens of accounts of unidentified aerial phenomena (UAP), they cannot fully explain what is. Nelson comments: “You’ve seen those films now made public. They [navy pilots] know they saw something. What is it? I don’t know. Is it an adversary on Earth that has that kind of technology? I hope not. “Do I think that there is life in the universe? The answer to that is clearly I do and we are searching for it. How can I limit a universe that is so big that I cannot see how big it is, where we are in a galaxy with billions if not trillions of stars and there are additional billions if not trillions of galaxies, and the universe is expanding?” He adds with a chuckle: “Like people that tried to limit Copernicus and Galileo that the Earth didn’t revolve about the sun, that everything revolved around the Earth. So, you get the drift.” What first contact with an alien civilisation would mean for humanity has long been the stuff of science fiction. But politicians take it seriously. After a conversation with his American counterpart in 1985, Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev recalled: “President Reagan suddenly said to me, ‘What would you do if the United States were suddenly attacked by someone from outer space? Would you help us?’ I said, ‘No doubt about it.’ He said, ‘We too.’ So that’s interesting.” Nelson, astronaut turned senator turned secretary of space, must be hoping that China’s Xi Jinping feels the same way about saving the planet from greenhouse gases.In 1998 I was part of an England team that headed into the Boxing Day Test 2-0 down. We were being outplayed by a better team and psychologically that is a tough place to be in international sport. When you’re on the wrong side of a one-sided contest it’s really quite depressing, constantly racking your brains to dream up ways to change things. Back then, what came next was probably the most satisfying England game I was ever involved in. It is a milestone in anyone’s career to play such a historic fixture in an amazing stadium. I remember the first day, 80,000 people squeezed into the ground and the feeling of being absolutely dwarfed by the MCG – the stands are high, the playing surface is huge. It’s very easy to get overawed but on that occasion as a team we showed a degree of stubbornness and, helped by an Alec Stewart century and six wickets from Dean Headley in the second innings, we managed to win. England find themselves in a similar situation now, but can they turn it around? They need to find a source of self-belief. Sometimes there are moments within matches that can provide a sudden transfusion, and there was one of those in 1998 as Australia chased a total they would normally have reached with ease. They were 100-odd for two, around 70 away from victory, and in the outfield I was watching helpless while the bowlers ran in and gave everything without getting any luck. Then Justin Langer latched on to this short ball and pulled it very hard, low to my right, and I dived for it and clung on. I got very animated in my celebration – a lot of friends laughed at my reaction, and I cringe when I watch it, but it was the simmering frustration of long days in the field, of being part of an excellent side getting outgunned by a better one, of fighting hard and failing. And then something came out of nothing, and it got the whole team going. The feeling was: if we’re going to go down, let’s go down with some pride. We won by 12 runs. Confidence and belief are essential in international cricket, and every single member of this England side has to look deep within themselves to find a way of bringing their best game when all these obstacles lie in their way – a lack of match practice, slightly alien conditions, very good opponents and a sense that the rub of the green is not quite with them. Some players are motivated by a fear of failure while other personalities, more extrovert perhaps, will be driven by the chance to be a hero on a big occasion. Whatever the inspiration is, now is the time to find it and mine it. As a batting coach I talk about having a confidence bank, which might be full of memories of previous good performances, or might need to be topped up by the right kind of preparation in the nets. It might take a session spent hitting the shots that make you feel confident, or upping the speed of the bowling machine and dealing with it. Whatever helps you believe you’re in the best place to succeed when you step over the white line. This week Marnus Labuschagne overtook Joe Root as the ICC’s top-ranked Test batter. I don’t think he’s technically as good as Root, but one thing he seems to have no issue with is belief. It doesn’t seem to worry him if he scores in an ugly fashion because he knows he can play at this level. The likes of Ollie Pope, Zak Crawley and Haseeb Hameed have played excellently for their counties but the leap to the international stage is huge, and some personalities clear it quicker than others. I don’t think their selection was wrong – they are the best we have – but it has been a tough experience both for the young players in the team and for those like Crawley who have not yet had a chance. England’s batters clearly have technical issues, and have struggled to deal with the extra bounce you get in Australia. Root, for example, is very adept at opening the face of his bat and running the ball down to third, but in Australia where there is a bit more pace and bounce that is a dangerous shot which often ends with an edge through to the cordon, so one of his key weapons has been taken away. England’s decision-making around the top of off stump has not been good enough and we’ve seen players not knowing what to play and what to leave, making bad decisions and getting punished. Australia’s bowlers aren’t much better than ours but they do have a bit more pace, they hit the pitch hard and give batters less time to make the crucial decision whether to play. But, despite the failings of the batters, in the aftermath of England’s defeat in the second Test Root blamed the bowlers’ lengths. Captains are on very dangerous ground when they start throwing blame around, and it was particularly galling to then see both Root and Chris Silverwood maintain their selection was right having left out Mark Wood, their quickest bowler. What England need at this point is for some players to find that inner steel. I do believe they have it in them. The squad contains some strong personalities – Ben Stokes, Root, Dawid Malan – who are perfectly capable of imposing themselves as Stewart did in 1998. On paper the gap between the sides is not so big, but if England don’t find the inner strength to come out and compete the Aussies will continue to steamroller them.In Lebanon’s year of loss and deprivation, simple pleasures have steadily drained away along with its fortunes. But amid a crisis renowned for breaking new ground, few Lebanese had thought their ability to stay in touch was at risk – until a pre-Christmas warning sent shudders through the country. The telecommunications minister, Johnny Corm, warned this week that a lack of funds and fuel could soon see Lebanon’s already struggling internet grind to a halt, making festive calls and messages even trickier than usual – and a financial and social disintegration like no other even more acute. As weary Lebanese approached another lacklustre Christmas, the warnings appeared to be bearing out. The internet was barely functioning in Tripoli on Tuesday. By the day after, Beirutis could barely communicate or open websites. Things were forecast to get worse in time for Christmas Day. Miriam Sarhan, 31, who left Lebanon for Canada in July after losing faith in her homeland, says calling her family on messaging apps had helped settle her in and reassure her family back home. “I was speaking to them by video in November,” she says. “Now we can’t even manage a voice call. What else will my country take from me?” The crisis affecting the telecom sector mirrors that faced by all arms of government; bills to overseas providers need to be paid in US dollars and the cost of doing so has increased up to twentyfold since the country’s plunging currency lost parity in late 2020. Since then, the value of the lira has been in freefall, while costs of goods and services have skyrocketed. Through it all, staying in touch had been at least one salvation; as had a hope that somehow, someday, things would get better. But as a cruel winter sets in, after an arduous year, there is little sign of a brighter horizon. Resilience, once a buzzword used to describe the Lebanese, is now parodied by citizens themselves. “How much more can we be humiliated?” asks Mustafa Alloush, an expatriate living in London. “It seems something that outsiders wish upon us to make themselves feel better about our situation.” Downtown Beirut, a crossroads of the city’s myriad manifestations, is unusually bleak and empty this year. As winter rains swept in across the still-ruined port nearby, the space where a Christmas tree normally stands was empty and abandoned. In the predominantly Armenian suburb of Bourj Hammoud in the capital’s east, the festive season barely appears to have been marked this year. Christmas decorations are few and far between. So are shoppers. “It’s a very depressing Christmas,” says Sandy Gumijian, a shop owner. “There’s no lighting, no decoration. And I’m not selling anything except food and bread. It’s much worse than last year. Worse for the kids too.” A coffee shop owner, George Kouyoumijian, 43, says: “Where is Christmas? Look at the store, there’s nothing. Usually there are decorations all over this street. It should be full of lighting and life. We thought last year was the worst and we were praying for the end of 2020, but this year is worse for sure.” Kamilla, a gift shop owner, says she could not afford decorations and lighting this year. “You are the first one to come to my shop with a smile,” she says. How Lebanon sank so low continues to trouble many of its citizens, who left the country in droves this year – determined to start again in the Gulf states, Canada, the UK or Europe. While immigration numbers are hard to discern from a broken bureaucracy, removal companies have a backlog of several months for people leaving the country – and the local carrier, Middle East Airlines has done a brisk business on outbound routes. Inbound flights before Christmas have also been busy – but that is not expected to last. “These are expats coming home for two weeks, their bags full of dollars from new lives abroad,” says an executive with Middle East Airlines, the national airline of Lebanon. “This is the new diaspora, which is added to the old one. We have always been a country of exiles, but never quite like this.” Indeed, what Lebanon now represents has become a riddle for many of its citizens. From postwar uncertainty to fleeting opportunity, short-term boom – and now emphatic bust, the trajectory has been volatile. Returning to the homeland from lives made abroad had remained an ambition for many. “It was for me too,” says Saad Chamoun, who arrived from Dubai to visit his family this month. “But something changed in me. I left in July and have been gone for five months. I’m working in reinsurance and am happy. I don’t want to come home, because the country is no longer for me. All my friends are the same.” With a middle class being fast whittled out, and a diaspora estimated at up to 18 million people having little incentive to return, Lebanon’s brain drain has an etch of permanence to it. “And that’s worrying,” says Khaled Zaidan, a banker. “The educated elite and the young and ambitious were always the country’s strategic depth. How does anyone ever lure them home now?” As the United Nations secretary general, António Guterres, left Beirut on Tuesday after a 48-hour visit, he reiterated grave concerns and the need for reforms, which a broken state and deeply factionalised government seem unable to deliver. More than 18 months after the Beirut explosion – as striking a symbol of state dysfunction seen anywhere in modern times – there has been little progress in bringing to account those culpable for the blast that devastated the city. Those responsible for the Ponzi scheme that crippled the banking system and the decades of industrial-scale corruption that preceded it also remain well out of reach of the enfeebled courts. “Christmas is a thing of yesteryear,” says Sarah Yamout, a Beirut resident. “Celebrating a real one has become something of our fantasies too.” Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:This was the year I started listening to non-stop pop music. It could be something to do with everything seeming hard and sharp at the moment, like those morphing spikes on the coronavirus. Those jaggedy little ridges tearing through our day-to-day lives. Growing up, pop was a dirty word and instead indie music was the soundtrack of my youth. I’ll probably never be as happy as I was stumbling around the Pavilion Tavern in Brighton drenched in lager, as the the Futureheads’ Hounds of Love blared from the speakers. Hip-hop figured heavily too. The crunchiness of Wu Tang Clan, like gravel underfoot. The ego of Kanye. The erudition of Kendrick. The melancholy of Frank. The swagger of Jay-Z. And latterly, the sheer hot-diggety of Skepta and the seductive hallucinatory quality of A$AP. Then I went to university and everyone did too many drugs and listened to dubstep, so I listened to that too. I never rated it, but a friend was a DJ for a pirate radio station in London and it all seemed pretty cool. I’d stagger around clubs to Benga, Skream and Crookers instead, covered in sweat, wondering where I’d left my mind. It was usually in the loos. Along with my phone. Recently, I decided I couldn’t “do” music with a BPM over 120 any more, it conjured too many memories – men I hadn’t slept with; men I shouldn’t have slept with, a few women I’d slept with too, actually; nights I’d missed out on; nights I shouldn’t ever have gone on. So I got pretentious and started listening to modern classical. Philip Glass, Ólafur Arnalds, Max Richter, that sort of thing. I “explored” the intersection of classical and dance: Actress, Nicolas Jaar, Nils Frahm. I spent a lot of time at the Barbican. That was as much about the boys as the music, though. And from Nicolas Jaar, I sidestepped to FKA twigs – with Sampha and Solange providing stepping stones along the way – and I was only one leap away from Lorde really. Then the pandemic hit. Lorde, Lil Nas X, Lana provided a much needed comfort blanket, along with Ariana, Bey and the occasional dose of RiRi. I wouldn’t tell anyone I was listening to pop for many months to come. I learned to dance, instead, by myself, in my bedroom. A perfect remedy for lockdown. In that, I learned humility. I was a body that responded to aural stimuli, I had rhythm, I was a person, not just a mind. A fleshy lump of humanness, gyrating, and it was lovely. Delicious, even. There’s no avoiding it: pop is sexy and sex is joy. For three and a half minutes we can forget the impending doom and just shimmy. There’s the queer thing too. Pop is subversive, we all know that. Lil Nas X has done more for gay rights than anyone since whoever threw that first brick at Stonewall. Pop is a nightclub, to extend the metaphor, with no door policy. A world unto itself, entry gratis, as long as you have a subscription to a music-sharing service, or can bear the ads on YouTube. You can be yourself, or someone else if you can’t handle that just now. There are no rules, have fun. As Lorde says “I’m kinda like a prettier Jesus”. You are, goddammit, Lorde. And I’m your disciple. But, Lil Nas X, if you’re reading this: my DMs are open. Oscar Quine is a writer and journalist based in GlasgowPacesetters Not so fast. The stuttering form of leaders Fulham and second-placed Bournemouth – neither have won any of their past five matches – has knitted things together towards the summit to tee up an intriguing second half of the season. A four-point blanket covers the top four, with Blackburn nestled in third above West Brom after bouncing back from a freak 7-0 trouncing by Fulham last month (it was only the second time they had lost a league game by more than a single goal since October 2020) by recording six wins in seven games, conceding twice. Among those on the Fulham scoresheet was Aleksandar Mitrovic, who has 25 goals in 27 games for club and country this season and whose league tally of 22 means he has outscored four strugglers in the division: Hull, Peterborough, Barnsley and Derby. Blackburn, who finished 15th last season, are the surprise package. In the summer they reinvested £400,000 of the £15m they received for talisman Adam Armstrong on a left-back from League One (Tayo Edun from Lincoln), Harvey Elliott and Taylor Harwood-Bellis exited after productive loan spells, a dozen senior players departed and yet they are mounting an unlikely promotion charge. Ben Brereton Díaz, the Stoke-born former England Under-19s striker turned Chile sensation, has provided a stream of goals, and the home-grown midfielders Lewis Travis and John Buckley have also impressed. Brereton Díaz has scored 19 in 23 games since adding his mother’s maiden name to his shirt in August, compared with nine in his previous 80 matches. West Brom are strong defensively but urgently require a bona fide No 9 to kill teams off, with Valérien Ismaël keen on reuniting with Daryl Dike. Bournemouth seemed untouchable for so long, Lloyd Kelly and Gary Cahill forming a peerless partnership, but defensive sloppiness has crept in. Fulham’s lead may have been shredded but budging them off pole position is another thing. They are blessed with midfield options, including the rejuvenated Jean Michaël Seri, the often-overlooked Neeskens Kebano, and Harry Wilson, who tends to enjoy himself at this level. Then there is Mitrovic. Play-off chasers Five points separate fifth-placed Queens Park Rangers and Blackpool, who continue to make impressive strides under Neil Critchley, in 13th but the former can point to two games in hand on most rivals as an opportunity to move level with West Brom. Nottingham Forest were bottom with a solitary point when Chris Hughton was sacked in mid-September but a few months on the outlook is distinctly different. Steve Cooper’s side are motoring in the rear-view mirror of sixth-placed Stoke City, who seem to have struck a healthy balance between experience and youthful exuberance – they have not paid a fee for any player over the age of 23 since Michael O’Neill took charge two years ago – with Mario Vrancic and Josh Tymon impressing at either end of the scale. Sheffield United are brimming with confidence after replacing Slavisa Jokanovic with Paul Heckingbottom and look well stocked to push on from mid-table. The majority of the squad that won promotion to the Premier League under Chris Wilder remain – Billy Sharp, Ollie Norwood and John Egan continue to be key pillars – but in Iliman Ndiaye who, like Sorba Thomas at Huddersfield, made big strides at non-league Boreham Wood, they possess a welcome unpredictability. The 21-year-old forward ran from inside his own half on Monday to beat Fulham and earn a fourth straight win. “You’ve not seen the best of him yet,” was Heckingbottom’s verdict. Wilder is now at Middlesbrough and has overseen an impressive upturn, which has restored optimism, though they may need to bolster their forward line to sustain their push. Coventry City have lost momentum in recent weeks but Mark Robins’ side, for whom Callum O’Hare has been particularly instrumental, remain very much in the conversation. Their unlikely ascent towards the top is one of the stories of the season. Millwall and Huddersfield appear too inconsistent to trouble the top six. Strugglers Weighed down by a 21-point penalty, Derby County’s primary focus is on surviving as a club, never mind in the division. Any hopes of staying up vanished a long time ago but Wayne Rooney continues to pull results out of the bag with a mishmash of a squad. The administrators, Quantuma, remain confident of selling the club in January. Last month supporters clubbed together to pay off the club’s £8,304 debt to St John Ambulance, one of dozens of creditors. Reading are another side nursing a points deduction for breaching financial rules. They have no shortage of pedigree – Andy Carroll, Junior Hoilett, Danny Drinkwater, Scott Dann, Alen Halilovic, Baba Rahman, George Puscas, the list goes on – but a team that began last season so promisingly have shown few signs of taking flight, even if the midfielder John Swift has been one of the division’s standout performers for a team one place above the drop. Peterborough are leaking goals but are in no way adrift and will hope to drag Cardiff, Hull, who have lost only one of their past seven games, Bristol City and Birmingham into trouble. Second-bottom Barnsley have got nowhere near replicating a memorable last campaign – they have won one of their past 21 matches and are the division’s lowest scorers – but the head coach, Poya Asbaghi, can see green shoots. “I’m sure when we start winning that we can create a machine that goes on and on,” he says.The 96,000 routine – In the Heights When I say I missed the cinema, specifically I meant I missed seeing musicals on the big screen. While Jon M Chu’s In the Heights was made before the pandemic, his commitment to the supremacy of the production number delivered what our eyes were craving. Naturally, the film opens up the musical’s theatre staging, and it begins with a vast ensemble song of escalating excess, but it’s the 96,000 routine, about a third of the way in, which made the biggest splash and proved the director’s commitment to Technicolor extravagance by way of Busby Berkeley, aqua aerobics and gurning contortionists. Aptly, it’s a song about bragging and wish-fulfilment, in which the cast speculate on how they’d spend a lottery windfall. And for a song about big numbers, the scale is as massive as it ought to be: bikini overkill. It’s a little daft, sure, but so exuberant, you’ll grin all the way through – even at the goofy graffiti effects. Pamela Hutchinson The dinner – The Hand of God “When did you all become such disappointments?” So asks the elegantly dressed Alberto, one of the elders of the extended Schisa family, as they dine al fresco on a gorgeous Neapolitan afternoon in Paolo Sorrentino’s winsome cine-memoir The Hand of God. Their summit is one of glorious ridicule as they mock the angry grandma who repulsively sucks on a fat lump of cheese while wearing a gaudy fur coat, chuckle as a rotund aunt gripes “my spleen is acting up”, and roll their eyes at a crooked cousin too stupid to steal anything but watermelons. Explosive laughter comes when the morbidly obese sister brings her new beau, who introduces himself through a robotic electrolarynx. And yet this garishly-shot parade of cinematic invective, peppered with many a hearty “va fongool!”, is awash, somehow, in the glow of nostalgic, familial love. To extract warmth from cruelty is a movie-making miracle. Jordan Hoffman The clients – Last Night in Soho About halfway through Edgar Wright’s cautionary tale about the hazards of escapism, the dream of young Eloise – to travel in sleep back to 60s London as bewitching it-girl Sandie – morphs into a nightmare. Though in this dizzying montage, it’s more like a good trip gone bad; Sandie’s yanked out of her bed by her boyfriend turned pimp with a bark of “everyone’s waiting for you”, a cruel inversion of the beckoning Petula Clark lyric sung a few scenes prior, and suddenly she’s at a club bathed in rainbow psychedelia. In time with the Walker Brothers’ cover of Land of 1,000 Dances, she whirls through a series of reluctant dates with oily clients, taking the edge off by getting progressively drunker until she’s cackling at their stock line about how lovely her name is. They don’t really care, assigning her a persona of their choosing, another dark play on the desire to be someone else she expressed before. The lyrics turn into mocking jeers, their exhortations to do the Watusi or Mashed Potato now demands from cruel men for her to dance to their liking. All she can do is get lost in the song. Charles Bramesco The party – The Worst Person in the World In a year of truly weird sex in movies (singing cunnilingus, oral period sex, sex with cars and Jesus figurines), the hottest scene of all may have been one without intercourse. Julie (Renate Reinsve, Cannes’ best actress winner) is flitting through careers and men, waiting for something to happen, as she approaches 30. One evening, walking home through luminous Oslo, she happens upon a wedding party, where she helps herself to too many drinks and chats up a tall, attractive stranger (Herbert Nordrum). What follows is 10 minutes of one of the most disarmingly romantic set pieces this side of Four Weddings and a Funeral, and a masterclass in chemistry. With both happy in relationships and loath to cheat, they insist nothing can happen. But in various dim nooks around the party, they engage in a captivatingly sexy game of Is This Cheating?, involving biting, smelling armpits, shotgun smoking and peeing in front of each other (hotter than it sounds). As the sun rises, they say goodbye, positive they didn’t transgress – just as we’re certain it’s the beginning of a transformative romance. Lisa Wong Macabasco The Bieber – Billie Eilish: The World’s a Bit Blurry Billie Eilish is at Coachella. She’s watching Ariana Grande, minding her own business, when a man in a baseball cap and medical mask approaches her. She recoils, keeping her distance. He holds her gaze, and she offers a shy, stressed wave. He opens his arms for a hug, and after taking a minute to gather herself, she eventually receives the embrace. The man is veteran teen idol Justin Bieber. Caught on camera in RJ Cutter’s masterful fly-on-the-wall rock doc, it’s an extraordinary moment that feels like lightning in a bottle. He strokes her hair as she weeps uncontrollably, face pressed into his chest. “He just stood there and looked at me WITH HIS EYES,” sobs Eilish, reliving the experience in the car on the way home. “You know exactly how it feels to be him in that situation,” replies her brother, Finneas. The film is a snapshot of the planet’s biggest pop star as her fame is cresting; the scene draws a clever parallel with Bieber, the object of her own fandom. Simran Hans The first time – Plan B At first glance, Hulu’s Plan B could easily be confused with last year’s Unpregnant – both films follow two inseparable best female friends on hijinks-filled road trips for reproductive healthcare denied to them by real-life restrictions. But I knew Plan B, directed by Natalie Morales and written by Prathi Srinivasan and Joshua Levy, was more than a retread of Unpregnant in the film’s first act, when firecracker Lupe (Victoria Moroles) convinces the inexperienced, tightly-wound Sunny (Kuhoo Verma) to host a party as a scheme to court her crush. That plan goes bust, of course, and Sunny instead ends up in a bathroom with Kyle (Mason Cook), a dorky, ultra-Christian classmate. Over the course of four and a half minutes, Plan B captures with cringeworthy precision an under-represented teenage girl experience: first-time sex that is not traumatic or revelatory, but boring – anti-climactic, incidental, very brief, unworthy of the hype. Verma and Cook hit all the humbling notes: impulsive lust, disillusionment (theres’s a Squatty Potty involved), shock, shame. It’s an endearing, searing and hilarious ride, whose stressful consequences for Sunny only casts the increasingly dystopian nightmare of US reproductive rights in starker relief. Adrian Horton The opening – Barb and Star Go to Vista Del Mar You can never anticipate how any movie is going to open, but there was no throat-clearing quite like Barb &amp; Star Go to Vista Del Mar, which starts with a paperboy rolling through a middle American suburb on his bike, slinging deliveries while lip-synching to the 1980 Barbra Streisand-Barry Gibb duet Guilty. Why that song? It’s not connected to the period or the themes of the film that follows, such as they are, but it nonetheless seems like an ideal primer, suggestive of both the culotte-and-casserole souls of Kristen Wiig and Annie Mumolo’s Nebraskan adventurers and the random battiness of the film’s delightfully offbeat sense of humor. Later in the film, when Wiig and Mumolo spend an entire plane ride talking up an imaginary perfect woman named Trish or Jamie Dornan launches into an impromptu beachside song-and-dance numbers, we can’t say we weren’t prepared for odd things to happen. Scott Tobias The downhill drive – Licorice Pizza Few film-makers put together moments that hit on multiple levels like Paul Thomas Anderson. The dude rocks images that can simultaneously move the plot forward, deliver a symbolic punchline and do a number on our emotions. Licorice Pizza’s downhill sequence – peak cinema in 2021 – is just the latest example. That’s when the adult protagonist in Anderson’s 1973 set coming-of-age comedy, Alana (Alana Haim), steers a U-Haul with an empty gas tank in reverse down the Hollywood Hills. It’s a breathtaking stunt that’s also devastating for Alana. She’s a beguiling young woman whose life was stalled working a job to nowhere. And then she found some forward momentum when meeting Gary Valentine (Cooper Hoffman), a 15-year-old googly-eyed go-getter. But the high of their relationship, and all its youthful recklessness, is wearing thin when they hop in that truck and let gravity drag them backwards. Licorice Pizza has a few moments when Alana catches her own reflection and reassesses. Here we see her face in a riveting close-up of the driver’s side mirror, struck with fear and melancholy as the road behind her comes closing in. Radheyan Simonpillai The walk – The Power of the Dog There’s been a strange reticence to much of the writing about Jane Campion’s magnetic Oscar-buzzed comeback. Critics have praised and pored over its themes of masculinity and a loose definition of repression, but most have been too coy to discuss how overwhelmingly, fascinatingly queer the whole film is. The uneasy dynamic between Benedict Cumberbatch’s sad, closeted rancher Phil, whose quick temper and filthy cowboy get-up help to mask his sexuality, and Kodi Smit-McPhee’s delicate, almost otherworldly med student Peter, whose exterior softness hides something far steelier is endlessly intriguing for everything it does and doesn’t say. The moment that burrowed its way under my skin the deepest was the film’s big turning point, as Phil watches Peter confidently strut over to examine a bird’s nest despite being ridiculed and called a faggot by the men nearby. It’s when the elder gay decides to suddenly take him under his wing. For what purpose? We’re not so sure and neither, it seems in the moment, is Phil. Is it some sort of desire? Is it a need to protect? Is it a form of jealousy? Is it perhaps all three? It represents a specific, hard-to-explain confusion that comes with generational queerness and while others might interpret it as a moment of darkness (was it really just a new way to torture Kirsten Dunst’s beleaguered mother?), I saw it as something tender. And undeniably queer. Benjamin Lee The Sondheim – tick, tick … BOOM! This was the year an American titan left us: Stephen Sondheim, whose great early hit West Side Story (for which he wrote the lyrics at 27) has now been revived in a new screen version by Steven Spielberg. So it is fitting that Sondheim appeared for a poignant moment, sympathetically played in cameo by Bradley Whitford, in Lin-Manuel Miranda’s tick, tick ... BOOM!: the autobiographical musical by the late Jonathan Larson, who wrote Rent, detailing his heartbreaking attempts to get an early work produced – a complicated, ambitious, futurist extravaganza called Superbia. Larson, played by Andrew Garfield, is seen presenting a workshop performance with some musicians and singers and himself narrating and singing at the piano keyboard. Afterwards, two established figures of the musical theatre world take to the stage and offer their advice and criticism. Richard Kind plays a fictional person called Walter Bloom (based, it is suggested, on the composer and lyricist Charles Strouse). The other is Sondheim himself – whose simple presence in the room stuns and awes all the young hopefuls – a rumpled, donnish, bearded figure, modestly retreating behind his shy mannerisms. Bloom is a supercilious, condescending fellow who dismisses the oddities and complexities of Larson’s work and says that it’ll never work commercially. But then Sondheim speaks and says that these are the things which make him like Larson’s work – and of course the submissive creep Bloom instantly tries turning around 180 degrees and claiming that he agrees. And what made me love this scene the most is that Sondheim says that the “tunes” are “swell”. This is the way a New Yorker of the old school speaks – there’s casual heft and authenticity in his words. And the simple spectacle of this great figure, taking time out of his day to help people coming up, is very moving. Peter Bradshaw The tree warrior – The Green Knight Of all the movies released this year – or in fact this century – this is the one that looked most disastrous on paper. I remember sweating over Sir Gawain and the Green Knight at university: that, plus Dev Patel, plus the guy who directed Pete’s Dragon and A Ghost Story? You’re having a laugh. But the laugh was on us, and to be honest, pretty much every frame of The Green Knight is a movie moment in itself. If I had to pick one, it’s probably when the tree-faced warrior gets his head separated from his shoulders, and then creepily, comes back to life, picks up his head and gallops his horse out of the door. Despite the batsqueak of Monty Python and the Holy Grail (“Tis but a scratch!”) this is as stunning as anything else in the film. Andrew Pulver The Pearls – Spencer Pablo Larraín’s remarkable, almost fully fictional biopic flirts extensively with camp, as befits a study of a celebrity already exaggeratedly set in the public’s imagination via tabloid culture and kitsch iconography. But that tendency reaches its apotheosis in an exquisitely nightmarish banquet scene, where the combination of royal decorum and fevered mental illness prove entirely too much for Kristen Stewart’s frail, exhausted Princess Diana to bear. Frantically, the tugs at the chunky string of pearls around her neck – lovelessly gifted by her husband – that may as well a noose. Finally, it comes apart, shallot-sized pearls scattering and bouncing across the dinner table – and bobbing into her pale green soup. Naturally, she scoops them up with a spoon and gets chewing. It’s a dream sequence of nakedly absurd horror, risking immense bad taste in its allusion to Diana’s eating disorder. Yet there’s something strangely powerful, too, about its spectacle of a woman attempting to destroy (to eat, even) her own stifling privilege. Guy Lodge • This article was amended on 25 December 2021 to correct misspellings of Jonathan Larson’s name.And with that, we’ll wrap up. Thank you so much – as always, an absolute pleasure. Before we all go, let’s recap the biggest stories: Victoria recorded 2,095 cases, NSW 5,612 cases and one death, Tasmania reported 27, Queensland 589, The ACT 102, SA 688 new cases, WA had five cases, and the NT recorded one new case. Omicron accounted for the majority of SA cases as the state announced it would forward boosters to 26 December. National booster shots brought forward to four months. Airport chaos as Christmas flights cancelled. Anthony Albanese addressed the media, saying “this is a government by echo”. Federal minister blocked six research projects and Labor accused the Coalition of “McCarthyism” for rejecting climate, China research. Seated service requirement for venues in WA as the state also changed border rules for SA and Queensland. There are warnings a tropical cyclone could form near Darwin on Boxing Day. Merry Christmas team Guardian! A Philippine family set to be deported from New Zealand on Christmas Day after the father used a false address to claim food vouchers out of desperation has been granted a last-minute reprieve in what they described as the “best present”. Jeffrey Santos had used a false address to claim $1,600 in vouchers because he lost his job when the Covid lockdown struck in March 2020 and was ineligible for New Zealand’s income relief payment, which wasn’t available to migrant workers. As a result, Jeffrey, his wife, Marjorie, and 8-year-old son James were to be deported back to the Philippines on Christmas Day. “I couldn’t pay rent for two weeks, I had to do something,” Santos told Stuff on Thursday. “I wish I hadn’t done this, but it is too late.” From AAP: A Sydney man who police allege was preparing to commit a terrorist act will face court on Christmas Day. Police arrested a 34-year-old man on Friday morning in Caringbah. NSW police detective superintendent Michael Sheehy says the man will be charged with offences relating to membership of a terrorist group and collecting and making documents likely to facilitate a terrorist attack. Following an investigation by the NSW Joint Counter Terrorism Team, police will allege the Caringbah man “made numerous threats to commit acts of violence against law enforcement officers and other community leaders”. JCTT investigators seized two knives along with documentation and electronic storage devices when they searched the man’s home following his arrest. He is posting a significant amount of material in respect of bombings, beheadings, manufacturing explosives and other material. It is likely he was, and we’ll suggest that he was, preparing to commit a terrorist act and that would have been an act of violence against law enforcement. The man was charged with using a social media platform to distribute material which may offend, harass or menace in December 2020. He was in custody for six months before being released in July. Sheehy said police and government officials had engaged with the man to “attempt to deradicalise him” but he refused to engage in a program and continued to promote Islamic State material online. Due to his recent escalation in his activities it was necessary for us to act today and arrest him for those offences. The man has been refused bail and will appear in a Parramatta court on Saturday. Australian man Carl Stanojevic might be the world’s most considerate neighbour after he was asked to “take the bins out” and dutifully followed the request – to the letter. The practical joke began when the 54-year-old photographer from Mackay, in Queensland, received a late-night text message from his neighbour, Nick Doherty – who works remotely – asking if Stanojevic “would be able to take my bins out please”. We’ve got a video of the Christmas messages from Morrison and Albanese here: The opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, has said that “after such a tough couple of years, we all deserve a happy Christmas”. After such a tough couple of years, we all deserve a happy Christmas. Thanks to everyone for taking care of each other. Australians have stood together. And now, with our borders opening up again, we’re getting back together. Off the Zoom and actually back in the room with family, friends and loved ones. May the festive season bring you joy. And may it be a sign of better times to come. Both major party leaders have recorded Christmas messages to the Australian people. I’ve taken a few lines from each. Scott Morrison: The prime minister, Scott Morrison, has thanked the “many selfless Australians” who are “caring for others this Christmas”. “At the end of this year, of course, we can think of the many difficult times we’ve had and the losses that people have incurred. But Christmas, you know, is a time of hope and we are an optimistic people,” Morrison said. He extended his support to the six families in Devonport in northern Tasmania that lost their children in the recent Hillcrest Primary School tragedy. “And this Christmas we’ll shed a tear and raise up prayers for them, I believe right across the country, for them that they might find some measure of comfort in this hour of their terrible grief.” He made a special thanks to the members of the defence force in the Solomon Islands and recognised it had been a hard year. “May all those who need a refreshing after what has been a difficult year, by just having a good long laugh out loud, round that Christmas table with friends and family, may you find it. May those who have been alone this year experience the warmth of companionship this Christmas. “May those of us who have faith find great encouragement as we reflect on God’s great gift to us and his son, Jesus Christ. And may all of us experience something of the joy and the wonder of Christmas, especially our children.” My colleague Lisa Favazzo got some of you to share your favourite Christmas traditions, and they are a wonderful mix of weird and cute. I like Little Drummer Boy as much as the rest of us but at 6 am on full volume it is a solid no from me. Hello everyone, this is Cait Kelly – I am back from my break and ready to roll through the last few hours with you. This is a cool calculator that tells you when and where you can get your booster. Whenever it’s quiet on the news front, you can usually rely on the Top End to come through. Today is no exception. AAP reports that thousands of dollars worth of Christmas hams are missing, after a learner driver allegedly stole a refrigerated truck in the Northern Territory. Police say about $10,000 worth of hams and the vehicle were stolen from a Darwin shopping centre car park on Thursday. The vehicle was later found abandoned, but there were no hams in the refrigerator and they remain missing, a spokeswoman said. Detective senior sergeant Mark Bland said: This behaviour can only be described as Grinch-like. It is incredibly disappointing for our members to be having to deal with these sorts of thefts just days out from Christmas. Police identified a 17-year-old boy and a man, 21, using CCTV footage, and they have been arrested and charged. The teenager was charged with aggravated unlawful use of a motor vehicle, stealing, damage to property, driving as a learner driver unaccompanied and failing to display L-plates. The man was charged with aggravated unlawful use of a motor vehicle, stealing and damage to property. Good afternoon. We’ve just launched our updated story on the thousands of Australians who have had their domestic flights cancelled in the hours leading up to Christmas, as frontline staff were ordered to test and isolate amid a rise in Covid cases. There were 117 domestic services cancelled on Friday between Sydney and Melbourne. I’m just going to hand you over to Michael McGowan quickly, who’ll keep you company while I eat some lunch. From AAP: The Top End is bracing for a wet and windy Christmas with residents warned a tropical cyclone could form near Darwin on Boxing Day. A monsoon trough and a tropical low are brewing north of the Tiwi Islands in the Arafura Sea, the Bureau of Meteorology says. It is expected to head south towards the Northern Territory by Saturday and extend across the Top End during Sunday as the monsoon sets in. “The best guidance is that the system will cross the coast south-west of Darwin as a category one system on Monday,” senior meteorologist Shaenagh Gamble said on Friday. “We’re fairly certain of where it’s going.” Darwin could be lashed by up to 100mm of rain per day with flash flooding and wind gusts of 150km/h possible. Communities from Point Stuart east of Darwin to Kalumburu in Western Australia have been told to remain alert and make preparations. If Braithwaite can’t reactivate the CBD no one can! The full list of WA exposure sites can be found here. The Northern Territory has recorded one new local case of Covid-19, taking the outbreak to 132. The case is a close contact of a previous case from Tennant Creek and Barrow Creek who was already in quarantine. A mask mandate that is currently in place in Alice Springs and Amoonguna will lift as planned at 5pm local time. And that is the end of the presser in WA. The state has recorded five new Covid cases. All cases attended the event Perth mess hall on 19 December in Northbridge. Anyone who attended that event, which is about 400 people, must get tested and go into quarantine until 14 days have passed since exposure to the virus. In this case, the quarantine period is counted from 19 December. About 100 people staying at the Fremantle Old Fire Station hostel are in lockdown, but will be moved to better accommodation for quarantining. SA and QLD are now classified by WA as high risk. Dawson is back up and is asked about if unvaccinated police officers will get full pay. I’m advised that the decision of the supreme court today was by one police officer; there’s in the order of about 30 police personnel with 23 sworn constables, and some other auxiliary officers and police staff. This injunction application was in respect of one officer alone, and the court – I haven’t read the decision because I have been here – but the advice I’ve got from the state solicitor is that the court has held that it only applies to that single officer [and] does not apply to the others. I intend to get further advice this afternoon in terms of further proceedings from here. Sanderson says check-ins have gone up by 38%. Yesterday, there were 1.7 million check-ins, that is significantly up on the day before. Sanderson says she doesn’t know how many people are in the hostel which is in lockdown. More than 100, but I don’t have the total number of residents there. Sanderson says surge plans are in place for hospitals. There are surge plans already in place for hospitals if ever required. But the public health measures we are putting in place at the moment and the very high levels of vaccination we have will negate the need for those plans, certainly in the immediate future. The current cohort that we are looking at with infections is also very young. And if this is potentially the Delta strain, evidence is that the disease is less severe in those young people. Sanderson is back up and she says the positive cases are all in their 20s. The people that are infected, people that have tested positive are in appropriate quarantine accommodation. We are working with those other potential close contacts, particularly the Fremantle hostel, and finding them appropriate hotel accommodation as well. McGowan says they will look at whether there can be compensation for the festivals that have had to cancel. In relation to some of the music festivals, that would have been difficult for the organisers of those festivals and quite costly. We will have a look at that as to whether or not there is any sort of compensation arrangements around it. Bear in mind, I think it ... can be difficult to do that but we will have a look at that. And what I normally find is whatever we do, people say it was not enough. In any event, we will examine the issue. McGowan: This is not about individual rights, this is about everybody. This is about protecting and helping everybody, and saving industries and lives more broadly across the community. And those who are out there protesting and taking matters to courts, all that thing, those are fundamentally selfish people. They are about them. They are not about the broader community. They need to have a good hard look in the mirror about their behaviour. But if and when Covid gets here, some of those people will die. I can’t help that if they are not going to abide by the rules and listen to all of the advice. McGowan says the people that will die when the virus enters WA will be those who are unvaccinated. Basically, the death rates around the world are the unvaccinated. When the virus gets here, and it may well be here already, the people who will die will be unvaccinated people. If people don’t learn that lesson, if they don’t watch what is happening around the world, then not much can be done for them. McGowan is asked if this is WA’s most challenging period yet, and says the outbreak is “most likely to have” caused community spread of the virus in WA. That is a fact. It is the Delta variant. The person in question has been to a whole bunch of venues. He has spread it to a whole bunch of other young people at those venues. It is a difficult situation. On the other hand, we now have over 91% first dose vaccination of over 12s. We have 85% double-dose vaccination of over 12s. ... Bear in mind, when I announced the transition plan a little while ago, it was on the basis that we wanted to get to 90% double-dose vaccination. That was the plan before we opened the borders. If we can get to 90% double-dose vaccination as soon as we possibly can, it will help protect the people of WA. If you are eligible to get the third dose, get it ... All the advice is, if and when Omicron gets here, the third dose gives you far greater protection against Omicron than two doses. McGowan says they are not happy about bringing in new restrictions. This is unpleasant and unfortunate for a lot of hospitality venues. I know that. But it does mean that tomorrow, if you’re running a restaurant or cafe [and] you have Christmas lunch booked, [you] can continue with seated service. McGowan says on the day WA announced the hard border with QLD, the state had one case. You have to bear in mind, Queensland, at that point in time ... We announced the hard border on that day and they had one community case. ... The day before they had six community cases ... in other words, in a state of 5 million people, at that point in time, they had seven cases. We still had a precautionary approach and put in place a hard border that night. Unfortunately, this person came in one hour before the hard border was put up. McGowan says they don’t know how many more cases are out there. Covid is a funny thing. I’m not, you know, a doctor, but your infectious period starts some days after you acquire the virus. It actually starts before such time as you become symptomatic, about a day before you become symptomatic. We have picked up five more people. We don’t know how much people are infectious or going to functions, which is why we’re being so precautionary about what has occurred. McGowan says the backpacker says he had not visited any of the known exposure sites in QLD. We asked the question, we put the exposure sites to him, and he indicated he didn’t go to any of the exposure sites. McGowan says there’s been good turnout at the vaccination clinics. People are booking their kids in. I expect a lot of the anti-vaxxers are now going and getting vaccinated. I expect a lot of people are going and getting their third doses, and that’s a good thing out of this. Go and get vaccinated, and if we get to very high levels of vaccination as a result of this, then that will be something that improves the situation for all of us. McGowan says it is “an unlucky” event. This fellow came in from Queensland whilst Queensland was ... very low-risk. So in other words, there were thousands of people coming in and out of Queensland because they ... didn’t have community spread of the virus. And our borders – again I’ll explain it – our borders were based upon the states and what the risk profile of each state was. Queensland, at the point of time this person came in, was very low-risk, so people were travelling freely between Queensland and Western Australia without restriction. That’s how he came in. Unfortunately he was one of basically half a dozen people in Queensland who had Covid at that point in time. McGowan says if there is a community outbreak, the planned border reopening on 5 February may become redundant. If we have community spread of the virus over coming weeks, then it may well be that 5 February date changes. It may well be it comes forward, because if we have major community spread of the virus ... it may well be that February 5 becomes redundant. Now, I said this prior to the outbreak. I said I hope we make it to February 5. The plan was to make it to February 5 without community spread of the virus. McGowan is asked what is different about this outbreak to others the state has had. Well, a few things about that. Firstly, if it is the Delta variant, it’s still highly infectious. So most of our outbreaks, bar one, were the predecessor variants prior to Delta. So Delta, of course, was regarded certainly by people in New South Wales as highly infectious. So that’s point one. So – it maybe Omicron but we suspect it’s Delta. Notwithstanding that, it’s highly infectious. Secondly, vaccination makes you less sick and reduces your transmissibility, it doesn’t eliminate. We have to explain this constantly to people. ... Like a flu vaccination, it reduces your chance of getting the virus, and it reduces your transmissibility. It doesn’t eliminate. So if you’re in a party in a room with hundreds of people, dancing in close proximity, you know, the chances are you’re going to spread it – and that appears to be what’s happened at the Perth Mess Hall. McGowan says 400 people at the Mess Hall are in quarantine. People at the Fremantle Hostel will be moved to hotel quarantine. It will be hotel rooms so they’ll be separated. The exact details, we’re working through. But at this point in time, the Fremantle youth hostel is locked down – so we have the people at the Fremantle hostel and the Mess Hall event ... in control, if you like. The reason we have done that is these hostels, as you know, have six or eight people in a room, so it’s very difficult for them to isolate. That’s why we have taken a particular interest in that hostel. McGowan says of the five cases, two are unvaccinated. The advice I have is that two are vaccinated, two are unvaccinated, one we don’t know. McGowan: It was an event with 400 people at the Perth Mess Hall. So it has parties in the undercover area there, so there were 400 people there including a hundred ... from a backpacker hostel in Fremantle who went there at the same time. It was very much sort of a – I suppose you’d say a young person’s party, in a closed environment. So at this point in time we have five people having acquired Covid from that single event. They’re obviously in proximity, probably dancing, having fun. He didn’t know he was positive, we didn’t know he was positive. So this is how this has come about. McGowan is back up; he says there is now another case, taking the state’s total to five. This is another person from the Perth Mess Hall event on 19 December. I don’t have any further details than that. He is asked if it is Delta or Omicron. We expect it’s Delta because [when] he arrived from Queensland, that was the dominant strain there. That’s the expectation. There’s still analysis, genomic sequencing on that, which means we might get an answer on that today or tomorrow. The WA police commissioner, Chris Dawson, says people are getting confused between testing and vaccine clinics. I must reinforce, though, that the testing clinics and the vaccine clinics are two separate premises. So don’t be confused ... at a vaccine clinic, the testing is not available there. They are quite specifically different premises. The vaccine clinics will not be open tomorrow but they’ll resume on Boxing Day onwards, and again, I would ask people to check those sites. It is encouraging that people are both presenting for testing and for vaccines. Sanderson: Encouragingly, we with had a 38% increase in check-ins by the SafeWA app yesterday from the day before. So it’s great to see that people are doing the right thing. Also today, we’re announcing that children aged five to 11 years old will have access to Covid-19 vaccinations from January 10. Vaccines will be available at a range of GP clinics, pharmacies and state-run vaccination clinics across Western Australia. Bookings opened for state-run vaccination clinics today, and bookings can be made via Vaccinate WA [online]. Sanderson says those getting tests should shop around for the quickest place. Capacity at our testing clinics was expanded yesterday. State-run testing clinics opened at 7am this morning and will be open until 8pm tonight. Tomorrow, Christmas Day, they will also be open from 7am to 8pm. On Boxing Day, they will open from 7am to 10pm. Private clinics are also open and are keeping similar hours. Please visit the HealthyWA website to find details of your clinics. Our clinics have been busy, and some are busier than others. I would urge you to shop around, it might be worth travelling a little bit further to get tested and wait less. The WA health minister, Amber-Jade Sanderson, is up now. More than 10,000 tests were carried out, and I understand that this is the last thing that you wanted to do just before Christmas, and I feel for those of you who will no longer be able to spend Christmas with your families. It generally takes between 24 and 48 hours for someone to get their Covid-19 test results, but rest assured our teams are working as fast as they can to get results back to people. Some are getting results back much faster than usual. Today, we have 85 contact tracers working hard to identify contacts of the confirmed cases. Tomorrow, 56 contact tracers will give up the chance to spend time with their families on Christmas Day to continue this important work, with the capacity to scale-up if needed, and we thank them for this. McGowan: To further protect our community and in light of skyrocketing infections over east, we’ll be upgrading our border arrangements. South Australia has today recorded an alarming spike in cases – 688 new infections. There are also worrying signs out of Queensland which has recorded 589 new infections. This is a major concern. That is why both South Australia and Queensland will be reclassified from medium-risk jurisdictions to high-risk jurisdictions. The new border arrangements come into effect from midnight tonight. This will mean arrivals must be approved, fully vaccinated, comply with the testing requirements before and after arriving, using the G2G Now app and undertake 14 days’ self-quarantine with the G2G Now app. McGowan says everyone needs to get vaccinated ASAP. These latest developments are a timely reminder of why it is so important to get vaccinated. Our vaccination rate is 91.3% for first dose 12-plus and 83.2% for second dose 12-plus. It’s 59.9% first dose for Aboriginal people and 44.7% double dose for Aboriginal people across WA over 12. The vaccine commander told this morning’s emergency management team meeting that we have seen an increase in vaccinations since yesterday’s developments. McGowan: As a result of these local cases, we are in a holding pattern while we get more tests done and develop a better understanding of the level of community transmission from case 1133. As detailed in our Safe Transition Plan, we’ll be introducing a proof of vaccination requirement for a range of venues and events by February 5 or earlier, depending on how this outbreak plays out. This will further protect everyone who has done the right thing and gotten themselves vaccinated. McGowan: Now, with the detection of these new cases and the big number of tests which are underway, more positive cases are expected, especially as we’re still in the infectious period from the exposure date. Therefore, from 6pm tonight, we will introduce an additional public health rule – for all licensed hospitality venues, seated service only will be permitted. This is on top of our public health rules we introduced yesterday including mask-wearing, the dancing ban, except at weddings, and the closure of high-risk entertainment venues and large-scale events. The additional seated service only requirement is also in place until Tuesday morning, December 28, which will help us further limit any potential spread of Covid in the community. McGowan: There are also 991 casual contacts of which 336 have tested negative so far and three positive as I detailed before. We expect the number of contacts to continue to increase. Last night, Health reported the partner of case 1133 and his four housemates have tested negative. They were all vaccinated. As a result of the Mess Hall event, and the large number of patrons who attend that event, our authorities have quickly responded to limit the spread as much as possible. A high number of patrons have been staying at the Fremantle Old Fire Station hostel. This morning, WA Police locked down that hostel. As this accommodation is not suitable for people to self-quarantine in, everyone staying in that hostel will now be provided with more suitable accommodation to complete their quarantine period. There are new exposure sites, which I will put up at the end of the presser. McGowan: The four cases – one is a close contact of case 1133 who also attended the Mess Hall event on Sunday, December 19. The other three are casual contacts of case 1133 who also attended the Mess Hall event but were not known to case 1133. As a result of the high-risk nature of the Mess Hall event in north, our health authorities will now upgrade the contact status for the Mess Hall event. This means that anyone who attended the event must get tested and now self-quarantine for 14 days from the date of exposure. As the date of exposure is 19 December, this means they will be in quarantine until January 3. We are making urgent arrangements to ensure everyone who was at the Mess Hall event, around 400 people, are tested and quarantined appropriately. Now, there are 21 close contacts linked to 1133, nine of whom have tested negative so far, and the one positive I mentioned earlier. McGowan says WA has four new Covid cases. McGowan says the advice from border force is that the French backpacker arrived before the onset of the pandemic and has been in Australia for two years. Fast forward to this month, he entered WA on December 12. At the time, Queensland was set as a very low-risk jurisdiction as they had virtually no Covid in that state which meant people entering WA from Queensland were not required to be vaccinated at that point in time. However, that changed the next day. And now under our safe transition plan, from February 5, everyone who is eligible aged 12 and over is required to be double-dose vaccinated to enter Western Australia. McGowan thanks everyone for wearing their masks when they are out and about. I acknowledge many Western Australians would prefer to not be wearing masks in indoor public venues across the festive season, especially when it’s so hot – me included – but the direction is based on health advice, it’s to keep us safe from any potential risk. And therefore, it is necessary at least until we know more about any potential spread. I want to nod to the many Western Australians who have clearly done the right thing and put their masks on where required. The WA premier, Mark McGowan, is giving an update now from Perth ... Labor Senator Kim Carr going in over the government refusing to grant six research projects including two about China and one about student climate activism. Just a quick reminder we are still waiting on Covid numbers from WA and the NT. We are not expecting a presser from the territory. From AAP: A Sydney man who police allege was preparing to commit a terrorist act will front court on Christmas Day. Police arrested a 34-year-old man on Friday morning in Caringbah. NSW Police Detective Superintendent Michael Sheehy said he will be charged with offences relating to membership of a terrorist group and collecting and making documents likely to facilitate a terrorist attack. “He is posting a significant amount of material in respect of bombings, beheadings, manufacturing explosives and other material,” Superintendent Sheehy told reporters on Friday. “It is likely he was, and we’ll suggest that he was, preparing to commit a terrorist act and that would have been an act of violence against law enforcement.” The man was charged with using a social media platform to distribute material which may offend, harass or menace in December 2020. He was in custody for six months before he was released in July this year. Superintendent Sheehy said police and government officials had engaged with the man to “attempt to deradicalise him” but he refused to engage in a program and continued to promote Islamic State material online. “Due to his recent escalation in his activities it was necessary for us to act today and arrest him for those offences,” he said. Police have issued a search warrant at the man’s home. In non-Covid news, a federal minister has blocked six research projects from receiving funding in the latest round of grants announced by the Australian Research Council. The winning Discovery Projects for next year were finally revealed in a Christmas Eve announcement. A report published on the ARC website said there were 3096 applications for funding commencing in 2022 - and 587 of those had been approved for funding totalling $259m over five years, for a success rate of 19%. The outcomes report included this nugget: “Of the unsuccessful applications in 2022, 51 were found not to meet eligibility requirements and 6 were recommended to, but not funded by the Minister.” A spokesperson for the acting education minister, Stuart Robert, said the minister had approved 587 of the 593 Discovery Projects the ARC recommended, but did not accept the following six: Playing Conditions: How Climate Shaped the Elizabethan Theatre National Forgetting and Local Remembering: Memory Politics in Modern China China stories under Xi Jinping: popular narratives Finding friendship in early English literature Cultural Production of Religion by Science Fiction and Fantasy novels New Possibilities: Student Climate Action and Democratic Renewal Robert’s spokesperson said the minister “believes those rejected do not demonstrate value for taxpayers’ money nor contribute to the national interest”. “After going through a peer review process, it is clear to the Minister the application of the National Interest Test is not working in every case. This test should ensure taxpayer-funded Australian Government research funding is directed to areas of national importance and delivers public value. It’s why in his Letter of Expectation the Minister asked the ARC to strengthen the test.” Is your Christmas cheer evaporating? Are you doomscrolling yourself into a complete funk? Try putting the phone down, making an eggnog and getting into some tasty online content from Australian arts companies to help inoculate yourself against the onset of festive season blues. These gorgeous shows are streaming right now. From AAP: Record sales are expected on Boxing Day as bargain-conscious shoppers shrug off coronavirus concerns to indulge in shopping, both in store and through their browsers. Shoppers have been tipped to spend $4bn – more than last year – in stores and online, based on Commonwealth Bank data. Australian Retailers Association chief executive Paul Zahra predicted an online record. “The big difference this year will be an even heightened level in online shopping because some people want to avoid crowds,” he said. “We still expect crowds but people will be more organised. There will be less browsing.” Zahra said he expected total sales to exceed last year because people could or would not spend their money on overseas travel during the Covid-19 pandemic. More than 80 domestic flights around the country have been cancelled after airline staff have had to isolate. Absolutely devastating for those trying to see family – and the staff having to isolate. I’ll bring you more on this as I have it. “We have to find a way to live and love, otherwise, we’ll all go insane.” Brigid Delaney says goodbye to 2021 and helps us process this cooker of a year. A must-read today, I reckon. From AAP: An 83-year-old man has died after a light plane crashed on Christmas Eve on a beach in central Queensland. Paramedics and a rescue helicopter were dispatched following the crash just after 8am on Friday at Ball Bay, about 50km north of Mackay. Police confirmed the man, a passenger on the plane, died at the scene. The pilot was airlifted to hospital with minor injuries. Queensland police’s forensic crash unit is working together with the Australian Transport Safety bureau to investigate the cause of the crash. The incident follows the death of four people in a light plane crash north of Brisbane less than a week ago. Professor Angela Webster, an epidemiologist from the University of Sydney’s School of Public Health was just on the ABC. She was asked if we are all going to have to get boosters for the rest of our lives. I think it’s an interesting question – to which she gave an insightful answer. Here it is: “I don’t think that’s the case. What we need to try and do globally is make sure that everybody has had access to vaccination so we can dampen the amount of infection that is circulating. “We know that coronavirus will mutate into new strains when it has a lot of opportunity, when it has a lot of infection around – that’s how the changes take place and that’s how we got Delta and Omicron. “There will be other variants that may become threats, or may not. And it’s likely that over time we will need to tweak the vaccinations, which is quite easy to do, and roll out slightly different versions like we see with seasonal flu vaccines. “I imagine we may reach a situation when coronavirus is less pandemic and more endemic, in the background rather than sweeping around the world as it is at the moment, when we will see we need boosters perhaps yearly to adjust to any different strains that are emerging.” Good afternoon everyone! This is Cait Kelly and I will be with you until the evening. I want to first up just bring you some Christmas joy with this gem: With that, I will pass the blog on to the highly capable Cait Kelly who will keep you entertained and informed this afternoon. A very Merry Christmas Eve for those who celebrate – I’m off to play Paul Kelly’s album on repeat. So case numbers are in for NSW, Victoria, Tasmania, Queensland, The ACT and South Australia. We are still waiting on the Northern Territory and Western Australia (WA detected a case in a Queensland backpacker yesterday). Marshall welcomes the reduction of the interval between second vaccination and the booster shot. From 26 December, mass vaccination clinics in South Australia will be available to ensure all those who are eligible can receive a booster shot until the rollout expands on 4 January. In addition, people who have had two shots of AstraZeneca and are working in “high risk” settings on the frontline who would normally be eligible on 4 January can receive a booster shot. Marshall: We need to take action. One of the things that we announced late yesterday is that we would no longer make it illegal to sell the rapid antigen tests here in our state. It has been in use for some weeks now in certain settings – medical settings, dental settings, aged care settings. Also settings in specific sectors that we’re very concerned about, for example, in food distribution and also in the mining sector, so it has been in widespread use in South Australia. Now, it is going to be made available to the people of our state. We strongly emphasise to every single person that you use this test for what it is – for its intended purposes which is a screen, a surveillance test for people that are not symptomatic. If you have any symptoms, the only option is to isolate ahead of a PCR test. That’s our strong advice. So the PCR is still suitable for all of those people with symptoms, or close contacts of known cases. But the rapid antigen test is suitable as a screening test and they will be made legal in South Australia as of last night and you’ll start to see those filtering through to stores almost immediately. There are eight people being treated in hospital in SA including one person – a man in his 30s – in intensive care. Marshall says of 484 new cases reported on Wednesday, 50% of new infections weren’t fully vaccinated. Some 70% of cases in the state are the Omicron variant, of the sample that have been tested. SA has reported 688 new Covid cases overnight from just over 20,000 tests. Marshall: If we don’t take action, there is going to be a significant problem for our country. It will overwhelm our health system, not because it is more severe, but just because of the sheer volume of people who are likely to become infected with this variant of concern. Now, South Australia has confronted the situation like this before by working together – we have been able to get through it and we’re going to need all South Australians to continue to work with us through this Omicron outbreak which is occurring right across the country. We have already seen today significant increases in other jurisdictions. This has been the picture right across the country, right across the world, for the last couple of weeks. SA premier Steven Marshall is up. The state is looking at the situation with Omicron “very, very carefully” and is concerned at the “very significant increase” in transmissability. “We do have to take action.” Albanese says the “only explanation” for reducing the booster interval on 4 January and again on 31 January is because of capacity constraints. The government once again hasn’t been ahead of the game when it comes to preparing for the action that is required based upon our own health advice and based upon international experience. This announcement today, which is quite extraordinary given Greg Hunt’s comments yesterday afternoon, follows a very consistent pattern. That pattern was followed with regard to wage subsidies and JobKeeper. Labor says something constructive, the government ridicules it and trashes it and a day or two later, they announced it as their own policy. I want everyone to acknowledge what masterstroke it is that they have come up with. The fact is that this government is always behind. It is always playing catch up ... whether it is the rollout of the vaccine, whether it is purpose-built quarantine, the rollout of the booster, on so many issues relating to this pandemic, the protection of people in aged care, the workforce issues that need to be dealt with, this government ... is always concentrating on the politics, rather than on the response that is required in the national interest. This is a government by echo. Labor says something, then we wait a couple of days to hear it back from the government as if it is its own idea. Opposition leader Anthony Albanese is up. He is less than amused at Hunt’s booster announcement today. Yesterday in this very room, I said one of the lessons from overseas is that we need to reduce the time between the 2nd dose and the booster. There are two reasons for that. Firstly, we are way behind with the rollout of the booster. As of the 22 December, Australia was 20th out of 21 advanced economies, with regard to the rollout of booster shots. Only Japan, that has just started to commence rolling out the booster, was behind us in the developed world. Secondly, as we know from the signs and medical evidence, that all the reports from overseas as well as from here is that boosters will be very important, particularly for the Omicron variant of this pandemic. I said that yesterday as a constructive suggestion. The government’s response, even though state governments, including South Australia and New South Wales ... have all called for the same thing. Greg Hunt’s response was quite extraordinary yesterday afternoon. He said that this was utterly irresponsible, utterly inappropriate ... well, less than 25 hours later, he is not only calling for it, he is announcing it. South Australia’s premier Steven Marshall will give a Covid update soon alongside the chief public health officer and SA police commissioner. Back to the boosters, you can read the full statement from Atagi here. An excerpt: Atagi notes that the course of the Covid-19 pandemic has significantly changed in recent weeks. Case numbers of Covid-19 due to the Omicron variant are rapidly increasing and this variant now dominates in some regions of Australia. Internationally, the Omicron variant has become dominant in several countries with case numbers growing rapidly in some. Preliminary data from large superspreading events in New South Wales involving younger people suggested that two doses of vaccine did not provide any significant protection against SARS-CoV-2 infection due to the Omicron variant. Strong evidence has accumulated over the past two weeks to indicate that booster doses of Covid-19 vaccines are likely to increase protection against infection with the Omicron variant. Although some early data suggest that the risk of hospitalisation due to disease caused by the Omicron variant is lower than that with the Delta variant, this difference would not be enough to offset the impact of high case numbers on the health system. There are now reassuring data on the safety of early booster doses in tens of millions of people, with no new safety signals identified in the United Kingdom where more than 21 million booster doses have been delivered. Atagi expects that booster vaccination alone will not be sufficient to avert a surge due to Omicron. However, maximising booster coverage by expanding eligibility and encouraging high uptake, in combination with enhanced public health and social measures, may prevent a large surge in case numbers, hospitalisations and deaths. ATAGI also acknowledges the demands that the booster and paediatric Covid-19 vaccination programs will have on the immunisation workforce. I like this but I would also add “Omicron” “Domicron” “Diamond Dom” and “Dictator Dan” (the three D’s). The ACT’s numbers are in, and there have been 102 new local cases. There are just two people in hospital, and no lives lost. Active cases are now up to 334. “Get Covid ready” The chief health officer, Dr John Gerrard, is up, and thankfully there is nobody in Queensland severely infected with the virus. There are 268 patients being cared for in their homes, and 110 in hospital, with just three being treated for Covid symptoms – none severe. But Gerrard says there will be strains on the hospital system in January. Not because the vaccination doesn’t work, but because thousands of cases will inevitably lead to a number of hospitalisations: This virus is everywhere, and so it is somewhat surprising that despite the fact it is everywhere we are seeing relatively few sick patients in hospital ... but the numbers of people we are going to see with the virus in the next few weeks is going to grow very substantially. D’Ath is now discussing the next phase in the strategy to manage Covid in Queensland – basically planning for getting Covid and how to manage it when/if you acquire the virus. She calls it the “Covid pathway”, and it’s available on the Queensland government’s website: This is how we care for people in the community and in our hospitals ... you can find many materials about how this will be managed, for clinicians, but most importantly for the public. How can you prepare yourself for becoming positive with Covid? And there are fantastic materials and a toolkit prepared. Think of it this way, Queenslanders. You need to get ready ... by getting Covid ready, you are doing the same as when you get ready for bushfires, cyclones, and these we do every year. We have toolkits, materials that are prepared for people to tell them what happens when you get a text ... saying that you are positive ... a plan of who may look after your children if one or both parents end up needing hospitalisation ... having masks and hand sanitiser and gloves, and also making sure that you have enough essentials for two weeks at home ... this is a great step forward to help empower the public to understand exactly what will happen if you get positive, but also how to plan for that to make it as smooth as possible to help you feel confident that you can stay at home. Only two-thirds of Queenslanders are following mask mandates, D’Ath says. It comes as 32 of the 77 local government areas in Queensland have detected Covid cases since the border reopened. “Get ready for Covid”: That reiterates what we said all along, which is that the virus will come to every single community in Queensland. How prepared we are will be dependent on the compliancy with the rules we’re putting in place, and of course the vaccination rates. As great as the vaccination rates are, that is not consistent across the state, and we still expect and require people to get vaccinated as quickly as possible to get the protection. D’Ath welcomes bringing forward the booster shots, labelling it “great news”. I say to everyone who is able to get their booster earlier than planned, based on these timeframes, that we strongly encourage you, particularly going to community pharmacies or GPs, because we know as we move forward we need these boosters to become part of just a normal immunisation program and getting those vaccinations done as quickly as possible. There have been 30,631 new border passes issued in the last 24 hours. This brings us to over 322,000 border passes since we opened on the 13 December, which shows that many people are still flocking to Queensland. There have been 589 new local cases reported in Queensland. The new cases come from over 30,000 tests. D’Ath is up, wishing everyone a merry and safe Christmas. Arguably more normal than “strong”. She thanks frontline health workers as we move to a new phase of managing the virus, and police for manning the borders, and Queenslanders, for getting vaccinated. Queensland health minister Yvette D’Ath is about to provide a Covid update from Brisbane. We’ll bring it to you here. Greg Hunt keeping the states and territories on their toes: You can have a little peruse of the full statement on booster intervals here: SA Pathology have posted the latest testing times across the state. As of 10am, there are wait times of more than six hours at Aldinga and Victoria Park but relatively short queues at Mount Gambier, Pinaroo and Bordertown. There are waits of between two and three hours at the airport. Back to disarrayed travel plans, The Australian is reporting Jetstar and Qantas have been forced to cancel flights for hundreds of passengers due to Covid-19 isolation requirements a day out from Christmas. Virgin scratched up to 12 flights between Melbourne and Sydney on 24 December, while Jetstar canned 10 flights between the two cities. More than 20 flights between the major cities and the Gold Coast, Adelaide and Brisbane have also been cancelled across both airlines. A Jetstar spokesperson said: We appreciate the frustration this causes, especially as customers are travelling for Christmas, and sincerely apologise for the impact these changes are having on travel plans. We are working to minimise any delays and re-accommodating passengers on flights as close as possible to their original departure times across both Jetstar and Qantas services. One day later, Greg Hunt: “It is no surprise we will be bringing forward the booster eligibility.” Christmas Eve carnage at Melbourne airport: Update from Tasmania - 19 of those 27 new Covid cases are still being assessed by public health. Meanwhile, testing delays are still causing heartache for travellers crossing borders for Christmas. There’s a huge queue for PCR tests at Melbourne airport this morning. The facility has been closed to domestic travellers due to demand. What are you meant to do if you diligently get tested within 72 hours and don’t receive your result? And off he goes. To recap, Atagi has updated its medical advice, reducing the interval between vaccination doses from five months to four on 4 January, and down to three months on 31 January. Jurisdictions can bring forward these dates if they believe they have the capacity to do so. It is not yet clear exactly how this will work, or if this means we will now be getting vaccinated every three months in the future. Some 7.5 million Australians will become eligible to receive their booster shot on 4 January. And Greg Hunt wants you to have a “strong” Christmas. Greg Hunt is asked why it has taken days for Atagi to update its health advice after increased calls for the booster interval to be reduced to four months: With great respect, that is incorrect. What we have seen is that Atagi has already moved on the basis of international evidence from six months to five months and that has seen a rapid increase in the uptake of boosters and what they have done is again, continuously reviewed the international evidence ... one of the things that has been a hallmark of Australia’s approach to the vaccination program is listening to the medical advice and with the quality of medical advice we received. To finish as we lead into Christmas, I want to give this ... message of thanks to Australians for coming forward to be vaccinated and keeping distance, for doing difficult things that are so contrary to our nation ... that is what has allowed us to be one of the highest vaccination rates in the world, one of the lowest rates of loss of lives ... and at the same one of the strongest economic recoveries ... we got through it better than almost anybody and we will continue to get through it better than almost everybody ... take care, everyone, and have a great Christmas. Tasmania has recorded 27 new Covid cases today, bringing active cases to 79. It hasn’t been confirmed yet whether any cases are of community transmission. My Tveeder live transcription just skipped over from the press conference to Gardening Australia and gave me quite a fright: ... (THEME MUSIC) (CHILD GIGGLES) (BIRD CHIRPS) (CAT MEOWS) (INSECTS BUZZ) (DOG BARKS) (ROOSTER CROWS) (SLEIGH BELLS RING) Hello and welcome to Gardening Australia, our last program of the year. And what a year it’s been! The expansion of the booster program will not impact the vaccination rollout for children aged between five and 11, Greg Hunt says, which is also due to kick off in the new year. He says bringing forward the booster program before 4 January would “displace the older or more immunocompromised” who have been less presently vaccinated: What this does is ... that there are 7.5 million Australians who are eligible from the 4 January that’s including those who already had eligibility, and by then we will have had well past the 2 million figure that will have been boosted. And so that gives them that immediate opportunity and those are overwhelmingly older Australians or more immunocompromised Australians who have been less recently vaccinated. So, of course, there has to be a priority program. The alternative of suddenly putting an extra 4 million people who would displace the older or more immunocompromised and less presently vaccinated is absolutely at odds with the right way. Paul Kelly is asked whether the 4 January and 31 January dates are based upon health advice or just the “sheer logistical challenge” of a rapidly expanded rollout. He says its based on the “science and the medical advice” and Australia has been “leading the world” (after a significant game of catch-up): We know that it is not an immediate thing when the vaccine starts to wear off, it’s a time-based thing. Again, as we have done all the way through the process, is we have prioritised the ones that are at most risk. Nowhere in the world has done – when we got to our peak of vaccination, we’re around 2.2m doses a week. That, on a per-capita basis, was leading the world. That’s what we aim to get to and achieve – and to exceed during January, but at this time, when – and minister has already mentioned the exhaustion of our health workforce, it’s just not feasible to suddenly give those large numbers their doses during this period. Reporter: Atagi expects the booster vaccination alone will not be sufficient to prevent a surge due in Omicron. When you hear the people saying 5,000 in New South Wales, do you think that’s helping people to get the booster or is it, kind of, scaring people? Paul Kelly: I think it’s a bit of both. We have been saying ... for quite some time, cases are not the most important thing at the moment. The vast majority of those cases are mild or asymptomatic. However, we have talked about transmission and so what we’re seeing in other parts of the world is a doubling rate of cases every two or three days and that is what we’re seeing here. We’re not seeing that same sort of increase in hospitalisations or ICU and I think they’re the most important metrics for people to look at. People should be alert to this, take it – particularly with this announcement today, make that booking in the new year to get that booster if you’re eligible. Paul Kelly says it won’t be possible for everyone to rush out and get boosters. Vaccination clinics will need time to prepare: Throughout this vaccination schedule, there’s a sense that everyone wants to be vaccinated on the first day an announcement is made, that is not necessary and indeed is not possible. We know that we have ... around 10,000 places you can get a jab at the moment, and that is continuing. At national cabinet, the PM announced the other day when we had our press conference that the states and territories are doing their bit. They have committed to go back to peak clinic use. We have our GPs, our pharmacists, Aboriginal community-controlled organisations, they’re all available, they’ll all do booster shots, they’re already doing booster shots and that will role out as we go. In terms of the future – that’s the future. Let’s deal with this booster at the moment. Paul Kelly is up. He starts will a callout to anyone in Australia eligible for their first two primary doses to get vaccinated as “the most important component of protection”. Why bring forward the booster? To protect people from severe disease, and to prevent transmission of the virus: We have seen a rise in intensive care patients in NSW in recent days, almost all of those have been unvaccinated, not even a first dose let alone a booster. So that still remains the No 1 priority for the vaccination program. It is four weeks today since we found out about Omicron, this new variant of concern, and in those four weeks we have already gained a lot of information ... particularly around severity and what is the effectiveness of vaccination programs throughout the world ... As has always been our main aim of the program, is to protect those that are most at risk of severe disease. So they remain our priority ... We know two key things. One is that ... protection ... from the first two doses of the vaccine ... wanes over time, hence the time-based change in the boosters. The positive effect of that is that we do know now that boosters do protect and increase that protection against severe disease once that third dose is given or a fourth dose in the case of immunocompromised people. So they are a given. It’s an absolute aim of the program to go forward and do that. The second reason is because boosters at this stage can help about the transmission of the virus. It is unclear how this will work – jurisdictions having capacity to bring forward the booster dates before 4 January. Do state and territory premiers announce if they have capacity to bring forward the dates to roll out boosters? Do individual clinics announce it? If I want to get a booster now, at four months between doses, where do I go? Either way, it once again comes down to an issue of supply. Greg Hunt concludes by wishing Australians a “strong” Christmas: Greg Hunt says jurisdictions can bring forward the reduced booster eligibility, flagged at four months on 4 January and three months on 31 January if they believe they have “the capacity” to do so. This is likely to occur in South Australia based on capacity at state clinics: It is Atagi advice is the jurisdictions who believe that they have the capacity to bring forward any of these dates without displacing older and more eligible people in terms of those that have had a longer period between their second dose and the access to boosters should feel free to do so. As an example, I was speaking to the premier of South Australia last night, he believes that they have very strong capacity and so Atagi has given jurisdictions freedom to move forward with their state clinics prior to then if they have that capacity without displacing. And this is a very important principle – that the stage of the progressive program, as quickly as possible, is what we’re focused on but ... we’re giving the highest priority to those who have the greatest distance in time from having been vaccinated ... so it’s protecting the oldest and the immunocompromised and giving them priority as is appropriate. Atagi has been going through a “constant review process” of international evidence, Greg Hunt says. The cohort will more than double to 7.5 million people eligible for boosters from 4 January when the period is reduced: It’s no surprise we will be bringing forward the eligibility for the booster dose to four months as of 4 January. The planning behind that is that will open up a new cohort. Currently that means that we will go from about 3.2 million people who are eligible today to approximately 7.5 million who will be eligible as 4 January. That means that the cohort has expanded. It will be expanded again on the 31st of January to three months and that will take it out to 16 million Australians who will be eligible at that point in time and as we have said all along, eligibility is the beginning of access, it doesn’t mean that somebody is overdue the very day they become eligible. These dates have been set out of an abundance of caution to give Australians early continued protection and the advice we have is that the protection as it is is very strong against severe illness, but what we’ll see is a much stronger protection against transmission. Greg Hunt says 192,000 doses were delivered yesterday and the 2m booster mark will be reached this morning: On the edge of Christmas, Australians have been coming forward and I really want to thank them for that. And that includes 148,000 boosters yesterday, and this morning we will pass the 2m booster mark. That’s half a million ahead of schedule at this point in time so Australians have been really fantastic in coming forward. I want to thank them for that in particular. That will mean we had about 1.3m doses since the expansion of eligibility from six months to five months just over one and a half weeks ago, so that’s really seen very high rates of vaccination. In fact, we’re now at 42m doses, we have passed 42m doses and all up that means that we now have 94.1% first and 91% second and at this point in time, as I say, this morning will pass the 2m dose mark for boosters. Health minister Greg Hunt and chief health officer Paul Kelly are up. The interval between Covid shots will be reduced to four months from 4 January. And it will be reduced to three months on 31 January based upon Atagi advice, Hunt says. Queensland health minister Yvette D’Ath and chief health officer Dr John Gerrard will hold a press conference at 10am AEST. While we wait for Greg Hunt to speak and reportedly announce a reduced interval between Covid shots (he’s due at 9.30am), I got three out of six in the Wordle today. 🟨⬜⬜⬜🟩 ⬜🟩⬜🟩🟩 🟩🟩🟩🟩🟩 Wordle 187 3/6 What is Wordle, you ask? Read all about the new viral word game delighting the internet: More, if not reassuring, then not horrifically bad news. The Reff is on a downward trend in NSW, seeing a 4.4-day doubling time. Meanwhile, many testing sites in Brisbane are closed over Christmas yet travellers are still required to get day five Covid tests. This site has been open since 8am Queensland time and will close at midday: Another thing to look at is how many tests are coming back positive. We’re still seeing high testing numbers in both states. Some 2.57% of today’s tests in Victoria came back positive. In NSW, that figure is 3.42%. So both are a little up on the seven-day average. Finally, people queuing for something other than a Covid test: So the good news is we haven’t seen a dramatic rise in case numbers in New South Wales or Victoria overnight. They’ve remained relatively stable in both states, and actually dropped a smidge in NSW. Turning to hospitalisations, they have jumped by 35 in NSW overnight, including a further eight people requiring intensive care. In Victoria, hospitalisations are stable, with a small rise in people requiring intensive care – up by three to 75. Numbers are in from NSW, and it’s another high number, though still slightly down from yesterday – 5,612 Covid cases. There has been one death, and there are 382 people being treated in hospital, including 53 in intensive care. Victoria has recorded 2,095 cases and, sadly, eight more deaths. There are 397 people being treated in hospital. This hasn’t been independently verified by Guardian Australia but 10 News is reporting that Greg Hunt is poised to announce a reduction of the booster dose interval to four months: The Sydney fireworks display will still go ahead at this stage, despite record Covid case numbers. NSW MP Stuart Ayres: Ultimately we have got to continue to live with this virus – it’s not going away. Nice weather in Melbourne? It’s a Christmas miracle! It may be Christmas Eve but the news stops for no man! Labor MP Jim Chalmers was up and about on breakfast television earlier today, expressing shock at NSW premier Dominic Perrottet’s slow limp to reintroducing mask mandates. He said mask mandates were just “common sense” right now: It’s a bit strange frankly that they held out for so long and in that period we probably lost a bit of ground when it came to tracing and tracking outbreaks of the virus, particularly the new strain. Jane Halton is asked about an idea NSW health minister Brad Hazzard has floated to force the unvaccinated to pay for hospital treatment. She says it is an “interesting” idea but not a good one: It’s an interesting thought but it’s not a thought which I think should turn into practice. We have a universal health system ... we care for people who need that care. We should encourage people to get vaccinated, it’s the best thing we can do to protect our health, but I don’t think our health system should discriminate. Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations chair Jane Halton is up on Radio National, arguing it’s in the interest of all countries to provide assistance to supply and administer vaccines in the developing world: We have to focus on delivery in these lower-income countries ... to increase their ability to actually administer vaccines. And at the same time we need to make sure ... that protection continues and that’s why we need boosters. I’ve described this in the past as learning to walk and chew gum, it’s not an either/or situation ... if you have significant proportions of the world ... uncovered, you have significant risk of the virus to mutate. We will be watching hospitalisations in NSW today, which have jumped in the past week: The ABC is reporting Shoalhaven Heads lawyer Paul Ell has pulled out of the marginal Gilmore pre-selection race, and endorsed Andrew Constance as the “best candidate”. The Bega MP and former transport minister has a strong backing from local branch members, and found wide popularity during the 2019-20 bushfires. His path to becoming the Liberal candidate is now all but confirmed. Queensland’s deputy premier providing a useful reminder to treat retail staff with the utmost respect and patience today: In non-Covid news, tributes are flowing in for US journalist and author Joan Didion, who has died at 87. The Year of Magical Thinking, accounting the year after the death of Didion’s husband John Gregory Dunne, may be the most powerful book about grief I’ve read. Mary Louise McLaws is asked whether we’re going to see exponential growth of Covid cases from here. She says it’ll be “quite likely” if we don’t quickly administer booster shots. There has been increasing pressure on Atagi to reduce the interval between doses from five months down to four: We have had so much evidence given to us from around the world at the WHO meeting that waning antibodies started about three months, certainly the Israel experience and all other countries now show that, you know, at about four, four and a half months before that booster you’re at a great risk, particularly if you’re young because you have so many social engagements. So I was disappointed that this booster hasn’t been rolled out to at least be given at four months because the majority of the country have had their shot for at least four, five months. Epidemiologist Mary Louise McLaws was just up on ABC News Breakfast, discussing rapidly rising Covid case numbers. Australia has had a 52% increase in numbers since yesterday, “not good news” for those who’ve been infected: It would be really very helpful to hear from the authorities about how mild these cases are and, of course, how many of them are going into hospital. I think it’s too early to be highly disappointed in this ... is this infection more severe, more deadly? All of these things are far too early to know becaus,e particularly in New South Wales, it’s always been an about a 10-day to 14-day delay between peak numbers of infections and peak hospitalisations and let’s hope that we don’t see that same pattern again, that Omicron may be more mild and not need hospitalisation. It’s Christmas Eve and you know what that means: a healthy dose of Mariah Carey, last-minute wrapping and a Love Actually rerun. But first, the news. Caitlin Cassidy is here to run you through it, starting in NSW, where premier Dominic Perrottet backflipped yesterday on his anti-mandate position. Compulsory mask wearing is now in place across almost every state and territory as Covid restrictions are slowly reimposed with infections soaring across the country. NSW will also reintroduce QR codes for hospitality and retail as well as some lower-risk settings, while density limits will return after Christmas. It comes after the state hit a new record of 5,715 daily infections and one death on Thursday, which is up almost 2,000 cases from the day before. Victoria also reintroduced a mask mandate, with the state recording more than 2,000 new infections and 10 deaths on Thursday. Over in Western Australia, Mark McGowan has also been forced to introduce mask mandates after a backpacker who arrived from Queensland tested positive to the virus yesterday. The backpacker was infectious in the community for a number of days, visiting a string of venues across Perth. High-risk, large public events will be cancelled and dancing has been banned except for at weddings. “I know this is not the news we wanted to hear two days before Christmas, but unfortunately this is the reality of Covid-19,” McGowan said. Queensland reported 369 new daily infections, South Australia 484, Tasmania 26 and the Northern Territory 10. The ACT also recorded a new daily case record, with 85 new infections, prompting the territory to update its definition of a close contact. Close contacts will now only be defined as a household contact of a positive case, or someone who has spent an extended period of time with a positive case. Casual contacts will no longer need to fill out a declaration form for ACT health authorities, but will still need to get tested and isolate until a negative result is received. There are also growing calls for the federal government to make rapid antigen tests available for free as concerns rise over a Christmas spike. The NSW government announced on Thursday its intention to make rapid antigen tests free to ease congestion at overwhelmed PCR testing sites. Perrottet said people lining up for a test who didn’t have symptoms or weren’t close contacts should take a rapid test instead. The NSW government estimates about one in five tests are for the purposes of travel, jumping to about 50% in the ACT, according to the territory’s health minister. The blown-out lines at testing clinics around the country have prompted calls for a rethink of entry requirements in states like Queensland which demand a negative PCR test before arrival. Queensland will move to allow rapid antigen tests before travelling but not before the new year. Labor leader Anthony Albanese has called on the federal government to make rapid testing more accessible for people on low incomes. The federal government has put in free rapid testing measures at residential aged care facilities but resisted calls by medical professionals to make the tests free universally. SA will allow the sale of rapid antigen tests in stores from today. Let’s dive in.Upsets, underdogs and the unpredictable Picking results on a Sunday has been impossible at times with the 2021 season giving every fan at one stage or another a left-field result to revel in. Schadenfreude is very much included in your stocking this year. Detroit’s 30-12 upset thrashing of the Arizona Cardinals last week, the league’s worst team at kickoff beating the joint-best, last may be the finest, freakish morsel to be dissected ad infinitum with us forever shouting: ‘But how Jared Goff?’ into the void. But ‘tis the season so treat yourself to the one-win Jaguars beating the Super Bowl-chasing Bills 9-6 in week nine, or seek out Tennessee’s quintuple turnover tire fire from 21 November as they lost 22-13 to the ... Texans. You would prefer something a little more exquisite? Stay put in week 11 for the anti-vax bowl featuring Minnesota’s upfront pseudo-scientist Kirk Cousins going toe-to-toe with Joe Rogan’s Igor, Aaron Rodgers, in a deliciously painful shootout for the Packers. The greatest joy is the strangest results may still be waiting for us in the lead up to the expanded playoffs. The bubble still shockingly includes Seattle, Atlanta and Washington in the NFC. Stay indoors this Christmas and stare into the abyss, it looks like Ben Roethlisberger’s retirement tour added an extra date in February. Jonathan Taylor: Colts rushing king A more conventional delight in 2021 has been the Indianapolis Colts’ breakout star running back, Jonathan Taylor. The fantasy football behemoth’s stellar season has led him to be selected to the Pro Bowl in only his second year after receiving the most votes out of anyone. You name the statistic and Taylor has it locked down. Most yards from scrimmage, check, 1,854. Most touchdowns, 19. Most rushes of 10 or more yards, 42. Twenty or more yards, 11. I could go on, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70 and 80 or more yards in a single jaunt down the field and Taylor is your man. He now holds the Colts’ franchise record for rushing touchdowns in a single season and will break the record for total touchdowns as he is tied-first at present. He has even made the MVP race quasi-exciting with an outside chance to be the first running back to win since Adrian Peterson in 2012. Taylor’s season-defining display came against New England on Sunday. Bill Belichick’s skill in stopping the opposition’s biggest threat is legendary but could he slow down Taylor? Well, he only scored one touchdown compared to five against the Bills, but his total 170 yards were vital and his tackle-breaking 67-yard scoring dash to clinch the game puts the Colts in a strong position to make the playoffs again this season. They still could surpass Tennessee and win the AFC South, an impossible feat without Taylor. Surprise package? The Chiefs’ defense Super Bowl favorites Kansas City had a rough start to the season. Tennessee torched them 27-3 in week seven leaving the Chiefs with a 3-4 record. Two problems were evident: Patrick Mahomes was not at his usual divine level and more pertinently the defense was a complete mess. Cut to seven successive wins later and Mahomes has improved but the opposing unit has been the defining factor in Kanas City’s rise back to the top of the AFC. The defense allowed 17 points or fewer in the six victories leading up their 34-28 win over the Chargers on Sunday. And against LA they were dominant when it mattered most. The Chargers succeeded on only two attempts from five on fourth down and turned the ball over twice. Mahomes linked up with Tyreek Hill and Travis Kelce to serve up a reminder of just how explosive this offense can be when it is in sync. Finally Kansas City are playing like a complete team just in time for Kelce, Hill, kicker Harrison Butker and six other starters to be placed on the reserve/Covid-19 list. How they deal with any potential adversity now could define their season. Micah Parsons: a rookie ahead of his time The Dallas Cowboys look like a different prospect this year and the reason is rookie Micah Parsons. The explosive offense still causes opponents huge problems but only when it’s at full strength. Running back injuries have followed Covid-induced receiver absences, and the line has had problems with all being on the field at once, too. But now, they have a defense that can pick up the slack when the offense is not quite firing on all cylinders. Parsons’ versatility is what has transformed the defensive unit. He can line up at any linebacker position or as an edge rusher and significantly change the outcome of a game. A punchy Washington team gave Dallas a run for their money in Week 14 but Parsons kept the Cowboys on top with two sacks and a forced fumble that resulted in a touchdown. Washington never saw him coming as he crept up to the line, blew past four-time Pro Bowler Brandon Scherff and blasted the ball from Taylor Heinicke’s grasp. The league has not seen anything like this for a long time as he shutdown the race for Defensive Rookie of the Year a month ago. Parsons has jumped up a class and is running TJ Watt and Myles Garrett to the wire for Defensive Player of the Year now, an award only Lawrence Taylor has won in his first season. New England’s terrifying turnaround As Santa will attest, coal, technically, is still a present. Not one anyone wants but you get what you are given and the NFL has been hand-delivered a sack-full from Scrooge in residence, Bill Belichick. Momentarily, New England looked like they could fall further in 2021 after the expensive roster retooling led to a 2-4 start but a painful overtime loss to the Cowboys sparked a streak of seven wins, proving you cannot keep the league’s best football mind down for long. The Patriots are back vying for supremacy in the AFC thanks to striking gold with Mac Jones in the draft. The rookie quarterback is managing games like a seasoned veteran while those touted above him have paled in comparison. Trevor Lawrence, Trey Lance, Justin Fields and Zach Wilson have a collective six wins to Jones’s nine. But where is this all leading? It would take a total collapse for the Patriots to miss the playoffs. Belichick will really be demanding his team take back the No 1 seed in the conference and earn a hugely-significant first-round bye. New England should beat the Bills, Jaguars and Dolphins, sealing a 12-5 record and chance of being the AFC’s top billing. A true nightmare before Christmas.We’re all programmed to dance, says Janette Manrara. “Babies can’t walk, they can’t talk, but put a song on and they start to wobble.” One of the first things she did, growing up in a Cuban family in Miami, was to stand on her dad’s feet when he danced salsa. You’ll probably know Manrara from her role as a professional dancer on Strictly Come Dancing, and from presenting its companion show, It Takes Two. She’s the real deal, and she’s going to teach me how to dance. Somewhere inside me, I know what she means about being programmed. Music is important to me, and when it’s the right kind of music I feel the urge to move to it. But I haven’t progressed much past the wobble stage. I’ve never really felt entirely comfortable – even at ease – on the dancefloor. The odds aren’t exactly stacked in my favour: I’m a gangly, introverted, English, now 56-year-old bloke – maybe it’s OK to throw in the towel on this one and accept my place as a wilting wallflower. But the issue is less about the shape or age of my body, more about what’s going on inside my head. It’s about self-consciousness and self-confidence, too much and too little, respectively. I enjoy dancing, but I worry about how I look when I do it, and what other people are thinking. That’s why I generally only do it when I am drunk. Or on my own. Often both, actually. And right now, I’m neither. It’s midday, we’re in a bright dance studio in Fulham, west London, and it’s scaring the hell out of me. There are mirrors all along one wall – that’s not going to help the self-consciousness. It’s also a constant reminder of how un-alone I am. It’s not even just me and Manrara – Lucy from BBC publicity is here, and so is David the Guardian photographer, with all his stuff. “Forget he’s here,” says Manrara. “Dancing is not about showing off, it’s about feeling a certain way, and as soon as you realise that you’re not doing it for anybody else except for you, you will look good dancing, and enjoy it.” We start with a little warm up: shaking, loosening, head-lolling, after which Manrara says I seem to have good self-awareness and I get a celebratory double fist-bump. Now she’s going to teach me the basics of salsa. “Because salsa is the least technical, you don’t need to think much, as long as you can follow the timing.” Aiming not too high, then. The steps I’m learning are less like the competition-standard Latin dance moves you see on Strictly, more like something you might see at a family party in Cuba. I’m happy with that; take me to the family party in Cuba. “It’s not a performance,” she says. First without music, she shows me: step forward, back, close feet, step back, forward, close feet. Now lifting the feet a bit, whoops, no, that way. Next right and left, legs bent a bit, less stiff, less like a salsa-robot. What about my arms? I never know what to do with my arms. “Imagine you’re playing the drums, hands in front, elbows out, and your hands are going the opposite way to your feet. And move the hips.” She wiggles her hips, like a slalom skier. I waggle mine, like a drunk tripping over. The hips don’t lie. But I think they can wait; baby steps and all that. Manrara then puts on some salsa music, loud, though not quite loud enough to drown out my inhibitions. Now she’s in front of me: “Don’t look down, or you’ll step on my feet,” she says. Where to look then? I’m not ready for eye contact; I settle for over her shoulder. OK, fine, it’s not so bad. But it’s quite a specific routine that Manrara has taught me, and I’ve been able to follow. But I also want to be confident, you know, just dancing, at a club (unlikely, these days, to be honest), at a wedding, possibly, dad dancing to I Will Survive, Staying Alive or Thriller. “There is no right or wrong, it’s about letting go. When a song comes on that you love, forget who’s around, it’s about you; just be Sam. What’s your favourite song?” God, my favourite song, so many … “Your favourite style of music, then?” Er, I like a lot of reggae? She puts on Bob Marley’s Could You Be Loved and tells me to close my eyes and relax. That – eyes closed – is a good one. I’m not in a bright studio with a famous dancer off the telly and a photographer from a national newspaper, I’m in a beach bar … Don’t let them change ya, O! Or even rearrange ya! Oh no! And I’m beginning to wobble, in a good way – well, my way, I don’t care if it’s good or not, remember? I still don’t know what to do with my arms … “Put them up!” says Manrara. What, in the air? I don’t think I do that … well, maybe once, in Ibiza in 1987, but I’m not really a “hands in the air” kind of guy. So I just wave them around a bit – but then I hear David clicking away with his camera, and I remember where I am and why I’m here, and it kind of ruins the moment. Still, I get a double high five, and guess what: Manrara says I’ve got natural internal rhythm! Ha! Obviously she tells everyone that, but I’m taking it. Anyway, back to the salsa, and she wants to try one more thing. Remember the step: forward, back, close feet, back, forward, close feet, then side, side. But now she takes hold of my hands … And that’s making me self-conscious all over again. I should have mentioned the hand operation I had a couple of weeks ago, the fresh scar It might feel a bit weird and rough – is that why she’s recoiling in horror? She’s not recoiling in horror, though – she’s spinning around! Loosen your grip, she says. I see, to make us less twisty, less like a wet towel being wrung out. She spins again, this time more successfully. I’m not going to lie, I’m feeling a tiny bit pleased with myself, not that I had much to do with it. It leads to more congratulations and double high fives. “Own your length!” Manrara tells me. What does that mean? “That’s not being cocky or arrogant or thinking you’re the best when you walk into a room; it’s about loving and embracing all of you. Own it!” Got it: own my length. And I have to promise to go out and dance more often. “Because it really is medicine for the soul, and will help with confidence in all aspects of your life.” Great, I think that’s me cured then. As from today, no one puts Sam in the corner. Janette Manrara hosts the Strictly Come Dancing Live UK Arena Tour, 20 January-13 February. Tickets are available at strictlycomedancinglive.comThe UK government’s chief scientific adviser has hit back at accusations from Conservative MPs that epidemiological modellers had “spread gloom” about the Omicron variant. Sir Patrick Vallance said it was not the responsibility of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) “to take a particular policy stance or to either spread gloom or give Panglossian optimism”. He used an article in the Times to respond to criticism that was widely circulated among Tory MPs and ministers that suggested Sage’s Omicron modelling had been an exercise in fear-mongering. The Spectator’s editor, Fraser Nelson, had a Twitter exchange with the Sage member Graham Medley over the weekend, suggesting ministers asked Sage to model worst-case scenarios. The exchange was reportedly widely shared in the WhatsApp groups of Tory MPs. In an account of the exchange in his column in the Telegraph on Monday, Nelson complained that Sage projections that Omicron could kill up to 6,000 in a single day had been seized on in the press, and more cautious projections ignored. Nelson wrote: “The 6,000 is the top of a rather long range of ‘scenarios’, not predictions.” He added: “I’ve been contacted by a few ministers saying they were alarmed to think Sage modellers were not giving the probability of various outcomes but cooking up gloomy scenarios to order.” In an apparent riposte, Vallance wrote science was “self-correcting” and about making “advances by overturning previous dogma and challenging accepted truths”. He wrote: “Encouraging a range of opinions, views and interpretation of data is all part of the process. No scientist would ever claim, in this fast-changing and unpredictable pandemic, to have a monopoly of wisdom on what happens next.” A widely reported statement from the Spi-M group of scientists, who report to Sage, on 18 December warned hospitalisations could peak at between 3,000 and 10,000 a day and deaths at between 600 and 6,000 a day based on models assuming no new restrictions were introduced. Vallance said modellers were “trying to model lots of different scenarios of how the wave of Omicron might grow, determine which factors are likely to have the biggest impact on spread and its consequences, and to assess how different interventions might alter the outcomes”. He added: “They do not, contrary to what you might have heard, only model the worst outcomes.” The comments follow an interview the scientist did with BBC Radio 4 in October in which he said his job was “not to sugarcoat” reality. He said at the time: “My mantra for a long time during this [pandemic] has been … ‘You’ve got to go sooner than you want to in terms of taking interventions. You’ve got to go harder than you want to, and you’ve got to go more geographically broad than you want to.”Cities are attracting more property hunters with demand for flats outstripping that of houses in the autumn, the latest sign that the pandemic-fuelled “race for space” could be waning. UK property prices hit record levels during the pandemic as factors including the rise of home and flexible working fuelled a buying boom outside cities. However, as staff returned to offices with flexible and hybrid working patterns through the autumn – prior to the emergence of Omicron – interest in flats has surged. “When the housing market reopened in May, there was an immediate rush for room from buyers to look farther afield from the capital,” said Tim Bannister, the director of property data at the property portal Rightmove. “However, in recent months we’ve seen higher demand to live near London, with buyer inquiries returning towards pre-pandemic levels. This is happening quicker than some will have anticipated, and is likely driven by many businesses encouraging a hybrid, rather than fully remote working model.” Rightmove said that flats had become the most in-demand property type among prospective buyers, supplanting the popularity of houses throughout the pandemic. “The complete reversal in demand from bigger houses to flats paints a picture of society opening up again and a group of people looking to be closer to city centres,” said Bannister. “Although there was less demand for flats when the market reopened, with more availability than other property types, and more steady average asking price growth over the last year, flats could be a good opportunity for people looking to move or to get on to the ladder next year.” Rightmove’s findings chime with trends identified by mortgage lender Halifax, which found that in November flats were changing hands for 10.8% more than at the same time last year, while detached houses were typically fetching 6.6% more. Despite the boost in popularity of flats, Rightmove said the longer-term trend towards bigger houses, in outer-city and rural or coastal locations, is here to stay. Prospective buyers have widened their searches for their ideal home by an average of 50 sq km (19 sq miles), according to Rightmove. In October, the typical asking price for a detached house was 76% higher than a semi-detached property. “The pandemic redefined the role of the home and placed new emphasis on its importance, and people looked for more room in order to work, exercise, and often teach under one roof,” said Bannister. “People have extended their search area, which suggests there isn’t as much reliance on being near key transport hubs, or realising that living just a bit further away from the high street could open up more properties that a buyer can afford, or they may get more for their money.” Last week, Halifax forecast that the boom in UK house prices is likely to end next year as household finances become increasingly stretched.What a festive joy it has been to read about the books you remember getting for Christmas – and also to see how many of you, like me, adored Kaye Webb’s I Like This Poem. Whether it was the Rupert annuals received yearly by LancsLionheart, or the boxed set of Roald Dahl’s children’s books which auspom started on Christmas Day and worked through over the rest of the holidays, it just goes to show that there’s nothing better to find under the tree than a book. For LawrenceWindrush, a 14-year-old in 1980, it was his sister who gave him Arthur C Clarke’s Mysterious World. “During the Christmas week I was lost in the world of crystal skulls, the Yeti and UFOs. The world seemed magical and exciting – anything was possible among all the wrapping paper, turkey sandwiches and nuts. Exciting times.” benwood201 was given an abridged version of Moby-Dick “which had wonderfully vivid illustrations. Queequeg, with his tattooed face, the whale tossing a boat high in the air with its fluke and Ahab being dragged down by the whale entangled in his harpoon line.” KateSheehanFinn says her life was changed by Gobbolino, The Witch’s Cat by Ursula Moray Williams. “It was in my Christmas stocking when I was eight years old. I read it with my mum first, then on my own, over and over again. It taught me what a gripping story was and how immersive reading a good book can be.” TheBorderGuard is “still profoundly affected by the late 1950s Lord of the Rings edition I received as a teenager from my cousin”, and staying on the science fiction and fantasy theme, Rhialto remembers getting boxed sets of paperbacks in the 1980s. “Stephen R Donaldson’s Thomas Covenant series. Brian Aldiss’s Helliconia trilogy. Piers Anthony’s Xanth series. And the one that brings back the most vivid memories – Herbert’s Dune trilogy (back when it was a trilogy). Just looking at the covers of the late 70s edition Dune books today sends a jolt of nostalgia through me.” dylan37 has a lovely story to tell, which I think contains a bit of Christmas magic. “I was given a book for my 11th Christmas called The War on William Street by Reginald Ottley. It was an amazing tale of a street gang of boys in 50s Sydney, a time and place so foreign to me, but utterly compelling. I never forgot it. I don’t know what happened to those books as I grew up and moved into adult life, but I always kept a strong memory of those Sydney boys, like the imagery in a lost Triffids song perhaps,” they write. “Thirty years later, at great expense, I tracked down a copy of the long deleted book. When it arrived, from the other side of the world, I opened it, and had the best and deepest Proustian rush I’ve ever experienced. Important books will do that to you, no matter how long you leave between reads. And I can’t be entirely sure, but I have the strongest and strangest feeling that it’s the exact same book I had as a child. There’s no markings or inscription, no missing or torn pages that remind me, but I’m connected to this book somehow beyond words and memory.” I also love this, from PatLux: “When we were 11 and 12 my parents gave my sister and me a Christmas gift of a subscription to the village tennis courts, a tennis racket each and balls. Also a small green tennis book of the teach yourself type. I remember devouring the book and practising the moves in our bedroom. Over 50 years later I am still playing tennis twice a week and have treated myself to some lessons starting this evening. I often tell my mother that it was the best Christmas present ever.” And I’m definitely in agreement with Clareontarget on this one: I love Jean M Auel too (although the Clan of the Cave Bear series definitely goes downhill after Plains of Passage). “When I was much younger and still living with my mother I would be given something every Christmas by an elderly neighbour of ours. Generally it would be something completely pointless or inappropriate. However one Christmas she bought me a book (hallelujah!) and it was the right kind of book. It was the third book in the Earth’s Children series by Jean M Auel and it was promptly devoured, repeatedly. It goes without saying that I am in possession of all six books of the series and they have all been worthwhile reads.” Patching always got a book for Christmas from their parents, and remembers a particular gift at age seven: Nature’s Playground by M Cordelia and E Leigh. “Dense text, glossy paper, terribly old-fashioned even then, It had chapters on all manner of wildlife with titles like ‘A populous Queendom’ (Bees) and ‘Sun Lovers and Strange Monsters’ (Reptiles) and ‘illustrated with over 250 photographs and diagrams’. It was way, way too advanced for me, but I was fascinated and pored over diagrams of sepals and nectaries, thorax and abdomen, and fell in love with the natural world and the strange, courtly language used to write about it. ‘The nest of the long-tailed tit is most cunningly built’; ‘the extremely ugly, dull-black beetle called the Devil’s Coach Horse … but though so ugly and fierce and disagreeable, he cannot really do us any harm …’ Funny old book, but it helped to set me off on a life of fascination with the myriad, gorgeous weirdness of the natural world and attempt to write about it myself.” After David Barnett revealed his night terrors on receiving a copy of Usborne’s The World of the Unknown: Ghosts, many others also shared beloved stories of the uncanny. “I was given a children’s book of scary stories for Christmas when I was about 10,” writes Angelaaaa. “A lovely hardcover, bound with leatherette and gold writing on the spine. It included, among other horrors, The Monkey’s Paw and Sweets to the Sweet. I was utterly terrified and fearfully read and reread it for years.” I know many of us have been stymied in our present-giving by the lack of new Discworld novels since the much-mourned Terry Pratchett’s death, so it was glorious to read Sam Jordison’s memories of receiving The Colour of Magic. And I have definitely been inspired to add a few extra books to my pile of presents this year as a result of all your wonderful memories. I’m not sure anything will beat my most triumphant present ever, though – when I tracked down old editions of Douglas Hill’s then out-of-print Blade of the Poisoner and Master of Fiends for my similarly fantasy-obsessed husband. Merry Christmas, and happy festive reading from the Guardian books team. Let us know in the comments what you find under the tree this year.In the Guardian’s 10th edition of the best 100 male footballer in the world our 219 judges cast 8,760 votes in order to determine the outcome. Each judge has to send in their choice of the 40 best footballers in the world from that calendar year and from that we calculate our list. This year we had 24 former players with a combined 1,071 caps on the panel, Javier Zanetti leading with the way with 143 for Argentina and Emre Belozoglu with 101 for Turkey. Click on this link to see the spreadsheet that shows the full breakdown of 8,760 votes. To allow our judges the freedom to express their opinions without fear or favour, individual voting records are anonymised in the full breakdown of scores. The judges’ numbers are allocated at random and bear no relation to the alphabetical list of names. You can see a reminder here of the full list of judges and rules. The 100 best male footballers in the world 2021 How they made their choices Our judges were sent a longlist of more than 300 players drawn from leagues on every continent and asked one simple question: who have been the best male players in the world in 2021? We asked our judges to choose 40 names each and rank their selection in order from 1-40, No 1 being their choice of the best player. How the voting works The No 1 choice of each judge was awarded 40 points, No 2 given 39, down to one point for their No 40. All the votes were added together to give a raw score. To minimise the influence of outliers in the list, the highest score awarded to a player was then deducted to give a final score. A player needed to receive votes from at least five judges to qualify for the list. If players are level on points in the scoring, the number of individual votes cast is used as a tie-breaker.As of Wednesday this week, a quarter of all kids at state school in New York were absent, for virus or other reasons. In the UK, a week before Christmas, they wouldn’t have been at school in the first place, but across much of the US, winter break doesn’t start until Christmas Eve. Every year this seems ungenerous, but this year it’s unbearable. We struggle in on Wednesday in -3C weather, and that night I have a conniption. That’s it, we’re out. I tell my kids, we’ll stay home tomorrow; the vacation starts now. It costs me something to say this. Through a combination of kneejerk rule-following and a desire to have the house to myself, we rarely skip school, even when people are sick (not with Covid). Until recently, we didn’t skip anything much. I’ve long subscribed to the theory that it’s better to do things than not do things. I also have to be vigilante against constant lobbying from my kids to take the line of least resistance. “No, we’re going, so stop asking me,” is a phrase played on repeat in my house with varying levels of crossness. “Giving up” is bad. Effortful endeavour is good. “You’ll enjoy it once you get there” – a line used every Thursday night by my mother when I didn’t want to go to Brownies – has surfaced three decades later to be rolled out prior to violin, taekwondo and playdates in the park. Silently, I say it to myself as I shrug on my jacket prior to dinners. The thing is, I hated Brownies and never did enjoy it when I got there, but it’s too late to rewire now. The desire to opt out, an expression of lassitude in other years, is in any case different this year. “Do you think it’s dementia?” a friend texted this week. Her kid is in one of my kid’s classes and she too pulled them out early, only in her case she got the dates wrong. The ability to plan and retain information has been messed up by the stress of Covid and we’re also physically depleted. “Do you think I should get an MRI?” texted my friend, which made me laugh. She’s a nurse practitioner; I’m a writer. In the immortal words of James Corden to Adele when she asked him what to do with her hair during Carpool Karaoke: “What I like is that you’re coming to me for this advice.” But in these dog days of the pandemic, the anxiety is common: am I tired-tired, or diagnosis-tired? If I’m tired-tired, I have to push through it. That is what we’ve been taught, and in the face of even the mildest desire to do otherwise all the old superstitions rise up. Conditioning kicks in. What will happen if we don’t do the thing? Pre-Covid, this anxiety was characterised as Fomo (fear of missing out), but it was always more than that. Going out is active and leads to wellbeing and wisdom. Staying in – sitting, watching, reading, thinking – is passive and constitutes giving up. The first is morally superior, while the latter is a gateway to nowhere. The fear, always, has been that given too much downtime some kind of lotus-eater scenario will kick in – doing the thing is great, but have you tried not doing the thing? Oh, man. It’s amazing – and after a few evenings on the sofa we will sink into it forever like quicksand. I still broadly agree with this characterisation. Mostly, when we force ourselves out, the experience is better than Brownies. Action begets action. Serendipity is hard to pull off in front of the telly at home. And scrolling has introduced a whole new level of irresistible emptiness to what we erroneously call relaxation. But it also strikes me that giving up needs rebranding. There is, sometimes, something to be said for sitting motionless and staring into space. A decisive opt-out needn’t be wholly passive. We are doing this thing at the expense of the other thing and it’s an active choice, not simply inertia. The night before we skip school, I am pathetically stressed. I read, with relief, that more than 420 of the city’s roughly 65,000 classrooms won’t be open on Thursday because of Covid, so it’s not likely anyone’s going to care. It’s responsible, in a way, to take two vectors of infection out of the classroom two days before the holiday. So much mental effort for a tiny break. That’s it, I’m done. Happy Christmas. Emma Brockes is a Guardian columnistThe beauty treatments listed at the new La Beauté &amp; Style salon are much the same as those offered by the dozen or so other parlours that dot the traffic-heavy Dilshad Extension area of Ghaziabad, 17 miles (28km) east of Delhi. But that is where the similarity ends. The wall behind the reception desk is painted in rainbow colours; a mural of a trans man with flowing multicoloured locks decorates another wall; a woman wearing a sari is having her eyebrows plucked next to a trans man who is telling a stylist how he would like his hair cut. La Beauté &amp; Style salon created history in September when it opened as India’s first salon run by transgender men. The owner, Aryan Pasha, 30, is a lawyer, activist and India’s first transgender male bodybuilder. He opened the salon to create a space where trans people would feel comfortable requesting beauty treatments. Everyone is welcome, he says, not just the LGBTQ+ community. Of equal importance was creating a business that would generate employment for his community, which “continues to face social discrimination and rejection in academic institutes, as well as at workplaces, despite the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act 2019,”, he says. “While conducting food and ration-distribution drives during the epidemic, it was heartbreaking to encounter young transgenders who were educated and skilled but jobless due to their gender. They were surviving on charity donations, while others were forced to return to unsupportive and abusive families in their villages,” says Pasha. With financial help from the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/Aids and the Gravittus Foundation, a Pune-based charity that works for social change, Pasha set up the salon with his partner, Laxmi Narayan Tripathi, 43. . Tripathi has been a transgender activist since 1999, campaigning for numerous causes from HIV to community-led social enterprises. Through their charity, the Gaurav Trust, the couple focuses on raising awareness and protecting the health and rights of male sex workers and others within the LGBTQ+ community. “Despite our collective advocacy and action over the years to mainstream issues like the welfare, rights and health of transgender people, stigma remains a major challenge. We face a hostile environment within schools, colleges and at the workplace, which leaves us scarred for life,” says Pasha, who transitioned from female to male after gender-reassignment surgery in 2011. According to a 2017 study by India’s National Human Rights Commission, 92% of transgender people in India are deprived of the right to participate in any form of economic activity in the country; 99% have suffered social rejection on more than one occasion, including from their family; and 96% are denied jobs and forced into areas such as sex work or begging to survive. At Le Beauté, the six newly trained staff earn £100 to £300 a month, depending upon their level of expertise and skill. More beauticians are being trained near Mumbai. “We plan to open our next salon in Pune and ultimately go national once we get more funding,” says Pasha. Bhanu Rajodiya, 25, says he was at the lowest point in his life when Pasha recruited him. “I used to work at an export house in Delhi and earn £80 to £100 a month, but I lost my job during the pandemic. My family turned its back on me, but the salon embraced me and I now have a secure job with a fixed income. It’s so empowering.” Another employee, Nakshatra Rajput, who transitioned last year, worked in Delhi as a team leader but lost his job when the management discovered his identity. “They started finding faults in my work and the work atmosphere became so toxic, I had no choice but to leave. This was despite the fact that I was transparent about my gender to the HR department when I joined. They hired me for my skills and paid me well, but kicked me out at whim,” says the 25-year-old. Rajput added that though his parents and friends had accepted him, Indian workplaces were far from inclusive. “This discrimination really hurts. After leaving my first company, I joined another one but had to leave that also within days because of my identity,” he says. However, he is happy that La Beauté opened a door for him and trained him as a hairstylist – and has recently made him a part of the salon’s management team. “I feel loved and appreciated here,” he says. “I no longer have to act or hide behind a different identity just to do my job. It’s so liberating. And that’s how society should be too – inclusive and diverse,” he says pointing proudly to the salon’s rainbow-hued walls. Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Even as economists celebrated a job market recovery seen from the beginning of the pandemic, when unemployment peaked at 14.8%, to November when unemployment was 4.2%, Black Americans have continued to see a much higher jobless rate. In November, Black Americans had an unemployment rate of 6.7%, while the unemployment rate for white Americans was 3.5%. The gap is even more pronounced between men: Black men had an unemployment rate of 7.3% in November while white men saw an unemployment rate of 3.4%. That this disparity has continued over the course of the pandemic is unsurprising to economists who have long paid attention to the racial gap in unemployment numbers. Valerie Wilson, director of the Economic Policy Institute’s Program on Race, Ethnicity and the Economy, said that occupational segregation has meant that Black Americans were less likely to be able to work remotely amid lockdown orders. Many Black workers were given the choice of keeping jobs where they faced greater risks or deciding that the risk was not worth it. “The two-to-one [disparity] has still been pretty consistent, and I think that says a lot to just how deeply entrenched those labor market inequalities are,” Willson said. Black Americans have long faced discrimination in hiring processes. One study from 2017 showed that Black Americans who remove references to their race on their resumes are twice more likely to get interviews. The unemployment rate is even consistent across educational levels, with the unemployment rates of Black Americans who have a high school or bachelor’s degree being twice that of White Americans who hold the same degree. Though many companies promised to reevaluate their hiring processes and focus on diverse recruitment following the massive protests after the murder of George Floyd in summer 2020, the racial gap in the unemployment rate still managed to stick. Other figures show that little progress has been made: There are just five Black CEOs leading Fortune 500 companies, and Black full-time workers are still making more than 20% less than white full-time workers. Even the gains that Black Americans have seen in employment numbers come with caveats. In November, the unemployment rate for Black women jumped 2%, from 7% to 5% – the largest decrease for any group. While the number reflects Black women starting jobs, it also reflects tens of thousands of women who left the workforce last month, more than 90,000, according to government figures. Even while moms across the board have faced problems with childcare during the pandemic, research has shown that Black mothers in particular have faced the toughest childcare issues during the pandemic. Wilson said there are multiple policies that need to be in place to address the unemployment rate gap but noted the complacency policymakers seem to have with the two-to-one disparity between the Black and White unemployment rates. “Part of the challenge and difficulty in addressing it is that it sort of becomes normalized, like ‘Oh, OK – that’s just how it works’, without us actually sort of questioning and interrogating the way that we understand those disparities,” Wilson said.Stephen Karam has adapted his award-winning 2016 Broadway play for the cinema, and directs: the result is like an expressionist horror by Polanski. In theory, it’s about a family gathering for a Thanksgiving lunch, the sort of event that can usually be expected to bring about the phased disclosure of all the characters’ individual secrets and micro-tragedies. This feels more serious. These people look like the last group of humans left alive after some apocalyptic catastrophe, the remnants of homo sapiens being watched and examined at a distance by aliens. The grimly damp and undecorated duplex in which they have assembled could almost be a mass hallucination, triggered by a trauma worse than anything they’re talking about. Brigid (Beanie Feldstein) and Richard (Steven Yeun) are a young couple who have put themselves under great financial strain to rent a place in Manhattan: this dark, dank, creepy apartment. Perhaps to brazen out whatever second thoughts they’re having, the couple have invited their extended family for a Thanksgiving lunch as a housewarming event, before they’ve had a chance to get it properly furnished. Brigid’s parents Deirdre (Jayne Houdyshell) and Erik (Richard Jenkins) arrive with Erik’s mother Momo (June Squibb) in a wheelchair: she has dementia. Then there is Brigid’s sister Aimee (Amy Schumer) who is on her own after a breakup. The pure, oppressive strangeness of the apartment makes it a seventh character: the spectre at the feast. Characters are always wandering off on their own into the gloom to have tense conversations in twos and threes, or jump at the unexplained thumps and bangs in the walls. It’s an ominous place, like Macbeth’s castle before the murder, and the collective unhappiness is dimming the lights. Erik has a drink problem and accepts more beers from Richard than he really ought, and the booze loosens his tongue on the subject of how hurt he is that the children have abandoned their Christian faith and also their hometown of Scranton, Pennsylvania in favour of pricey New York. Deirdre is judging and critical. Brigid is a would-be composer who keeps failing to get grants and resents her dad for not helping out financially. She may yet have to take a humiliating job in a department store – an awful fate that is to echo the revelation that Erik is later to spring on everyone. Richard is recovering from depression and Aimee’s legal career is stagnant; she has health issues and is faced with living and dying alone. As for Momo, she murmurs and sometimes moans nonsense words, but is heart-rendingly mute while Deirdre reads aloud the emotional, loving email she wrote to her granddaughters while she was still lucid. Karam and his cinematographer Lol Crawley will often record their conversations at a distance, as if they have these people under surveillance. Often, the camera will home in on the damp patches bubbling and cracking the walls, or the clanking old pipes along which weird echoey sounds travel. Sometimes a conversation will take place behind a fiercely detailed closeup of a pigeon feather on a window sill, which has been torn off by one of the anti-vermin spikes. The impending sense of doom and the uncanny takes The Humans beyond miserablism. Are these people sleepwalkers? Or is this all a dream or memory that one of them is having? Very real issues are suffused with an oppressive, unearthly, compelling unreality. • The Humans is released on 24 December on Curzon Home Cinema and on 26 December in cinemas.Lawyers working on behalf of Nirvana have filed to dismiss a lawsuit made against the band by Spencer Elden, who appeared as a baby on the cover of their album Nevermind. In the lawsuit filed in August, Elden claimed he was the victim of child sexual exploitation and that the cover artwork was a child sexual abuse image. “Defendants knowingly produced, possessed and advertised commercial child pornography depicting Spencer,” the lawsuit read. Elden amended it in November, adding details including a passage from Kurt Cobain’s journals that describes imagined child sexual abuse. He also removed a number of named defendants. Lawyers for the remaining defendants – Nirvana members Dave Grohl and Krist Novoselic; Courtney Love, executor of Cobain’s estate; and Kirk Weddle, the photographer of the cover image – have now sought to dismiss Elden’s suit. They claim that the two statutes under which Elden is filing his complaint have time limitations that will invalidate it and that the lawsuit “falls on its face” by being filed too late. Elden’s claim that the image is of child sexual abuse is described by the lawyers as “not serious. A brief examination of the photograph, or Elden’s own conduct (not to mention the photograph’s presence in the homes of millions of Americans who, on Elden’s theory, are guilty of felony possession of child pornography) makes that clear.” The motion claims the image instead “evokes themes of greed, innocence, and the motif of the cherub in western art”. In his lawsuit, Elden said that appearing on the cover of Nevermind caused him “extreme and permanent emotional distress with physical manifestations”, plus loss of education, wages, and “enjoyment of life”. Lawyers for Nirvana have countered that Elden “has spent three decades profiting from his celebrity as the self-anointed ‘Nirvana Baby’”, including recreating the image for the album’s 15th and 25th anniversaries. They make reference to the fact Elden has a tattoo of the word Nevermind on his chest, which Grohl also addressed when asked about the lawsuit in October: “He’s got a Nevermind tattoo. I feel the same way most people do in that I have to disagree [with Elden’s allegations]”. Nirvana’s lawyers have called for a hearing for their dismissal motion in January.Jenny Harries, the chief executive of UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA), has urged the public to carry on getting boosted and not to be alarmed by press coverage about waning immunity. Harries conceded that booster vaccines had waning immunity against catching Omicron after 10 weeks, but said the jabs would still help prevent serious illness and death. She also said findings suggesting the Omicron variant could be less likely to result in serious illness than Delta offered a “glimmer of Christmas hope … but it definitely isn’t yet at the point where we could downgrade that serious threat”. The Office for National Statistics estimates 1.7 million people in the UK had Covid-19 in the week ending 19 December, the highest number since comparable figures began. The interim data, published on Friday, also shows that about one in 35 people in private households in England had Covid in the week to 19 December – up from one in 45 in the seven days to 16 December. In London this rises to about one in 20, the highest proportion for any region in England, the ONS said. Speaking to BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Friday, Harries said: “Despite the headlines people need to really understand that a booster dose is absolutely vital.” Asked about research showing that booster efficacy against Omicron infection waned after 10 weeks, Harries pointed out it would still be effective against severe disease. She said: “Our vaccine programme has always been around ensuring individuals don’t get severe disease, and fatalities from this infection. It’s entirely natural that after a vaccine, whether it be for Covid, or other infections, that our immune response wanes over time.” She added: “I don’t think people should think that the data around 10 weeks is just an indicator against symptomatic infection. We anticipate it will have a very significant positive impact on preventing serious illness and death.” Harries also suggested the government may consider new restrictions in England based on the impact on the workforce, not just preventing hospitalisations. Boris Johnson decided against imposing any further restrictions for England over Christmas but has indicated he could act afterwards. Harries said: “Ministers will look at all of the data that we have available – and that isn’t simply what the epidemiology is saying, it’s how it’s impacting society. So, for example, we have very high rates of individuals off sick – we know that particularly in London, around one in 35 have currently got Omicron. Now that’s having an impact on the workforce. So these are not simply about hospitalisation rates.” She said ministers were being kept updated daily in a process that would continue throughout the Christmas period. She said key pieces of information about Omicron were still needed to understand how much of a risk it posed to the health service. Harries said: “We don’t yet know what the average length of stay for an individual is in a hospital … I don’t think we do know yet that this is going to be a significantly less serious disease for the population – the older population – that we are normally most concerned about in relation to serious disease and death.” The UKHSA estimates that someone with Omicron is between 31% and 45% less likely to attend A&amp;E and 50% to 70% less likely to be admitted to hospital than an individual with the Delta variant. Harries added: “What we have got now is a really fine balance between something that looks like a lower risk of hospitalisation, which is great news, but equally a highly transmissible variant and one that we know evades some of our immune defences, so it is a very balanced position.”Removing trade barriers around the world would help to tackle the climate crisis, enable a “just transition” away from fossil fuels and make developing countries more resilient to the impacts of global heating, the head of the World Trade Organization has said. Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, who took over as director general of the global watchdog last March, said: “Trade is part of the solution, not part of the problem … We need a global effort to climate-proof the supply chains and infrastructure of the most vulnerable economies or risk undoing hard-won economic progress and development.” She told the Guardian trade would be essential to helping developing countries cope with the effects of extreme weather, which are already being felt. “We need to put in place trade policies to cushion against the negative impacts of climate change, to ensure food security in the face of climate threats [and] provide access to adaptation technologies,” she said. Developing countries have long been wary of international trade talks, fearing that wealthy countries were using them to protect their own economies while enabling them to export goods to poor countries, and in some cases criticising the WTO for being biased in favour of the rich. Many have also been sceptical of including climate issues, and fear that “environmental” standards insisted on by some developed countries would be used as a cover for raising barriers to cheap imports from the developing world. Green campaigners have also claimed the WTO has encouraged high-carbon trade. Okonjo-Iweala, a former finance minister of Nigeria and World Bank economist, who is the first African and first woman to head the WTO, moved to reassure doubters. “Trade helps to build resilience. People don’t recognise it but the fact [is] that in times of great difficulty, trade can help move services and goods to where they are needed. Food for instance: trade helps to move food from one area that is not drought-stricken or flood-prone to another.” Environmental rules could be compatible with trade, she said: “The WTO rules do not preclude people from putting in environmental standards [but] if you’re designing your environmental policies you have to do it in such a way that it’s transparent, and you are not discriminating against like products.” The WTO last week embarked on an initiative to incorporate environmental concerns into trade, with roadmaps for the reform of fossil fuel subsidies, encouraging sustainability in international trade, and controlling plastic pollution. Okonjo-Iweala believes that, in the wake of the Cop26 summit, trade will become a vital tool in achieving the drastic cuts necessary in greenhouse gas emissions, helping to shift the global economy to a low-carbon footing. She said: “What is clear is that climate negotiations have shifted from technical discussions to actual implementation … This makes the role of trade and trade policy even more urgent in ensuring a just and effective green transition for all.” Agreements were signed in Glasgow last month to cut methane around the world, protect forests, and institute a global system of carbon trading under the 2015 Paris agreement, all of which she said the WTO could help with. But she said developing countries also needed assistance from the rich world, especially in the form of climate finance, which comes from public and private sources in the rich world to help poor countries cut emissions and cope with the effects of extreme weather. Rich countries have so far failed to produce the $100bn in climate finance promised each year to developing countries from 2020, though they are likely to hit the target by 2023. Okonjo-Iweala said this was not good enough: “If you can mobilise $26tn [in response to Covid-19], it beggars belief from the part of developing countries that you can’t mobilise $100bn [for climate finance]. That’s what’s causing a huge trust deficit.” The UK should also restore its recent cuts to overseas aid, she added. “We all want the UK to go back to 0.7% [of GDP going to overseas aid, the previous target which was slashed to 0.5% by the chancellor of the exchequer, Rishi Sunak]. It’s been a leader in overseas aid and should continue to lead. So we don’t want to see this cut back.” Over the next year, countries will be asked to reconsider their national targets on cutting emissions and how to meet them, before the next UN climate meeting, Cop27 in Egypt in November. Okonjo-Iweala said: “We saw promising outcomes from Cop26, but I would not be alone in saying that the world is not yet on track to giving the most vulnerable countries and communities a fighting chance in the face of climate change. The WTO has a vital role to play in harnessing trade as a tool to get us closer to climate targets.”The government is to hold emergency meetings with the bosses of the UK’s biggest energy suppliers, after providers warned on Thursday of a “national crisis” that could lead bills to increase by more than 50% to £2,000 a year. Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, is to hold virtual meetings on Monday with energy suppliers, who are pushing the government to intervene to alleviate the unprecedented rises in consumers’ bills caused by soaring wholesale gas prices. The energy industry believes the crisis, during which more than 26 energy suppliers have gone bust at a cost of £1.8bn to date, could be made more manageable if the government axed the 5% VAT on bills imposed when the UK was part of the European Union. Other interventions the industry would like to see considered include extending fuel grants and moving green levies from consumers’ bills into taxation. Trade body Energy UK said on Thursday that consumers could expect their bills to soar by as much as 50% from 1 April. While wholesale prices continue to climb steeply, the UK’s price cap on energy bills stops companies from immediately passing those costs on to their customers. The price cap, set by the industry regulator, Ofgem, has been at a record £1,277 Since 1 October. Ofgem is expected to raise the cap significantly on 1 April. EDF has said the cap could hit £2,000 by next October, when the cap is reviewed again. Analysts at Investec believe the expected bill increase in April would add 1.8 percentage points to inflation next year. On Thursday, the shadow energy minister, Ed Miliband, called on the government to stop families being “clobbered” with the increased cost of heating and powering their homes, by removing VAT on bills for six months. Spain has cut energy taxes, while Germany has slashed green levies on household bills, designed to support the development of renewable energy. But Energy UK said measures like these would save less than £300, significantly less than the expected £600 rise in the average annual bill when the price cap goes up. One plan being formulated by the energy industry to would involve a government-administered loan scheme to spread the impact of the price increases over several years. The plan would involve one or more commercial lenders – such as banks – covering the immediate cost of buying energy on wholesale markets at record prices, with a sum of at least £7bn. The loans would not require a government guarantee, but officials would be responsible for ensuring repayments. “We regularly engage with the energy industry and will continue to ensure that consumers are protected through the energy price cap, which is insulating millions from record global gas prices,” a government spokesperson said. “We also continue to support those most in need through our £500mhousehold support fund, the warm home discount and winter fuel payments.”If you witnessed Mark Zuckerberg’s unveiling of the “Metaverse” this year, you’ll be familiar with his utopian vision: a future in which we abandon our woefully outdated reality in favor of his virtual world. After all, what could be better than surrendering the very concept of observable truth to the man whose service has convinced your aunt that elites want to drink the blood of children? The Zuckerbergian digital universe isn’t quite ready yet, but with Christmas around the corner, we took an educated guess at what the holidays might look like under the incoming regime. It all begins on a cozy winter’s evening. Instead of bundling into the car with the family, you simply tap a button on your VR goggles. Instantly, you’re transported to a customized digital environment – perhaps somewhere with a Dickensian flourish, such as a Victorian workhouse, or one of the kooky spots featured in Zuck’s demo video, such as the lifeless blackness of the cosmos. Everyone is there: Aunt Dakota, Uncle Logan, your cousins Edith and Walter, Grandma and Grandpa. And is that Great-great-Uncle Harry? It is! He died last year, but a little thing like that won’t stop his avatar from showing up. It’s programmed with all his favorite anecdotes and jokes – in fact, it’s so lifelike that as the years go by, you’ll forget entirely which relatives are still actually breathing. Of course, because everyone’s chosen an avatar, there are no familiar faces. So you’ll have to make educated guesses about who’s who as you approach giant T-rexes and smiling robots – don’t want to accidentally get stuck making small talk with weird cousin Andrew, who is either that zombie in the corner or the knife-wielding guy in the hockey mask. On the plus side, no one has aged a day since you last saw them. It’s been a while, so you’ll need an icebreaker. Just as it was last year, the go-to topic is the plight of the “phizzies” – the new underclass that can’t afford Zuck’s goggles and still lives in the physical world. Your progressive relatives bemoan their plight, while your more callous family members have a good chuckle, wondering what it must be like to be left behind in a world where matter is still a thing. Soon it will be time for dinner – which is never as filling as it used to be, given that it’s made up of mainly zeroes and ones. But wait, the fabric of reality is tearing over by your stepdad, and … yep, someone’s hacked Christmas again. A pair of alien avatars have appeared out of nowhere and started doing weird sex stuff, which, to be fair, accounts for most of what happens in the Metaverse. Doing your best to avoid stray pulsating tentacles, you push them back into the rift they emerged from, making a mental note to contact Meta’s support staff yet again. Finally you all sit down for your meal, though before the food will materialize, you’ll of course need to chant the Pledge to Lord Zuckerberg. When it’s complete, a disembodied blue thumbs-up briefly appears over the table and dinner begins. Edith and Walter are late to the table; they’ve been in the real-life bathroom, vomiting from what doctors have termed goggle-derived motion sickness (GDMS). Conversation is, unsurprisingly, dominated by your conspiracy-theorist uncle, who has spent the whole night waiting for JFK Jr to show up – which, in this reality, is not outside the realm of possibility. After dinner it’s time for entertainment, and it’s the Metaverse, so you’re excited for an appearance by a big star, digitized. It’s Christmas, so how about Mariah Carey? Turns out she’s only available as an NFT, and she costs Z1m (1 million Zuckcoin). You settle for Michael Bublé again. While he belts out Jingle Bells, you begin handing out the presents, bracing for the yearly tantrum when the kids, who legally can spend only 95.3% of their waking hours in the Metaverse, realize their new toys don’t actually exist. Finally, the evening is over, and people begin spontaneously disappearing as they teleport to their virtual bedrooms. The holidays make you nostalgic, so you decide, for old time’s sake, to pull off the goggles. As your eyes adjust to the physical world, you watch your immediate family stumbling into walls and bumping into each other, their vision blocked by their headsets. It feels like a metaphor for something, but you can’t think what.People at greater risk of becoming seriously ill from Covid-19 will likely have more treatment options in January. That’s the forecast in the wake of the US Food and Drug Administration’s approval this week of the first two antiviral pills used to treat Covid-19 and reports of shortages of a monoclonal antibody treatment used against the Omicron variant. “Other companies are developing monoclonals that should work against Omicron, but all of that takes time, so these antivirals slot in almost perfectly to where these monoclonal antibodies are no longer useful,” said Andrew Pekosz, an epidemiologist from Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. The need for more options to treat Covid has increased not only due to the spike in cases, but also because only one of the three monoclonal antibody treatments used to treat Covid has proven effective against Omicron, and it’s now in short supply across the country. Pekosz added: “As long as production and distribution of the [antivirals] can be geared up, they will be an important tool, especially in the short term, to fight off severe disease.” The shortage of the monoclonal antibody treatment and FDA approval of the pills from Pfizer and Merck are important factors as hospitals try to contend with Omicron, which is more contagious than previous variants and has led to a sharp increase in Covid cases in New York and has emerged in many other parts of the US. But epidemiologists and public health officials around the country do not know exactly how the initial limited supply of the pills will be distributed. “There are still a number of questions about how efficient the system will be to get these pills to people in time” to treat them, said William Schaffner, an infectious diseases expert at Vanderbilt University School of Medicine. On Wednesday, the FDA approved a Pfizer antiviral, Paxlovid, that reduced the risk of hospitalization among high-risk patients by 89% when they took it within three days of the onset of symptoms and almost the same amount when taken within five days, according to a Pfizer study. The agency approved the pill for people ages 12 and up at high risk of severe illness from the virus. The US government will have 265,000 Paxlovid treatment courses available in January and 10m courses by late summer, White House Covid-19 response coordinator Jeff Zients said at a briefing. On Thursday, the federal agency authorized a Merck antiviral, Molnupiravir, that has not been shown to be as effective as Paxlovid against hospitalization from Covid. It’s approved for the treatment of mild to moderate Covid in adults at high risk of severe illness from the virus. The federal government also pre-purchased 10m Molnupiravir treatment courses and expects to have 3m courses available in January, Zients said. Covid patients’ access to the antiviral pills will depend on how efficiently the federal government distributes the pills to states and community health centers, said Schaffner. “We have not seen the logistics laid out as to who needs to be called right at that critical time” during the first few days after a person develops symptoms and tests positive for Covid, said Schaffner. “You want to get these pills as quickly as possible so that you can avert the infection evolving into something more serious that gets you into the hospital.” Even though the Merck pill has lower efficacy against the virus than Pfizer’s, Pekosz still recommended that people at high risk from Covid who become sick take “whatever anti-viral drug is available”. France canceled its order Wednesday for the Merck antiviral because of data showing that it only reduced the risk of hospitalization and death by 30%, compared with preliminary data that showed a 50% reduction. “Given the Omicron situation here in the US, the choice between nothing and the Merck, there is absolutely no [question], I would absolutely take the Merck drug if that was the only thing available,” Pekosz said. Dr Farrin Manian, an infectious disease specialist and chair of the department of medicine at Mercy Hospital St Louis, said he was excited about the Pfizer antiviral but more hesitant about the Merck pill, which attacks the virus’s genes, because of the theoretical concern that it could alter the genome of the patient’s cells, leading to a possible increased risk of birth defects and cancer. Manian also emphasized that people’s access to the antivirals will depend on their access to Covid tests, which have been in short supply in the United States. “I am hoping that we will have more testing available to the public so that when these drugs do become available, the testing will not be a huge obstacle,” said Manian. In addition to people who are elderly or immunocompromised, the new antivirals could also help people who are not vaccinated against the virus and as such, at much greater risk of becoming seriously ill or dying. “I think these medications are likely to be looked upon with favor by a lot of people who are vaccine averse, and so in a sense, they actually may continue to slow down the acceptance of vaccination,” said Schaffner. “That’s too bad because then we have lost half of our one-two punch.”As the highly transmissible Omicron variant began to surge across Colorado this month, Governor Jared Polis adopted a laissez-faire tone. Asked in a radio interview about the possibility of reinstating a statewide mask mandate, he replied that, with Covid vaccines now widely available, getting sick was the “own darn fault” of the unvaccinated. But health workers at hospitals in parts of Colorado that have been overwhelmed by coronavirus patients in recent weeks say they’re bracing for even worse. “We are encountering what almost feels like a war zone these days,” said Stephanie Chrisley, an intensive care nurse at Longmont United hospital, about 50 miles north of Denver. She says she is sometimes tasked with caring for twice the number of patients she’d normally be responsible for. The job, she said, has become “morally distressing”. Hospitals like Chrisley’s are preparing for an even bigger surge, one that will put the most vulnerable residents at risk. And as state leaders across the western US take a hands-off, wait-and-see approach to handling the new variant, experts worry that relying on vaccines alone without additional public health measures won’t be enough. Vaccination rates across many western states are high, with between 60% and 70% of residents in Oregon, California, Washington, Colorado and New Mexico having been fully vaccinated (though not necessarily boosted). But Omicron, now the dominant variant in the US, appears to be more effective than previous variants at infecting even the doubly vaccinated. “In this moment, I would not agree with this sort of throwing the hands up and saying this is a pandemic of the unvaccinated,” said Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo, chair of the epidemiology and biostatistics department at the University of California, San Francisco. “The spirit of public health is that we have to think collectively.” Unlike Colorado, California reinstated its statewide indoor mask mandate last Wednesday. But the state has so far avoided issuing the stay-at-home orders it used to curb infections last December, leaving it up to restaurants and businesses to decide whether or not to scale back service or close. Residents, meanwhile, have been left to individually assess the risks of dining out, going to the gym or meeting with friends and family for the holidays. In Oregon, officials this week warned that a winter surge would tip already strained hospital systems across the state over the edge and in New Mexico, some hospitals had already been operating under “crisis standards” of care, as patients with Covid-19 and other ailments overwhelm emergency rooms and intensive care units. In contending with the Omicron variant, one year on from when western states faced a devastating surge and some of the highest case and death counts in the country, Bibbins-Domingo said aggressive vaccination drives and testing, as well as masking rules, will be required to weather the coming months. “Now is not the time to put any of our tools away,” she said. “We need all our tools to keep rising cases of both the Delta and Omicron variants under control.” Each state has “some things it’s going well and some things it could be doing better”, she added. Colorado could consider reinstating mask mandates, though the state’s push to provide free testing to residents is commendable, Bibbins-Domingo noted. In California, stronger masking rules are likely to help stem the spread of the virus. But getting rapid at-home tests remains costly and inconvenient, hurting low-income workers at risk of exposure to the virus and who are most in need of frequent testing. Although a double dose of vaccines seems to protect people from severe illness and hospitalization, workers at restaurants, grocery stores, food processing centers and other jobs where they must interact in close quarters with other people could still carry and transmit the omicron variant to older and immunocompromised relatives, she said. Relying on vaccines alone also leaves out those who are struggling to access vaccines, or are unable to take them due to age or preexisting conditions. In many parts of California, Colorado and the broader west, vaccination rates among Latino residents have lagged, a reality that experts say is at least in part due to a lack of outreach and access. Across California, data have also shown lagging vaccination rates among the poorest residents. Even those who want vaccines may face language barriers in scheduling a shot, said Ninez Ponce, a professor of public health at UCLA and the principal investigator of the California Health Interview Survey (CHIS), the largest state health survey in the United States. Others who work multiple jobs while juggling childcare may have trouble finding the time off to get a first dose or booster. Chrisley, the ICU nurse, said she was disheartened by Polis’ stance that the unvaccinated only have themselves to blame for contracting the virus. “I have a three-year-old who can’t be vaccinated yet. I have friends who are getting treatments for certain illnesses, which prevents them from being able to get vaccinated. There are people who have allergies to certain vaccines,” she said. Just the vaccines aren’t enough to protect everyone, she said. Moreover, especially amid severe medical worker shortages, a surge of unvaccinated Covid-19 patients in hospitals will mean that patients with other illnesses and injuries will be left with nowhere to go for treatment – and everyone will suffer. Nurses at Chrisley’s hospital recently led a drive to unionize, saying that their workload was unsustainable. “This has always been a hard job, but it has been getting harder,” she said. At the PIH Health Good Samaritan hospital in Los Angeles, Jennifer Delisle – a medical surgical and orthopedic nurse – said that while the scene this winter is a lot calmer and more in control than it was last year, when LA endured the worst of the pandemic and overflow morgues were set up outside to hold the dead, she is growing uneasy about the months to come. She has seen Angelenos grow laxer about social distancing and masking, forgoing face coverings while holiday shopping, she said. And vaccination rates are stagnating. “People are letting their guard down,” she said.Ministers have chosen a senior banker as the new chair of NHS England, with a brief to push through changes in the way the service operates and cut spiralling waiting lists. Richard Meddings, a former chair of TSB Bank, will take over the role early in the new year. He will be paid £63,000 a year for working two to three days a week, the Cabinet Office said . He will succeed the Conservative peer David Prior, who has held the post for four years. However, unlike Lord Prior, who had been a health minister and chaired two NHS hospital trusts before taking over, Meddings is not thought to have any previous experience of the health service. He is taking over at a time when the government is keen for the NHS to improve the way it works, use innovative means to tackle the 5.7 million backlog of patients, and provide value for money for the record funding it is due to receive in the next few years. A 1.25% rise in national insurance in April will yield about £12bn a year to help improve healthcare and social care. The Cabinet Office said in a statement on Thursday: “Richard Meddings has been named as the government’s preferred candidate for the next chair of NHS England. Sajid Javid, the secretary of state for health and social care, has today invited the health and social care committee to hold a pre-appointment scrutiny hearing with Richard.” The Commons committee, chaired by the former health secretary and Tory leadership contender Jeremy Hunt, will question Meddings at a confirmation hearing early next year. However, while it can offer Javid its thoughts as to his suitability for the post, it cannot block him from taking up the role. The Daily Telegraph, which revealed the appointment, quoted a Whitehall source who said Meddings “has unrivalled business experience and will bring an outsider’s eye to the NHS”. The source added: “We can’t have business as usual when it comes to the health service. Reform is needed to deliver an NHS that serves patients for years to come.” Meddings will take over shortly before changes contained in the health and care bill going through parliament hand Javid much more control over NHS England and reduce its independence from the Department of Health and Social Care. They will also formalise big changes in the way the NHS in England operates through the creation of 44 “integrated care systems”, which bring providers of different types of health services and local councils together across a region. Meddings, whose background is in chartered accountancy, is also a non-executive director of the Treasury. He has held a number of other senior roles in banking.Boris Johnson can “get away with things that mere mortals can’t seem to”, the former prime minister David Cameron has said, while suggesting there has been an “arms race” between politicians and the media to outwit one another. Johnson’s team have significantly changed relationships with the media – hiring personal photographers on to the No 10 staff who often snap key events instead of photographers from media organisations. Johnson has also used taped clips to make announcements – including most recently the announcement of no new restrictions before Christmas – instead of appearing at a press conference or in front of MPs. In an interview with Adam Boulton for Feral Beasts, a documentary exploring Britain and the media, Cameron said the relationship had become more adversarial. “I think there has been a bit of an arms race in a way,” Cameron said. “Politicians have tooled up with special advisers and the spin doctors, and the media have tooled up by even more aggressive ‘gotcha’ interviews to get that magic moment. “I think we have got to try and have a relationship still distant and confrontational by moments – but understanding that you have got legitimate questions, but we have also got a responsibility to explain what we are doing. And can we try and find a bit of space for those things to coexist.” Cameron had also made a request for a personal official photographer, which was declined, which prompted him to say Johnson could get away with more than others. He also criticised the prime minister’s decision to boycott appearances on BBC Radio 4’s flagship Today programme – his appearance on the show in October was the first time he had been on it in two years. Cameron was criticised during his time in No 10 for avoiding press scrutiny. As Conservative leader he had pledged to hold monthly press conferences but those were soon ditched. “But, look, I think you shouldn’t do this to bypass the media. You go on having … whether it is press conferences or interviews or media events – this is important,” Cameron said. “And I always did. Yes, the press conferences were rather infrequent, but I never held back from going on the Today programme and coming on your show. “I mean, we were always available and keen to engage and to answer questions.” Johnson had promised a more open relationship with the press with plans for televised media briefings from a £2m refurbished media suite and hired Allegra Stratton as an official spokesperson to front them. But rows over the briefings eventually led to the departure of several senior staff and they were cancelled. Stratton resigned this month after footage leaked of briefing rehearsals in which staff joked about Downing Street Christmas parties.It is remarkable – not to mention impressive – that, given all the turmoil of 2021, we were treated to such a terrific year of culture. As with 2020, there was endless innovation shown in every art form, as performers found ways to create within the restrictions placed on them. The difference this year was that, alongside lockdown-devised albums, remote theatre performances and the like, we were also treated to the hefty backlog of films and TV shows originally intended for the year before, from No Time to Die to season three of Succession. And, for a while at least, there was the return of full-throated live performance, from West End shows to music festivals. In this week’s newsletter we’re highlighting some of the best culture from 2021, chosen both by me and by you. There are no rankings here; the Guardian has already done that pretty extensively across film, music, TV, games, stage and art. Instead, it is more of a celebration of the great culture that you probably caught (Dune, It’s a Sin) and those gems you almost certainly missed (unearthed recordings from the birth of 80s Chicago house). Thank you for all your great recommendations, and I hope you have a very merry Christmas. Film The Guide’s picks For gargantuan big-screen spectacle at a time when the future of the cinema itself was being questioned, it is hard to look past Denis Villeneuve’s Dune. Right at the other end of the scale, was the hilarious and cringe-inducing low-budget comedy Shiva Baby. Its lead, Rachel Sennott, is a superstar in waiting. Pablo Larraín’s psychological horror-comedy Spencer was the year’s most audacious and divisive film, a Sandringham-set Rosemary’s Baby with Kristen Stewart’s Princess Diana in the Mia Farrow role. And on the documentary front, two very different films leaped out: MLK/FBI’s gasp-inducing uncovered history of institutional skullduggery, and Questlove’s joyous 1969 concert film Summer of Soul (... Or, When The Revolution Could Not Be Televised). Reader picks Best film of the year for me is The Power of the Dog. Loved the cinematography and the slow pace, and the acting was brilliant. It’s a film I’d watch again to catch the subtleties. Jane Campion is a superb director, kudos to her. Suzanne Gauthier Must see: Coda! Would return to the theatre for that one, again and again. CG I thought Minari was splendid: beautiful, original, moving and hilarious. Excellent acting as well. What more could you want? Yvonne Durie [Further reading: Minari star Steven Yeun spoke about the film as well as his love of the great Bong Joon-ho, in an interview earlier this year] My favourite film was Another Round, which I’m sure will get lots of votes! Karen Beesley Music The Guide’s picks Surely 2021’s most gorgeously produced album, the daring, bracing, vast-sounding Sometimes I Might Be Introvert saw north London rapper Little Simz deliver on a decade’s worth of promise. Shame’s taut and propulsive Drunk Tank Pink was my favourite of the many British post-punk/noise-rock albums that landed in 2021 (although Black Midi’s John L remains the most thrillingly out-there track I heard this year). Promises – Floating Points, Pharoah Sanders and the London Symphony Orchestra’s lovely ambient-electronica-jazz hybrid – was perfect aural escapism in a frenetic year. And for pure jangly catchiness, it is hard to look past the Canadian outfit Kiwi Jr’s Cooler Returns, positioned perfectly between the Strokes, Parquet Courts and Pavement. Reader picks The Solution Is Restless by Joan as Police Woman, Tony Allen and Dave Okumu. Created music, not simply constructed. Niall O’Donnell Under the Conditions by LeRon Carson. Not sure if this really counts as new since Carson died in 2016, but a lot of these tunes are previously unreleased, made at the birth of house music in Chicago on the lowest of lo-fi equipment. This is amazing stuff, up there with Virgo, Mr Fingers &amp; co, back at the start of Trax, DJ International, Underground, Mitchbal and all the other seminal labels. Mike Firth Pressure Machine by the Killers. Rosa Bartlett [Hailed by the Observer as their best album in years] Cleo Sol took over from Max Richter for my own personal lullaby. Maggie Chute [Further reading: as well as her own soothing soul-jazz, Cleo Sol also found time to make yet another album with the prolific collective Sault, which found its way on to the Guardian’s best of 2021 list] Isles by Bicep got me through lockdown. Suzanne Stockton TV The Guide’s picks Although I am still not convinced it quite stuck the landing, Russell T Davies’s deeply affecting Aids drama It’s a Sin is the show that stayed with me the longest this year. The ridiculously consistent Succession has to be mentioned in any end-of-year sum-up, while the pitch-black satire of The White Lotus more than deserved its sleeper-hit status. It was a great year for small-screen documentaries: the Beeb’s policy of just letting Adam Curtis crack on with things bore fruit with his most ambitious series yet, Can’t Get You Out of My Head, while Steve McQueen’s doc about the 1981 fire in New Cross, south London, Uprising, served as a sobering postscript to his drama series Small Axe. And two British comedies – Jamie Demetriou’s fantastically daft Stath Lets Flats and Liam Williams’s note-perfect coming-of-age series Ladhood – returned with new outings that somehow improved on what had come before. Reader picks I learned about the Netflix series Somos from the Guardian. It’s about a Mexican town that is slowly taken over by drug traffickers, and it’s brilliantly done. Lives are upturned and destroyed by a wrong turn, a misplaced word, an unintended glance. It’s terrifying, tragic, subtle and with some superbly subdued performances from mostly unknown actors. A worthy addition to the year’s best. Andrew Downie The best series, without doubt, and not just because I live in Bristol was Stephen Merchant’s The Outlaws. Great cast, great writing, funny, serious, political and riveting. Josephine Eliot [Further reading: earlier this year, Stephen spoke to our magazine Saturday about his “low rent western” The Outlaws, and also walking through a plateglass window at a party hosted by Sarah Silverman] There was a recent spate of very good BBC dramas running in four-to-six parts. Showtrial was first class. Sheelah Kehoe Unforgotten’s Nicola Walker and Sanjeev Bhaskar are the best double act on TV – bar none. Continuing the Nicola Walker theme, a shout for Annika – a quirky police procedural shown on Alibi, set in Scotland with her as the eponymous detective inspector. She breaks the fourth wall constantly, drives a boat to work, and references Viking words and customs to make sense of the plot. Completely oddball, but rather charming. Rob Mansfield I loved The White Lotus, and of course Succession! Elaine Dunlap Time by Jimmy McGovern, starring Stephen Graham and Sean Bean. Amazing story and acting from this impressive duo. Louise Carr Podcasts The Guide’s picks At a time where podcasts have somewhat lost that buzzy, blockbuster quality, Tortoise’s addictive catfishing investigation Sweet Bobby was an exception, harking back to the glory days of pods such as Serial. The film-maker Adam McKay hosted the engrossing Death at the Wing, which recounted the tragic deaths of high-profile basketball players in the 80s through the prism of Reaganism, while Karina Longworth’s old Hollywood podcast You Must Remember This had a particularly great season on Dean Martin and Sammy Davis Jr. My favourite of the “people amiably chatting” genre this year was film pod The Big Picture, which seems to have come into its own in lockdown, with its lively “movie draft” episodes, director top fives and zingy back and forths from hosts Sean Fennessey and Amanda Dobbins. Reader picks World Service’s Deeply Human. Great presenter and subject. Maggie Chute Sweet Bobby came late in the year, but was a fantastic listen. The mic-drop moment in episode three was worth it alone. It’s been left tantalisingly open for a follow-up, but I was left counting down the days between episodes. Rob Mansfield [Further reading: the Observer’s Miranda Sawyer was just as hooked by Sweet Bobby] I like boring history podcasts, so it’s Rex Factor. Suzanne Stockton Books The Guide’s picks The Guardian’s books of the year list is an absolute monster this year, covering everything from Sally Rooney’s Beautiful World, Where Are You to Warren Ellis’s imaginative music biography, Nina Simone’s Gum. You can explore the whole thing here, helpfully divided into categories from politics to food. Meanwhile, the Observer has handed its books of the year list over to the experts, with authors ranging from Bernadine Evaristo to Kazuo Ishiguro highlighting their favourites from 2021. Reader picks Four Thousand Weeks by Oliver Burkeman. To call this a book about time management is a whopping understatement and a major injustice. It gets to the heart of our existence and what, individually, our place here is – it’s part self-help, but a bigger part life philosophy. I defy you not to find something in here that will make you reassess the way you live your life. Rob Mansfield Civilisations by Laurent Binet, translated by Sam Taylor. Mary Bailey [This does sound fascinating: a counter-factual novel imagining what would have happened if the Incas had settled in Europe] My favourite book published this year was A Bright Ray of Darkness by Ethan Hawke. Karen Beesley [Further reading: we interviewed Ethan for his first novel in 20 years, as well as his unlikely love of Doris Kearns Goodwin] If you want to read the complete version of this newsletter please subscribe to receive The Guide in your inbox every Friday.Everton’s Boxing Day match at Burnley has been called off a day after Rafael Benítez said it should not go ahead because he had too few players and some were being put at risk. The league’s board rejected an initial postponement request from Everton but accepted on Friday morning that the game could not take place because of the impact of Covid and injuries on Benítez’s squad. It is the third match of the Premier League’s Boxing Day programme to be cancelled, after Liverpool v Leeds and Wolves v Watford. The league said it had “regrettably approved” the postponement. “The board reviewed the club’s request today to postpone the match following further injuries to their squad,” it said. “They concluded that the club will not be able to fulfil their fixture this weekend as a result of an insufficient number of players available to play due to Covid-19 cases and injuries.” Benítez said on Thursday that Everton had only nine outfield players available and would have to bring in five youngsters deemed by the league as having enough experience to play. “The reality is some of these players include Dominic Calvert-Lewin, who has been out injured for two months,” the manager said. “We have other players with knocks and we will have to push them. They are not fit and who will take responsibility if something happens to them because they have to play 90 minutes? We are exposing them … The reality is it is a risk for some of our players.” Vieira hopes to play Spurs despite Covid cases Patrick Vieira hopes Crystal Palace will be able to play Sunday’s fixture at Tottenham, despite “a couple of cases” of coronavirus at the club. “We hope we are going to be okay, but when you are looking at the number of cases around [the country], we start to be worried,” the Palace manager said. “We had a couple of cases in our football club in the last couple of days,” Vieira added. “We try our best to prevent and avoid a situation but it is worrying because we don’t know how the next couple of days will go.” Palace’s last match, against Watford last weekend, was postponed due to a Covid-19 outbreak in their opponents’ squad. Vieira did not confirm which players had tested positive for the virus and said that, while he is concerned about his squad’s well being, he did not agree with Pep Guardiola’s call for collective action. “I am against this kind of strike,” Vieira said. “What is really important at the moment is the voice of players or managers should be heard a little bit more.” “I am not worried about the players’ welfare regarding the games during this period because it has been like that for years and years,” the 45-year-old added. “What I am worried about is the players’ welfare regarding Covid.” Vieira also supported Antonio Conte’s view that Thursday’s Premier League meeting achieved very little. “When you have a meeting like that with 20 managers, it is always difficult to put your ideas or what you really think across,” Vieira said. “What was it for? I still don’t understand what the conclusion of that meeting was.” PA MediaWhat can be said of a world where one billionaire wants to build a giant tulip-shaped tower of little practical use and another wants to house thousands of students in windowless rooms in a block with all the charm of an Amazon distribution centre? The first, designed by Foster + Partners for the Brazilian Jacob Safra, was supposed somehow to boost confidence in the City of London by building what would have been only the world’s second highest flower-themed absurdity, a taller Lotus Tower having already been built in Colombo, Sri Lanka. The second, Munger Hall, is the dormitory for the University of California, Santa Barbara, where in return for donating $200m of the $1.5bn cost the 97-year-old Charlie Munger is insisting that 94% of residents have no natural light in their rooms. At least the British government saw sense and refused the Tulip planning permission, whereas plans are still proceeding for Munger Hall. Both projects seem driven by ego, but in the wide space between the brutal functionalism of the latter and the redundant gesturing of the former you might hope to find places where beauty is put in the service of the usual and unusual needs of human life. My top five, I submit, achieve this. In climate emergency news, there was a bit of a fad this year for temporarily relocating trees in places where you don’t usually find them – in the courtyard of Somerset House, out the back of Tate Modern, on a “mound” at Marble Arch. The idea was to say something or other about the importance of having nature in cities, but any suspicion that these projects were, like the Tulip, a teeny bit gestural was resoundingly confirmed by the contrast between the lush landscape that publicity images promised for the mound and the bedraggled reality. More usefully and less glamorously, it continues to sink into public and official consciousness that it’s environmentally good to refit buildings where possible rather than rebuild them – that there’s little point in sinking huge carbon and energy costs in a building that might give some payback in a few decades’ time. Progress was also made with the technology of building large structures with timber – by no means a cure-all for issues of sustainability but a step in the right direction. The boggling horrors of the Grenfell Tower inquiry continue to unfold. Stories keep coming out of failures by manufacturers, regulators, contractors and consultants to stop the building being wrapped in materials that easily caught fire. Questions are now being asked about the effect of the coalition government’s attempts to deregulate construction – as David Cameron put it at the time, to “kill off the health and safety culture for good”. There were losses to the world of architecture and design: Zeev Aram, the architect and retailer who did much to popularise the work of Eileen Gray; Chris Wilkinson, whose elegant high-tech structures included the Gateshead Millennium Bridge; Virgil Abloh, who took his architectural training into fashion design; the brutalist maestro Owen Luder. Above all, Richard Rogers, the co-creator of one of the most significant of all postwar buildings, the Pompidou Centre, but also a tireless and effective campaigner for the renewal of cities. The top five buildings of 2021 1. Serpentine Pavilion, London Counterspace Sophisticated architecture inspired by cross-cultural meeting places. 2. Maggie’s centre, Southampton Amanda Levete Architects Sensual joy for cancer patients and their loved ones. 3. Cohen Quad, Exeter College, Oxford Alison Brooks Architects The traditional quadrangle reinvented with wit and charm. 4. A House for Artists, Barking, London Apparata A glimpse of what affordable housing could be. 5. Lambeth Palace Library, London Wright and Wright A dignified way of housing a huge collection of precious books in the grounds of a historic palace. Turkey Marble Arch Mound, London MVRDV Lovely idea – a temporary artificial tree-clad hill – but disastrous execution.Last week, while the media were preoccupied with Downing Street parties, an election took place in parliament in which every sitting MP had a vote. The purpose was to fill the post vacated by Yvette Cooper’s elevation to the shadow cabinet: chair of the home affairs select committee. It’s a powerful position: the winner can subpoena witnesses, make statements to the house and issue reports and recommendations on some of the biggest issues of the day. All the chairs of parliament’s 30 key committees serve as members of the liaison committee and get to grill the prime minister regularly at close quarters. Follow-up questions are allowed, unlike at prime minister’s questions, where slots are drawn out of a hat with very poor odds. Chairships are divvied up between the big two parties in proportion to how many MPs each has, so this was a guaranteed Labour post. Despite the universal acknowledgment that we need a parliament that reflects wider society, backed up with strategies and policies to achieve it, there is a glaring omission in this vital element of our democracy: not a single one of the current 30 committee chairs is black or from a minority ethnic background. I tried to change that. I failed. Before becoming an MP in 2015 I was an academic and sociologist, writing books on drugs and riots. In my first parliament I was Labour’s home affairs spokesperson and a shadow minister, so I reckoned I was suitably qualified. Others who’d trodden the same path before, unsuccessfully, warned me of the awkward conversations these elections entail: the sucking up to Tories for votes, the fierce competition with others in your own party. Nonetheless I went for it – how bad could it be? In the end Dame Diana Johnson, the continuity candidate from the committee, won. My 132 votes garnered to her 154 placed me second of three candidates. I’m delighted for her and know she’ll be great. But the experience confirmed many things I’d been warned of. In 2020, my friend and fellow London BAME MP Kate Osamor, who ran for the international development committee, crunched the figures. LGBT and disability are represented among committee chairs, she found, with women catching up, but black and minority ethnic representation lagged seriously behind. As she points out, BAME candidates all too often don’t get taken seriously. As it is the media tend to mix us up: I’ve been captioned as Tulip Siddiq by the BBC. The same has happened to Dawn Butler and Marsha de Cordova, and others. In this case, media coverage described me as “considering a tilt” rather than being a serious contender. That has its effect; possible candidates don’t stand because they fear how they will be perceived. And thus we see an eerie repeat of the underestimation/underachievement loop that means BAME footballers struggle to become managers, black lawyers struggle to make partner, and black police officers rarely rise to the rank of chief constable. This matters because, unlike the weekly pantomime of the chamber and PMQs, select committees do have the ability to hold the powerful to account on the nation’s behalf, and have a record of actually doing so. Remember beleaguered Rupert Murdoch’s appearance amid the hacking scandal, the discomforting of Sports Direct’s Mike Ashley over his company’s working practices, and the spectacle of Dominic Cummings likening Boris Johnson to a shopping trolley careering around with no direction – an epithet that stuck. But there is weakness in homogeneity. During the digital, culture, media and sport select committee’s inquiry into the racism in cricket scandal, it was remarked that none of the admirable MPs involved in cross-examination had any first-hand experience of the racism being discussed. To have a committee chair who could identify with how it feels to be racially abused, to be called a “Paki”, might have sent out a powerful signal. I hope things will change, but I can’t help but notice that of the three committees I’ve served on, justice, public administration and Brexit, the chairs have been either knighted or the offspring of MPs – or, in the case of Sir Bernard Jenkin, both. This feels like a replicating pattern. And while there has undoubtedly been progress in diversity – on both sides of the house – since 1987, when my ex-boss Diane Abbott first took up her seat alongside Keith Vaz, Bernie Grant and Paul Boateng, progression in key aspects of parliamentary life – the roles that shape how the executive does its job – seems to have stalled. At this rate, for example, will we ever see a person of colour in the Speaker’s chair, refereeing proceedings? I may not have got the chairship but the experience was salutary, and this is not about me as an individual. Surely the concern for every MP must be how it appears that no one who looks anything like me tends to get there. The one exception was Keith Vaz who was forced, amid scandal, to resign in 2016. We need more MPs to vote in these elections – less than half of those eligible did this time – and for them to see a broader picture when they do. In parliament’s shop window, we have the most diverse house ever with Priti Patel, Rishi Sunak, Kwasi Kwarteng and Sajid Javid in powerful public roles, but in committee-land, where important stuff happens without the Punch and Judy style spectacle, it’s still “hideously white” (as Greg Dyke once described the BBC). As we head into 2022, is that acceptable? Rupa Huq is the Labour MP for Ealing Central and ActonWho is the most important player in a football team? Is it the goalkeeper who stops the goals going in, or the forward who scores them? Or is it the midfielder who contributes to both? That debate has raged for more than 100 years and is unlikely to be solved in 800-odd words on this page but it is a pertinent question as we survey this year’s Guardian top 100 male footballers in 2021. Once again a forward tops the list, Robert Lewandowski defending his crown from 2020 but with a smaller share of the vote. He is one of only four players to have won the award since its inception in 2012, Lionel Messi, Cristiano Ronaldo and Luka Modric being the other three. The Croat’s triumph in 2018 was the only time a non-forward has won the prize. This year Jorginho was in with a shout of becoming our fifth winner, having won both the Champions League and the European Championship during an outstanding year with Chelsea and Italy. I love a midfielder – especially if he or she is defensively astute – and put the Italian first on my list but in the end he could not compete with the goalscoring prowess of Lewandowski, Messi, Mohamed Salah and Karim Benzema and finished fifth. Jorginho is joined by two other midfielders in the top 10 – his Chelsea teammate N’Golo Kanté and Manchester City’s Kevin De Bruyne – but the whole list is dominated by forwards – 42 of the 100 play up front. Club-wise we have a shift at the top again, Manchester City replacing Liverpool with the most players on the list, having won the Premier League and reached the Champions League final. They have two more players on the list than the side that beat them at the Estádio do Dragão, Chelsea. Two clubs who have featured heavily in previous years, Barcelona and Juventus, drop out of the top five, mirroring the turbulent times they have had in 2021. Both have four players on the list – compare that with Barça’s four players in the top 15 in our first list in 2012 – and the Catalan side are rescued by the appearance of two youngsters, Gavi and Pedri, while Juve benefit from Italy’s win at Euro 2020 with Giorgio Chiellini and Leonardo Bonucci included. The delayed Euros and the Copa América bear a heavy influence on the standings when it comes to nationalities in the top 100. England and Italy are top with the Copa finalists Argentina and Brazil also among the top eight countries on the list. Germany’s poor showing at Euro 2020 is reflected in that they drop from 12 players (the most) in last year’s rankings to nine this time. Bayern’s failure to regain their Champions League crown doubtless played a part too with every player featured from the Bavarian club dropping down in position, except Lewandowski. Players from 30 countries received votes this year, Denmark having a record four players on the list after their Euro 2020 heroics and Senegal moving up to two with Édouard Mendy joining the top-100 regular Sadio Mané. The Premier League’s standing as the most powerful league in the world continues and, frankly, is reaching a somewhat disturbing level with 42 of the 100 players on the list coming from the English top flight. That is seven more than in 2020 and partly, of course, a reflection of the Champions League final’s all-English composition and England’s progress to the Euro 2020 showpiece. It is, nevertheless, a worrying trend as we want teams from as many countries as possible to challenge for the main continental prizes. This year we carried an interview with the Bayer Leverkusen CEO, Fernando Carro, who expressed his concern over the Premier League’s dominant position saying his club, regularly in the top five of the Bundesliga, lost out on a player in the summer because they could not compete financially with a promoted team from England. “At the end of the day you can make money from transfers,” he said. “English clubs pay the transfers, we get the money, but then that just means the entire Bundesliga is like a development league for the Premier League. “Even Borussia Dortmund have to sell players to the Premier League. The only club that can compete at the moment from the Bundesliga is Bayern Munich.” La Liga is still the second highest league but down two players from 2020. It does have, in Gavi, the youngest player ever to appear on the list, at the age of 17, beating Gianluigi Donnarumma by a few months from when the Italian made his debut on the list in 2016. At the other end of the spectrum Zlatan Ibrahimovic appears on the list for a ninth time despite having turned 40 in October. Every year it feels harsh not to mention the unlucky players who finished just outside the top 100. In 2021 Alexander Isak was particularly unfortunate having featured on 25 voting slips, yet finished a mere three points behind the 100th-placed Pierre-Emile Højbjerg. Theo Hernández, Andy Robertson, Kalvin Phillips and Pau Torres were also very close to making the list. An impressive 325 players had at least one vote this year, showcasing the vast array of talent on display around the world.Around about this time last year, a few sips into one of the drinks that are the subject of this column it occurred to me that the best Christmas nighttime drinking is all about wood. Most of the drinks I turn to as a calmer mood takes over from the jangly, tinselly brightness of Christmas Day have benefited from mastery of the mellowing effects of ageing alcohol, for various lengths of time, in oak barrels of various sizes. In Portugal’s Douro valley, port producers perform an annual experiment, making two very different styles from the same sweet, red fortified wine. Vintage port will go into a bottle after a couple of years in oak vats, retaining its inky purple colour and dark fruit when sold. Tawny ports, by contrast, stay in vat for years longer, even for several decades in the case of the flurry of very rare collectors’ tawnies that have emerged in recent years (such as the extraordinary, €895 a bottle 1934 Dalva I was lucky enough to try a small sample of recently). The effects of oxygenation are more advanced in porous barrels than they are in bottles, in which only a small amount of oxygen, passing through the cork, is in contact with the liquid. It’s that process which brings the special cast of flavours to tawny ports: the nuts, the dried fruits, the treacle and caramel, and dark baking spices, as well as the colour that gives the style its name. Colheita ports are relatively rare; most tawny ports are blends of vats of differing ages with an average age statement rounded up to a decade (10-year-old, 20-year-old etc). These rely even more on the chef-like skill and librarian’s memory of a master blender – the same abilities that bring magic to blended, oak-aged drinks such as whisky, rum, cognac and very old sherry. In all of those drinks the taste isn’t only wood. Character and quality depends equally on the raw materials, the length of time they spend in wood and the way they interact with it: its flavours (American oak tends to deliver sweeter, more coconut flavours than the toastier aromas of French) and the oxygenating effects it allows. The suave, golden harmony of great grape-borne cognac; the molasses-richness of dark rum; the peppery iodine-wildness of Islay whisky made from peaty malted barley; the salted nut savouriness of very old sherry … the string of relaxed dark nights between Christmas and new year seems to me the perfect time to sit, sip and explore this world within a world. Taste the Difference Oloroso Sherry (£8, 50cl, Sainsbury’s) The range of sherry made for Sainsbury’s by Lustau has long been one of the highlights of the Taste the Difference range. The oloroso has a touch of sweetness but is intensely flavoured with tangy dried citrus and nutty length and great with a slab of manchego. Warre’s Colheita Port 2009 (£17, thewinesociety.com) This superb-value colheita (a tawny port from a single harvest) from venerable port shipper Warre’s has been bottled at a beautiful point on the continuum between ruby youth and tawny age. The result is all Christmassy dried dates and nuts, and a hint of brambly jam. Villa de Varda Amaretto (£26.95, independent.wine) Not a product of wood-ageing, but a drink that is very much of the woods, a sweet but gloriously complex amaretto that is very far from the mass market norm thanks to its high-definition capture of the scents and flavours of almonds foraged in the forests of Alpine Trentino. Hine Rare VSOP Cognac (from £43.90, thewhiskyexchange.com; waitrosecellar.com) The flagship VSOP cognac from one of the region’s grand old names, Hine’s Rare gets its seductive silkiness and aromatic fineness from a combination of top-notch grapes from more than 20 of the region’s best crus, plus an average of eight years’ rest in French oak barrels. Gosling’s Family Reserve Old Rum (£60, Waitrose) A molasses-based, 150-year-old family secret recipe is the base of this luxuriously rich old rum from Bermuda. The components have spent 16-19 years in charred oak barrels, and the result has a liquorice-toffee dark depth, a crackle of spice and a beguiling softness. Laphroaig 10 Year Old Cask Strength Batch 012 Bottled 2020 (£89.95, thewhiskyexchange.com) The standard 10 Year Old Laphroaig (from £30) is one of my failsafe single malt choices, but this special cask strength bottling is another level of evocative wild Islay magic: an extra-concentrated version of the classic Laphroaig mix of heather-honeyed smoothness and smoke-and-sea-spray pungency.A kennel owner who died in a dog attack was a passionate animal welfare campaigner who worked tirelessly to give abused dogs another chance in life, his friends and colleagues have said. Adam Watts was killed at the Juniper kennels and cattery he ran in Kirkton of Auchterhouse, near Dundee, on Wednesday, by a dog it is understood police had previously seized and brought to him for rehabilitation. Watts, 55, was pronounced dead at the scene after the attack, which was believed to have involved a large bulldog-type animal. The father of five wrote on the kennels’ Facebook page that his five sons assisted his work. It is believed his wife died of stomach cancer eight years ago at the age of 46. Police have said there are not thought to be any suspicious circumstances and a report will be sent to the procurator fiscal. Save Our Seized Dogs, a group dedicated to helping owners whose pets are seized under the Dangerous Dogs Act 1991, said Watts worked with police in Dundee. “Adam would take any dog to give them the chance of life and was the kennels of choice for the police in Dundee,” the group said on Facebook. “His gentle, calm nature soon gained the trust of some of the most abused dogs and they were able to go from him to find loving homes. “Adam died doing what he loved. He leaves behind five boys who he was the sole parent to. He talked of them often and was so proud of the older boys helping him with the dogs.” Juniper Kennels advertised itself as having 22 kennels of varying sizes, and eight catteries, with an enclosed exercise area to the rear where dogs could have a secure free run. It also offered leaded walks, one dog at a time. Wallace Vets, which has centres around Dundee, posted a tribute on its website, describing Watts as “the most caring man who went over and above in his passion for caring for animals, and worked tirelessly to help give some a loving future with a new family”. The Edinburgh-based dog training company SuperSmart Dog Training and Behaviour posted: “He was not just a kennel owner. He saved many dogs which he felt needed saving and would campaign for dogs’ welfare. All that met him found a caring, loving man who lived for his five boys and dogs. Since his wife died, this was his life [and he] put his heart and soul into saving dogs.”Once a week at about 5.30am, Hayley Ashton pulls two masks over her face, sanitises a shopping trolley with her handbag disinfectant then takes a deep breath before stepping into the fluorescent glare of her local supermarket in Leicester. These grocery trips feel for Ashton, a 33-year-old project manager who is immunocompromised and has severe asthma, like treacherous expeditions where she risks serious illness or death. “It’s the one area you just can’t control,” she said. In previous waves of Covid-19, Ashton was part of the government’s shielding schemes, which meant she had access to measures like statutory sick pay, medicine deliveries and priority shopping. Now, as the Omicron variant pushes cases to record levels, there is no such protection. “A pint of milk could well cost me my life,” Ashton said. “And at the minute I’ve got no support from the government to get those essentials.” Ashton is one of almost 4 million clinically extremely vulnerable (CEV) people in England who were advised to shield by the government during previous Covid waves. She said her clinician told her she would probably become seriously ill or die if she caught the virus, making the surge of Omicron a time of high anxiety and fear – made worse, she said, by ministers’ unwillingness to impose extra measures. In these circumstances, many CEV people are choosing to shield themselves – retreating into their homes, cancelling social engagements, avoiding public transport and sometimes even leaving frontline jobs to protect themselves. “Our world has shrunk back a lot,” said Sue Hardman, a retired 60-year-old in Suffolk with severe asthma. “You just feel forgotten … It’s almost as if there’s a group that doesn’t matter.” Ashton said she “felt supported” by the shielding programme earlier in the pandemic. But now she feels there is significant risk for those with underlying conditions. “What people are forgetting is for those in these vulnerable categories, even if [Omicron is] mild, the likelihood [or risk] is, despite vaccines, you are still going to become seriously ill.” For Zoe Pettigrew, a solicitor previously living in a flat-share in Bristol, the pandemic has meant isolating from friends since March 2020 with her family in Cornwall. Pettigrew, 33, who has Crohn’s disease, which means taking immunosuppressive medication, feels “completely forgotten about” by the government. “It makes me so sad, but also angry,” she said. Pettigrew is yet to meet her three-month-old nephew. Chris Whitty, England’s chief medical officer, said last Wednesday the government was trying to avoid returning to the shielding programme given vaccines and new drugs – such as molnupiravir or Ronapreve – and the detrimental impact on mental health. “Shielding came with some very obvious downsides for the people involved in the shielding – including loneliness and mental health issues,” he said. A 2020 study found shielding led to a deterioration in mental health for about 35% of CEV people. “So it’s not an area we want to go down if there’s any way of avoiding doing so,” Whitty said. But for Pettigrew, this ignores the toll of feeling forced to shield but without the official acknowledgment of ministers. “It makes you feel like you’ve lost the plot,” she said. Without government support, “it’s like being under house arrest”, said Colin Talbot, 69, an emeritus professor at the University of Manchester who is immunocompromised. Some families, like Hardman’s, are cancelling Christmas plans. Her 28-year-old son is no longer visiting after being exposed to friends who tested positive. For others, it means leaving jobs they love. In Berwick-upon-Tweed, Rosie Purves, 36, has rheumatoid arthritis and is immunocompromised. Tests show she has a lack of Covid antibodies despite three vaccine doses. This autumn, Purves left her job as a reception teacher over the risks posed by classroom infection and has received no financial or other support from the government. She urged ministers: “Please don’t forget about us.” Others have pulled their at-risk children out of schools, such as Laura Baines, a 44-year-old full-time carer to her CEV son, Louie, 15. “I’m struggling financially buying school supplies,” she said, urging safer measures in classrooms. National charities including Crohn’s and Colitis UK, the National Aids Trust and Kidney Care UK said the government must provide greater clarity and support for shielders. A Department of Health and Social Care spokesperson said it had published “a range of guidance for those previously considered clinically extremely vulnerable” and urged people to discuss “necessary precautions with their specialist” and to get the booster vaccine. Ashton is weighing up whether to spend Christmas alone or risk it with family. “It’s a really scary time,” she said.Anthony Smith, who has died aged 83, was the brains behind the creation of Channel 4, which he envisaged as a new kind of publicly owned television channel for turning fresh ideas and minority views into programmes made by independent producers. At a time of just three channels, BBC1, BBC2 and ITV, he dedicated himself in the 1970s to media reform, and lobbied for an open broadcasting authority to run a vacant fourth channel, in a democratic opening up of the airwaves, unleashing “an imp in the mechanism”. The Guardian acted as a facilitator, publishing two lengthy articles by Smith in 1972 and 1974 as he refined the concept. He then became director of the British Film Institute (1979-88), well positioned to influence the final decision. Although holding centre-left political views, he won support from Margaret Thatcher’s 1979 government, by meeting Keith Joseph, one of the prime minister’s most influential allies, and recasting the argument as a way of introducing competition and enterprise into broadcasting, while keeping public service dominant. Smith was a thinking person, combining unobtrusive sharpness with persistence: his personal charm and hospitality softened a serious intensity. This approach saw off ITV’s claim on the fourth channel and won round the home secretary, Willie Whitelaw. The 1980 Broadcasting Act paved the way, and two years later Channel 4 was launched, with Smith serving as a board member (1980-84). One driving conviction of his survived to the end: Smith believed in the importance of independent institutions, which foster sound values and nurture people. “I believe in a collegiate system – Channel 4 as originally practised. I hate state control,” he said. In 1987, he expected to succeed Jeremy Isaacs as chief executive of Channel 4, believing Richard Attenborough, the new chairman, had promised him the job. “There is only one reason I would take the job, darling. If I become chairman you will have to become chief executive when Jeremy goes,” went the reported exchange. But when it came to the crunch, the board chose Michael Grade. Smith felt betrayed. “May God forgive them,” he said. I witnessed Attenborough delivering the news to Smith at the BFI, where he was launching the London film festival and his project, the Museum of the Moving Image, backed by Paul Getty. He crumpled. After he left the BFI, the museum eventually closed. Earlier in 1987 he was unsuccessful in his bid to succeed Alasdair Milne as BBC director general – the accountant Michael Checkland was appointed. He had also been rejected in 1982 when Milne was selected. Smith ranked these as his biggest disappointments. But he then enjoyed a remarkable consolation. In 1974 he had taken up a set of rooms in the Albany apartment complex on Piccadilly, opposite Fortnum &amp; Mason, at the heart of the establishment. There he entertained stylishly: silver teapot, fruitcake, bone china cups and saucers. His open-house policy led by chance in 1988 to the “best bit” of his life, appointment as president of Magdalen College, one of Oxford’s oldest and wealthiest colleges. A Financial Times foreign writer was a guest of Smith’s at the Albany, and his lengthy dinner with a fellow of Magdalen ended in the latter staying overnight on Smith’s sofa. Smith was suddenly on Magdalen’s radar. “I ran it,” he said with relish, “with a finger in every single pie.” The Grade I-listed buildings were cherished, but so was a new building, an auditorium where films were screened. In 1989 Magdalen launched the Oxford Science Park, now home to scores of businesses. In 1999 he invited the Russian Yukos oil plutocrat Mikhail Khodorkovsky to a college dinner. At this point Khodorkovsky was seemingly espousing a new form of socially aware Russian capitalism: “He asked us to find a way to help very able young Russians undertake a degree at Oxford – a sort of Russian Rhodes scholarship – which the Rhodes Trust helped us with in the early years.” They were called Hill scholars, named after the office in Hill Street, off Piccadilly, administering the funds. But by 2003 Khodorkovsky had become a threat to Putin and was arrested and charged with fraud. “As he was about to be arrested in Russia he sent a message asking if we would be willing to help establish a fund to cover the costs of Russian students in their own universities. He said there would be a large sum available,” said Smith. A donation of $500m arrived. Khodorkovsky was released from prison in 2013. Smith meanwhile set up the Khodorkovsky Foundation, which he chaired, after checking with the Foreign Office and Charity Commission. This second initiative supports students through a network of 20 Russian universities. By 2020, 45,000 students and 150 Hill scholars had benefited. Its third duty is to support an orphanage school for 200 children near Moscow set up by Khodorkovsky’s parents. It also provides an English-language academic library. James Curran, a friend, said of Smith: “He was a brilliant fundraiser. In business he would have made a fortune, but that was not his game.” Smith believed that the charities would influence the future of Russia, educating a fresh political class. Born Harrow on the Hill, northwest London, Anthony was the son of Esther and Henry Smith, a civil servant, and early in the second world war the family was evacuated to Rhyl, in north Wales. On their return to London, Anthony went to Harrow county school for boys, and from there to Brasenose College, Oxford, where he studied English. He joined the BBC in 1960 as a current affairs producer, editing 24 Hours, the influential daily current affairs programme launched in 1965, providing the template for Newsnight. However, in 1971 he resigned and, as a fellow of St Antony’s College, Oxford, for the next five years developed his ideas on public service broadcasting in the belief that it was failing through being too middlebrow and out of touch. So he picked up his pen, turned to activism, mulled wider media reforms and outlined Channel 4. The most influential book of the 15 he authored was The Shadow in the Cave (1973), an examination of the relationship between the broadcaster, the audience and the state. He submitted evidence to the Annan committee on broadcasting, whose eventual report in 1977 adopted the proposal for an Open Broadcasting Authority. He also contributed to the inconclusive Third Royal Commission on the Press (1974-77). Though in 1987 he was made a CBE, in Curran’s view he was “judged to be the enemy”. Smith came to be highly critical of Channel 4, which he believed had lost its way after Grade’s arrival, though he welcomed those of its executives who consulted him. In 2005 he stepped down at Magdalen, and in his final years he enjoyed reading very long novels. • Anthony David Smith, broadcasting executive and academic administrator, born 14 March 1938; died 28 November 2021The Women’s Championship club Coventry United have announced they are going into voluntary liquidation, halfway through their first season as a fully professional club. Coventry, second bottom of the second tier, confirmed the news on Thursday hours after one player tweeted that they were heartbroken to discover they no longer had a job. The club’s website lists a squad of 21 players and it was announced on Friday that 30 people would have their contracts of employment terminated. Liquidation is expected on 4 January. “With regret the board of directors have instructed BK Plus Limited to assist with placing the company/club into creditors voluntary liquidation,” a club statement said. “At this point we cannot go into detail … We would like to thank everyone for the support over the last seven years. The club will keep you updated on developments of the club’s future.” The Coventry and Wales goalkeeper Olivia Clark tweeted: “I have no words. To come into work and to find out that you no longer have the job that you’ve always dreamed of is heartbreaking. Thanks for making me a professional footballer and for the best two seasons.” Her teammate Holly Chandler echoed those sentiments. “Sometimes life is filled with things outside your control! I’m heartbroken,” she wrote. Coventry, in their third season in the Championship, were next due to play on 9 January against Bristol City. The FA, which allows clubs to participate in the Women’s Super League and Championship only if they meet licensing criteria, said: “We are liaising with all relevant parties. Our priority right now is to gain as much information as possible to ensure we can provide the right support to those associated with the club.” The FA’s owners’ and directors’ test applies to Championship clubs. Under the governing bodies rules, Coventry’s results will be expunged if they cease to operate. The Manchester City Women and England defender Alex Greenwood tweeted: “The sacrifices these girls make to become professional footballers to be told halfway through a season you no longer have a job, or a club, is simply not good enough.” BK Plus Limited said on Friday the club had been advertised for sale at the start of December but that no offers were received and salaries due at the end of the month could not be paid. “The directors of the company have explained that the company suffered financially as a consequence of Covid when games were being played behind closed doors, and potential sponsors were difficult to attract,” BK Plus said. “We understand that in November 2021, the company’s shareholders indicated that due to current global impact of Brexit and the financial impact of Covid-19, they would be unable to invest any further money in the company.” It said Coventry’s employees could make claims to the government’s redundancy payments service.The government will send out a UK-wide mobile alert urging the public to get a Covid booster, a move mobile operators fear could spark a backlash from customers opposed to vaccinations. The UK’s biggest mobile operators – EE, O2, Vodafone and Three UK – have been asked by the government to send a message on Boxing Day. The campaign will involve mobile operators sending a message on behalf of the government to their tens of millions of customers. The message is likely to be on behalf of the NHS, with the text encouraging all adults to get an additional vaccination. The proposed copy of the text message will say: “Get boosted now. Every adult needs a Covid-19 booster vaccine to protect against Omicron. Get your Covid-19 vaccine or booster. See NHS website for details.” It is understood that the mobile operators will all enable the message to be sent, but some are agreeing with reluctance given the highly politicised nature of the vaccination programme. “Operators feel a little nervous about angering some customers because it is such a heated issue,” a telecoms industry source said. “We will make it happen, but don’t want those who don’t agree with the message to blame us.” Earlier this month, Tesco’s festive TV campaign featuring Santa Claus bearing a Covid vaccine passport was cleared by the UK ad watchdog, despite anti-vaccination campaigners making it the second-most complained about advert of all time. The government confirmed that the national text alert will be going ahead on Boxing Day. “We are texting this Boxing Day for all eligible adults to get boosted now,” said Sajid Javid, the health and social care secretary. “It has never been as important to get protected with the booster – so whether it is in between turkey sandwiches or before the Boxing Day fixtures, whatever your traditions make the booster a part of them this year. “Millions of vaccine slots are available through the festive calendar so if you’re not boosted and you get this text, take up the offer and get vaccinated.” Last March, at the beginning of the pandemic, the government used mobile operators to send a message regarding support of the NHS and offering general coronavirus health advice. It is understood that the government plan will not use the nationwide mobile emergency alert system, set up to send targeted information in cases of events such as floods. If it goes ahead, the message will instead be sent by operators separately. In October, the government launched a nationwide advertising campaign encouraging people to take up Covid-19 booster jabs. The push comes as Boris Johnson used his Christmas message on Friday to tell the public to give the “wonderful” gift of a booster jab to their families this year. Johnson admitted that after nearly two years it was not possible to say the pandemic was receding, as the UK reported a record 120,000 new coronavirus cases on Thursday. In the speech, Johnson said: “Though the time for buying presents is theoretically running out, there is still a wonderful thing you can give your family and the whole country, and that is to get that jab, whether it is your first or second, or your booster, so that next year’s festivities are even better than this year’s.” The government decided against implementing further Covid restrictions before Christmas, but could meet as early as Monday to decide on whether restrictions would be needed in England over the new year period. On Thursday, the latest analysis by the UK Health Security Agency suggested that Omicron is milder than past Covid variants such as Delta, with 50%-70% of people less likely to be admitted to hospital. However, data also showed that protection from a booster starts to wane after 10 weeks.Mail Online, the online edition of the Daily Mail, has been heavily censured by the press standards regulator for publishing an article referring to “British towns that are no-go areas for white people”. The title’s defence – that no reasonable person was likely to take the claim seriously – was dismissed by the Independent Press Standards Organisation (Ipso). “The headline claim that there were ‘British towns that are no-go areas for white people’ was not supported by the article. The article included no reference to a town or towns which were claimed to be off-limits to white people, and only one area within a city was described as a ‘no-go area’ for white people,” the organisation said. Mail Online was ordered to publish a correction and ensure that a link to it appeared on the front page of its site. The piece, widely ridiculed when it was published in June, reported claims made in a book by the former Islamist radical Ed Husain titled Among the Mosques: A Journey Across Muslim Britain. The author said he had spoken to a group of white men who claimed they were scared to go to the Whalley Range area of Blackburn. Husain said they cited claims of violence at the hands of Asian teenagers, adding that the local council was racist and would threaten people with eviction for flying the cross of St George. The Mail’s article also included an image of Didsbury beneath the headline “British towns that are no-go areas for white people: Muslim author’s study of mosques reveals children ‘attacked for being white’”. Nevertheless, Ipso found that the title had only suggested Didsbury was home to a mosque hosting a sharia court, not that it had become a “no-go area for white people”. Sharia councils are often accused of operating a “parallel legal system” in the UK but their rulings have no legal standing in British law and they have no enforcement powers. According to Ipso, Mail Online claimed it “considered it to be ‘extremely unlikely that reasonable readers would have taken the impression from the headline that entire towns in Britain are […] entirely inaccessible to white people’”. The committee made no ruling in respect of a second complaint that the article breached clause 12 of its code, which calls on titles to “avoid prejudicial or pejorative reference to an individual’s race, colour, religion, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation or to any physical or mental illness or disability”. It said it was unable to consider the issue because the complainant was not personally affected..The Queen’s Christmas Day message is expected to be a particularly personal one this year, her first since the death of the Duke of Edinburgh. A photograph, which was released by Buckingham Palace ahead of her televised address, shows the Queen sitting behind a desk in the White Drawing Room at Windsor Castle, accompanied by a single, framed picture of the couple taken in 2007 at Broadlands country house, Hampshire, to mark their diamond wedding anniversary. The handout from the palace shows the monarch wearing an embossed wool shift dress in Christmas red, by the British designer Angela Kelly, as well as a sapphire chrysanthemum brooch the then Princess Elizabeth wore for a photocall on her honeymoon, also to Broadlands, in 1947, and for the couple’s diamond wedding celebrations. This year’s message follows the death of the duke in April aged 99. Coronavirus restrictions at the time meant the Queen was memorably and poignantly forced to sit alone in St George’s Chapel for his funeral service. Clarence House has confirmed the Queen will spend Christmas Day with the Prince of Wales and the Duchess of Cornwall. The monarch had said she would remain in Windsor for Christmas amid the rapid spread of the Omicron Covid variant. The Queen normally hosts her large family at Sandringham in Norfolk, where they are usually watched by crowds as they attend church on 25 December, although Covid meant this did not happen last year. Prince Charles, the Duchess of Cornwall, the Wessexes and the Duke and Duchess of Gloucester would attend a morning service at St George’s Chapel, Clarence House said. The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge will be spending Christmas in Norfolk and will be joined by some members of the Middleton family. The Queen cancelled a traditional pre-Christmas lunch with her extended family, which had been scheduled for Tuesday. Buckingham Palace announced on Thursday a service of thanksgiving for the life of the Duke of Edinburgh would take place in spring 2022 at Westminster Abbey. The Queen’s speech will mark the closing of an eventful year for the royals, which included the Duke and Duchess of Sussex’s bombshell interview with Oprah Winfrey in which they accused an unnamed royal of racism, as well as making other allegations about the institution. The royals also had to contend with allegations from Virginia Giuffre, who started legal action against the Duke of York for allegedly sexually assaulting her when she was a teenager. Prince Andrew has repeatedly denied all claims. The Queen’s address will be broadcast across multiple channels at 3pm on Christmas Day.Final checks and fuelling are under way for the launch of the James Webb Space Telescope, a flagship mission for Nasa that aims to observe worlds beyond the solar system and the first stars and galaxies that lit up the cosmos. If all goes to plan, the $10bn (£7.4bn) observatory will become the largest and most powerful telescope ever sent into space when it blasts off at 12.20pm UK time on Christmas Day onboard an Ariane 5 rocket from the European Space Agency’s spaceport in Kourou, French Guiana. It has taken more than 30 years to conceive, design and build the telescope and the project has been beset with delays, cost overruns, redesigns, and technical glitches that postponed the launch as recently as this week. “I’m excited and nervous at the same time,” said Prof Martin Barstow, chair of the Space Telescope Institute Council and director of strategic partnerships at Space Park Leicester. “It’s exciting to think that after so long, we might eventually get this telescope into space. But I’m nervous because we all know that however good the rocket is, there are risks in getting there, and a whole lot of things have to go perfectly for us to have a working telescope.” At the heart of Webb is a 6.5-metre primary mirror that will enable the telescope to observe the faint glow from some of the oldest, most distant objects in the universe. Because the universe is expanding, light emitted from stars and galaxies is stretched as it travels, meaning that the glow from the earliest stars is “redshifted” into the longer wavelengths of infrared light. Unlike the Hubble space telescope, which orbits the Earth, Webb will orbit the sun. It is bound for a spot called L2, or the second Lagrange point, a million miles from Earth. Here, gravitational forces will allow the telescope to observe the heavens in the infrared realm, with the Earth and the sun to its back. Webb’s primary mirror is so large that it must be folded up for launch and unfolded during the month-long journey to L2. Along the way, the telescope will also deploy a sunshade the size of a tennis court to help shield the telescope from the sun’s rays. “We want it really cold and space isn’t that cold,” said Barstow. “There’s a lot of infrared out there from the Earth and sun that will warm things up. To cool everything down takes a long time.” Beyond observing the first stars and galaxies, Webb will watch alien worlds cross the faces of their stars and measure how infrared light is absorbed in the planets’ atmospheres. This will provide hints about the atmospheric chemistry and potentially conditions ripe for life. “In terms of the science, this is going to be transformational,” said Barstow. “It’s quite simply the largest, most sensitive telescope ever put in space. It’s been designed to look back at the very early history of the universe and to understand the formation of the first stars and galaxies. And it’s about us. It’s about how we came to be and what our place is in the universe.” If Webb arrives at L2 unscathed, mission scientists will spend a further five months checking out the telescope’s systems and ensuring they are working properly before taking data at the start of the summer. “I just want it to be there and working,” Barstow added. “There are thousands of astronomers waiting to use this telescope. It’s important to remember this is a huge endeavour. There will be a lot of people around the world biting their fingernails tomorrow.”Steven Gerrard has won four out of six since taking the reins at Aston Villa and his rejuvenated side will guarantee a stern examination of Chelsea’s wobbly form. Thomas Tuchel knows all about the new manager bounce – delivering a Champions League within months of his appointment is hard to beat there – but the magic has faded. The N’Golo Kanté-shaped hole in Chelsea’s midfield looks set to be filled, though: he came off the bench in Wednesday’s Carabao Cup win over Brentford, so Kanté v John McGinn could be a key battle. Tuchel knows keeping the France international fit is crucial if Chelsea are to maintain a credible Premier League challenge. Luke McLaughlin Boxing Day 5.30pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Villa Park Last season Aston Villa 2 Chelsea 1 Odds H 9-2 A 4-6 D 5-2 Referee Martin Atkinson This season G11 Y27 R2 2.82 cards/game ASTON VILLA Subs from Steer, Sinisalo, Tuanzebe, Davis, El Ghazi, Sanson, Trézéguet, Ings, Hause, Philogene-Bidace, Carney Chukwuemeka, Archer Doubtful Davis (unknown), El Ghazi (unknown), Sanson (unknown) Injured Nakamba (knee, Mar), Bailey (thigh, unknown), Traoré (thigh, unknown) Suspended None Form WWLWLW Discipline Y35 R1 Leading scorer Watkins 4 CHELSEA Subs from Arrizabalaga, Bettinelli, Christensen, Havertz, Hudson-Odoi, Loftus-Cheek, Lukaku, Werner, Ziyech, Saúl, Barkley, Sarr, Baker Doubtful Christensen (knock), Havertz (Covid), Hudson-Odoi (Covid), Loftus-Cheek (ankle), Lukaku (Covid), Werner (Covid), Ziyech (calf) Injured Chilwell (knee, 15 Jan) Suspended None Form DWLWDD Discipline Y29 R1 Leading scorer Mount 7Environmental organisations across Latin America have called on the US to reduce plastic waste exports to the region, after a report found the US had doubled exports to some countries in the region during the first seven months of 2020. The US is the world’s largest plastic waste exporter, although it has dramatically reduced the overall amount it exports since 2015, when China – previously the top importer – said it “no longer wanted to be the world’s rubbish dump” and began imposing restrictions. Elsewhere around the world imports are rising, and not least in Latin America, with its cheap labour and close proximity to the US. More than 75% of imports to the region arrive in Mexico, which received more than 32,650 tons (29,620 metric tonnes) of plastic waste from the US between January and August 2020. El Salvador was second, with 4,054 tons, and Ecuador third, with 3,665 tons, according to research carried out by the Last Beach Cleanup, an environmental advocacy group based in California. While hazardous waste imports are subject to tariffs and restrictions, they are seldom enforced and plastic waste intended for recycling – which until January this year was not considered hazardous under international law – that enters importing countries can often end up as landfill, according to a researchers with the Global Alliance for Incinerator Alternatives (Gaia). A Gaia report published in July also predicted further growth in the plastic waste sector in Latin America due to companies in the US and China investing in factories and recycling plants across the region to process the US plastic exports. Some view the practice as a form of environmental colonialism. “The cross-border plastic waste trade is perhaps one of the most nefarious expressions of the commercialisation of common goods and the colonial occupation of territories of the geopolitical south to turn them into sacrifice zones,” said Fernanda Solíz, the health area director at the Simón Bolívar University in Ecuador. “Latin America and the Caribbean are not the back yards of the United States,” Soliz said. “We are sovereign territories, and we demand the respect of the rights of nature and our peoples.” Most of the world’s countries agreed in May 2019 to stem the flow of plastic waste from the developed nations of the global north into the poorer ones of the global south. Known as the plastics amendment to the Basel Convention, the agreement prohibited the export of plastic waste from private entities in the US to those in developing nations without the permission of local governments. But critically, the US did not ratify the agreement, and has been accused of continuing to funnel its waste into countries around the world, including in Africa, south-east Asia, and Latin America. “Regional governments fail in two aspects: the first is inspections at customs because we don’t really know what enters the country under the guise of recycling, and they also fail in their commitments with international agreements such as the Basel convention.” said Camila Aguilera, a spokesperson for Gaia. “And here it is important to see what comes under the types of recycling because recycling is seen as a good thing.” “Countries in the global north see recycling as something to be proud of, forgetting about redesigning the products and reducing waste,” said Aguilera. “It’s very difficult for governments to treat plastic like toxic waste, but that’s what it is.”A British man is missing in Afghanistan after a report he has been detained by the Taliban. Grant Bailey was arrested in the Afghan capital, Kabul, where he has been working as a security consultant. The arrest came during a Taliban security clampdown, according to the Daily Mirror. The Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office could not confirm his identity, but a spokesperson said: “We are aware of the detention of a British national in Afghanistan and have been in touch with their family to support them.” Bailey’s work duties include liaising with the US state department on security-related issues. He was last heard from on Saturday after being arrested at gunpoint, a UK security source told the Mirror. The Mirror quoted the source saying: “We were quite surprised he went back to Kabul after the western withdrawal as the security situation there is obviously much worse. “Added to that, the Taliban government is making it very difficult for the few ex-pats working there, making it very difficult to travel. A lot of people are trying to get to the bottom of what has happened to him, where he is being held, and under what charges.” Bailey is believed to have returned to Kabul in September shortly after the Taliban took over and the US and UK forces withdrew amid chaotic scenes at Kabul airport. His employer has been contacted for comment. Bailey’s arrest underlines the continuing risks facing the small number of westerners who continue to work in Afghanistan. Meanwhile, hundreds of Afghans who were previously employed by UK organisations, including former BBC staff and those who worked for the British Council and UK forces, have been forced into hiding since the Taliban took over. Earlier this month, Joseph Seaton, the former British Council Afghanistan English manager, said of his former colleagues: “These people are living in constant fear of their lives. They were contracted under a British government-funded scheme to teach English teachers British values of diversity, inclusion and equality, the values that … the Taliban oppose. They were always told they were employees of the British government.” Since the Taliban’s takeover, the UN has warned that 23 million Afghans face hunger due to conflict, drought and an economic downturn. In October, the World Food Programme’s executive director, David Beasley, said: “Afghanistan is now among the world’s worst humanitarian crises – if not the worst – and food security has all but collapsed.”The UK’s benchmark stock market index hit a 22-month high on Friday, coming within touching distance of the levels seen in February 2020 just before stock markets around the world were sent into a tailspin by the first European lockdown. The FTSE 100 hit an intra-day high of 7,403.65 points – surpassing the previous post-lockdown high that it hit last month – before slipping back one point to close at a Christmas Eve loss. Traders on the London Stock Exchange downed tools at 12:30pm on Friday to mark Christmas Eve, while exchanges across much of Europe were closed. Markets have been boosted in recent days by data suggesting that the latest variant of concern, Omicron, is not as severe as previously thought. British Airways owner International Airlines Group was among the biggest gainers, up 1.9%, while hotels group Intercontinental also edged up by 1.2% – both are particularly sensitive to pandemic restrictions. The cautious optimism around Omicron has helped the FTSE 100 to gain 4.4% so far during December. That would be its best month since November 2020, when news of Pfizer’s first successful vaccine prompted a global rally. The morning rally left the FTSE just shy of its closing point on Friday 21 February 2020 of 7,403.92 – the day Italy imposed a lockdown in the regions of Lombardy and Padua, sending markets around the world plummeting when they reopened the next Monday. The value of the FTSE 100 companies dropped by £62bn that day. Investors look out for a “Santa rally” on markets at the end of the year, as the low volumes combine with other factors that may include end-of-year portfolio adjustments. The S&amp;P 500, Wall Street’s benchmark, appeared to catch that mood with a fresh record high on Thursday, although the positive sentiment faded on the FTSE 100 on Friday. Fawad Razaqzada, an analyst at ThinkMarkets, an investment website, said markets had rallied in the last week thanks to optimism over Omicron. People with the variant are estimated to be between 31% and 45% less likely to attend A&amp;E compared with the Delta variant, and 50% to 70% less likely to be require admission to hospital, the UK Health Security Agency reported on Thursday. Razaqzada said: “Judging by the stock market rally this week, it appears as though investors are still confident that the ongoing recovery from the pandemic recession can survive the Omicron wave.” Chris Beauchamp, an analyst at IG, a trading platform, said: “The FTSE 100 has not had as stellar a year as some, but the recovery to 7,400 today puts it in good stead for the year ahead, and means a run at the pre-pandemic highs could still be possible if Omicron concerns can be kept under control and earnings continue to recover in the fashion they have throughout 2021.”The bearded Graham Potter increasingly looks like a young, dishy Captain Birdseye but his side cannot catch a win. Brighton have not tasted victory since September and their failure to convert chances has come back to bite them after a strong start to the season. Brentford are level on points with Brighton but in better form, with two wins and two draws in their last five league games, and have Ivan Toney back in action up front. The good news for Brighton is that Brentford can be vulnerable, having conceded eight total goals in three games against Newcastle, Norwich and Burnley. But Brighton need to start turning their possession stats into goals and fast. Alex Reid Boxing Day 8pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Amex Stadium Last season n/a Odds H 10-11 A 3-1 D 9-4 Referee Andrew Madley This season G8 Y14 R2 2.25 cards/game BRIGHTON Subs from Scherpen, Steele, Webster, Connolly, Mac Allister, Mwepu, Lallana, Welbeck, Locadia, Burn Doubtful Veltman (fatigue) Injured Dunk (knee, 14 Jan), Sarmiento (hamstring, May) Suspended Bissouma (one match) Form DLDDDL Discipline Y37 R1 Leading scorer Maupay 6 BRENTFORD Subs from Raya, Thompson, Forss, Wissa, Ghoddos, Onyeka, Valencia, Mbuemo, Jeanvier, Peart-Harris, Baptiste, Bidstrup, Roerslev, Zamburek, Racic Doubtful None Injured Ajer (hamstring, 2 Jan), Martin (knee, Mar), Dasilva (hip, unknown), Fosu-Henry (hamstring, unknown), Goode (hamstring, unknown), Jørgensen (knock, unknown) Suspended None Form LDWLDW Discipline Y33 R1 Leading scorer Toney 4There is a moment when a never-ending crisis turns into a way of life. This seems to be the case with the pandemic. If so, it’s wise to explore the permanent condition in which it has left us. One obvious lesson is that societies have to learn once again to live with pathogens, just as they learned to when microbes were first made visible by the discoveries of Louis Pasteur and Robert Koch. These discoveries were concerned with only one aspect of microbial life. When you also consider the various sciences of the earth system, another aspect of viruses and bacteria comes to the fore. During the long geochemical history of the earth, microbes, together with fungi and plants, have been essential, and are still essential, to the very composition of the environment in which we humans live. The pandemic has shown us that we will never escape the invasive presence of these living beings, entangled as we are with them. They react to our actions; if they mutate, we have to mutate as well. This is why the many national lockdowns, imposed on citizens to help them survive the virus, are a powerful analogy for the situation in which humanity finds itself detained for good. Lockdown was painful enough, and yet many ways have been found, thanks in part to vaccination, to allow people to resume a semblance of normal life. But there is no possibility of such a resumption if you consider that all living forms are locked down for good inside the limits of the earth. And by “earth” I don’t mean the planet as it can be seen from space, but its very superficial pellicle, the shallow layer of earth in which we live, and which has been transformed into a habitable milieu by the aeons-long labour of evolution. This thin matrix is what geochemists call the “critical zone”, the only layer of earth where terrestrial life can flourish. It’s in this finite space where everything we care for and everything we have ever encountered exists. There is no way of escaping our earth-bound existence; as young climate activists shout: “There is no planet B.” Here is the connection between the Covid lockdowns we have experienced in the past two years, and the much larger but definitive state of lockdown that we find ourselves in: we are trapped in an environment that we have already altered irreversibly. If we have been made aware of the agency of viruses in shaping our social relations, we must now reckon with the fact that they will also be moulded for ever by the climate crisis and the quick reactions of ecosystems to our actions. The feeling that we live in a new space appears again at the local as well as the global level. Why would all nations convene in Glasgow to keep global temperature rises below some agreed upon limit, if they did not have the sensation that a huge lid had been put over their territory? When you look up at the blue sky, are you not aware that you are now under some sort of dome inside which you are locked? Gone is the infinite space; now you are responsible for the safety of this overbearing dome as much as you are for your own health and wealth. It weighs on you, body and soul. To survive under these new conditions we have to undergo a sort of metamorphosis. This is where politics enters. It is very difficult for most people used to the industrialised way of life, with its dream of infinite space and its insistence on emancipation and relentless growth and development, to suddenly sense that it is instead enveloped, confined, tucked inside a closed space where their concerns have to be shared with new entities: other people of course, but also viruses, soils, coal, oil, water, and, worst of all, this damned, constantly shifting climate. This disorienting shift is unprecedented, even cosmological, and it is already a source of deep political divisions. Although the sentence “you and I don’t live on the same planet” used to be a joking expression of dissent, it has become true of our present reality. We do live on different planets, with rich people employing private fire fighters and scouting for climate bunkers, while their poorer counterparts are forced to migrate, suffer and die amid the worst consequences of the crisis. This is why it is important not to misconstrue the political conundrum of our present age. It is of the same magnitude as when, from the 17th century onward, westerners had to shift from the closed cosmos of the past to the infinite space of the modern period. As the cosmos seemed to open, political institutions had to be invented to work through the new and utopian possibilities offered by the Enlightenment. Now, in reverse, the same task falls to present generations: what new political institutions could they invent to cope with people so divided that they belong to different planets? It would be a mistake to believe that the pandemic is a crisis that will end, instead of the perfect warning for what is coming, what I call the new climatic regime. It appears that all the resources of science, humanities and the arts will have to be mobilised once again to shift attention to our shared terrestrial condition. Bruno Latour is a philosopher and anthropologist, the author of After Lockdown: A Metamorphosis and the winner of the 2013 Holberg prizePep Guardiola has raised the prospect of a general strike in protest at the punishing schedule – an idea the managers of less well-resourced clubs may find amusing coming from him – and judging by results there is little evidence that City are struggling to cope. Since a shock 2-0 reverse against Crystal Palace at the end of October the Premier League champions have scored 31 times in 11 matches and will face a Leicester side who have leaked a worrying number of goals against higher-calibre opposition this season. Jamie Vardy is always a threat and scored twice against Liverpool in the Carabao Cup on Wednesday, but City are odds-on favourites for a ninth straight league win. Luke McLaughlin Boxing Day 3pm Venue Etihad Stadium Last season Manchester City 2 Leicester 5 Odds H 1-5 A 16-1 D 7-1 Referee Chris Kavanagh This season G8 Y35 R2 4.88 cards/game MANCHESTER CITY Subs from Carson, Steffen, Walker, Stones, Aké, Grealish, Silva, Fernandinho, Kayky, Foden, Delap, Palmer Doubtful Walker (match fitness) Injured Torres (foot, 1 Jan) Suspended None Form WWWWWW Discipline Y27 R1 Leading scorer Silva 7 LEICESTER Subs from Jakupovic, Ward, Justin, Soyuncu, Bertrand, Evans, Albrighton, Iheanacho, Pérez, Amartey, Choudhury, Pereira, Daley-Campbell, Dewsbury-Hall, Mendy, Daka, Benkovic, Lookman Doubtful Choudhury (Covid), Daley-Campbell (Covid), Evans (hamstring), Justin (match fitness), Pereira (knock), Soyuncu (hamstring), Vardy (hamstring) Injured Fofana (broken leg, Feb) Suspended None Form DLWDLW Discipline Y23 R1 Leading scorer Vardy 9The actor and director James Franco has been accused of being “completely insensitive” and of causing “immense pain and suffering” after an interview made public on Wednesday in which he admitted to sleeping with students at his acting school and claimed that he suffered from sex addiction. A statement from lawyers representing two women who brought a civil suit against Franco in 2019 said that Franco, who made comments on SiriusXM’s Jess Cagle Podcast, was “completely insensitive to, and still apparently does not care about, the immense pain and suffering he put his victims through”. The statement added: “[Franco] continues to downplay the survivors’ experiences and ignore their pain, despite acknowledging he had no business starting such a school in the first place … It was, and is, despicable conduct.” In June 2021, Franco settled a class action suit for $2.2m (£1.64m) after the two women, Sarah Tither-Kaplan and Toni Gaal, filed a complaint against the actor, accusing him of fraud, after Tither-Kaplan and several other women aired claims of sexual exploitation in a 2018 Los Angeles Times article. Both women received substantial sums in the settlement, alongside other students of Franco’s Studio 4 film school, which was set up in 2014 and closed in 2017. In his Jess Cagle Podcast interview, Franco said he “did sleep with students, and that was wrong” and denied that he had started the school to lure women for sexual purposes.America’s longest running oil spill dispute is close to a resolution after a Louisiana-based energy firm has agreed to a proposed multi-million dollar settlement. Taylor Energy agreed to pay more than $43m in clean-up costs, civil penalties and natural resource damage, and transfer a $432m clean-up trust fund to the Department of Interior, according to a proposed settlement announced by the Department of Justice. The proposed agreement stems from more than a dozen Taylor Energy-owned wells in the Mississippi Canyon area of the Gulf of Mexico that began leaking after a production platform was damaged by Hurricane Ivan in 2004. The pipeline has lost hundreds of thousands of gallons of oil, and continues to leak. “Offshore operators cannot allow oil to spill into our nation’s waters,” said Todd Kim, assistant attorney general for the DoJ’senvironment and natural resources division, adding: “If an oil spill occurs, the responsible party must cooperate with the government to timely address the problem and pay for the cleanup.” As part of the settlement, Taylor Energy will withdraw three existing lawsuits it filed against the government and will not be required to admit “any liability to the United States or the State arising out of the MC-20 Incident.” The agreement will now put before a court’s review and approval. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s national ocean service, said in a statement that the “settlement represents an important down payment” to the costs of the environmental clean-up. “Millions of Americans along the Gulf Coast depend on healthy coastal ecosystems. Noaa and our co-trustees look forward to working in partnership with the National Pollution Funds Center to ensure the region and the ecosystem can recover from this ongoing tragedy,” said Nicole LeBoeuf, national ocean service director The spill began 17 years ago when a cluster of pipes connecting sixteen wells off the Louisiana coast were damaged by a subsea mudslide caused by the toppling of a Taylor production platform by hurricane winds. The company plugged nine wells but has said it cannot plug the rest. The Coast Guard said a system had captured and removed more than 800,000 gallons of oil since April 2019. Taylor Energy sold its oil and gas assets in 2008, according to its website. The trust fund will be created to plug the wells, as well as to permanently decommission the platform and clean contaminated soil. The agreement, if approved, will also settle a series of legal disputes over the costs of the clean-up. “Despite being a catalyst for beneficial environmental technological innovation, the damage to our ecosystem caused by this 17-year-old oil spill is unacceptable,” said Duane Evans, US attorney for the eastern district of Louisiana.Six of the nine runners for the King George VI Chase on Boxing Day have at least one Grade One win to their name already and five are expected to start single-figure odds, so the 2021 running of Kempton Park’s showpiece event has fair claims to be not only the strongest renewal this century but also the most competitive. Two serious contenders from Ireland - including Minella Indo, last season’s Gold Cup winner – add to the depth in a race that has not crossed the water since Kicking King’s second win in 2005, and Rachael Blackmore’s mount is priced up alongside Clan Des Obeaux, the King George winner in 2018 and 2019, at around 3-1 as the market struggles to find an outright favourite. Frodon and Bryony Frost, who led all the way last year to win at 20-1, will go off at around 6-1 this time around, as will Chantry House, a dual Grade One winner as a novice last season. Asterion Forlonge, Saint Calvados and the mercurial Lostintranslation also arrive at Kempton with a chance on the pick of their form, so the only guarantee this year is that finding the winner on Sunday afternoon will be well worth the effort. Anyone who simply wants to back the best horse need look no further than Minella Indo, who is 3lb in front of Clan Des Obeaux on the official numbers and 5lb ahead according to the much-respected Timeform organisation. Finding the best bet in the race, however, is a different puzzle entirely, as Minella Indo’s best form has come at Cheltenham and he needed every yard of the extended three-and-a-quarter miles to get the better of A Plus Tard in the Gold Cup. Sunday’s race is a very different test, and while Blackmore has a rare talent for adapting her tactics to suit the situation at hand, Minella Indo was only fourth in the Irish Gold Cup over three miles in February and was a beaten favourite too – behind Frodon - on his seasonal debut at Down Royal in October. Henry de Bromhead’s chaser was fully entitled to need that run after a 225-day break but he still makes more appeal at 5-1 for the Gold Cup in March than he does for Sunday’s race at 3-1. Clan Des Obeaux is the opposite, a horse who is ideally suited to Sunday’s track and trip and highly unlikely even to get an entry in the Gold Cup. He is now almost 10, however, was below his best behind Frodon 12 months ago and has not seen a racecourse since Punchestown in April. Paul Nicholls has saddled a dozen King George winners and has no equals when it comes to getting a horse fit first time up, but a nine-year-old Clan Des Obeaux’s best may no longer be quite enough. Frodon and Frost were worthy winners last season and will again be very difficult to overhaul in the straight if they can settle into their usual rhythm. But they are unlikely to be allowed such an easy time of it in front and this also looks like a stronger race. The juice has been squeezed out of Chantry’s House’s odds in recent days and he has too much to find with the principals to be of any interest at around 5-1. As a result, the price that leaps out at the likely odds is the 7-1 about Asterion Forlonge (3.05). Willie Mullins’s seven-year-old made a slow start over fences, falling in two of his first three chase starts, but his 14-length win off 152 in a handicap at Punchestown in April was backed up by an excellent time and he looked a very likely winner when he unseated Bryan Cooper three out in a strong renewal of the John Durkan at the same track earlier this month. The grey’s jumping had been sound to that point, as it was when he won in the spring, and he also seems well suited to a right-handed track. He looks overpriced to give Mullins his second King George winner, 20 years on from his first win with Florida Pearl. Kempton Park 1.20 Jacamar is still winless after three starts over fences but has shown something to work on in all three. He was clear of two previous winners at Wincanton last time, has cheekpieces applied to help his concentration and looks too big as the outsider of the field at around 14-1. Kempton Park 1.55 A fascinating head-to-head in prospect between Ahoy Senor and Bravemansgame, the best staying novices of the season so far. At the likely odds, marginal preference is for Lucinda Russell’s six-year-old, who stormed 31 length clear of the runner-up at Newbury last time. Wetherby 2.10 Debece has shown glimmers of real class at times in a stop-start career and could be worth chancing first time up after a second wind op over the summer. Kempton Park 2.30 Not So Sleepy and Epatante dead-heated for the Fighting Fifth at Newcastle in November and there should be little to choose between them again here. Drying ground may just tip the balance towards Nicky Henderson’s mare.Known as the masterplanner of the successful 1992 Olympics in Barcelona, the architect Oriol Bohigas, who has died aged 95, was a fierce defender of urban planning as a political and social act. He played a critical role in the cultural and political life of his city, influencing generations of urban theorists and practitioners. As leader of Barcelona’s urban planning department in the mid-1980s, Bohigas conceptualised and implemented the “Barcelona model” that formed the urban backbone to the city’s Olympics. This event and its lasting legacy put the grey, debilitated but fiercely independent city, punished by decades of Francoism, firmly on the international map. Twenty years later, the Barcelona model informed London’s approach of using the Olympic Games as an opportunity to create an integrated piece of city with housing and amenities for the capital’s more deprived neighbourhoods. With the death of Franco in 1975, Barcelona had grasped the opportunity to democratise and modernise. Working closely with the first socialist mayors of the post-Franco era, Narcís Serra and Pasqual Maragall, Bohigas created the intellectual and spatial armature for its transformation. He was committed to innovation through continuity rather than aggressive rupture and restructuring, and recognised that the public spaces of the city – the pavements, streets, squares, parks, beaches and waterways – should be at the heart of a democratic vision of the contemporary city. Bohigas built on the canonical work of the father of modern urbanism, Ildefonso Cerdà, who in the mid-19th century had created a plan for the growing city with an elegant and functional diagonal grid known as the Eixample. With its tree-lined avenues and pedestrian friendly ramblas, generous public spaces and community parks, Cerdà’s Grid served the city well. Bohigas re-interpreted this model for the 20th century, upgrading the public realm, intensifying its local neighbourhoods and reuniting the city with its seafront on the Mediterranean. “Monumentalise the periphery; functionalise the centre” was Bohigas’ linguistically obtuse slogan for re-energising Barcelona. This translated into a focused programme of interventions that gave dignity to deprived neighbourhoods – such as the working-class district of Poble Nou – and made the dense inner-city districts more liveable, with pocket parks, markets, play areas and local amenities. In the space of two decades much was achieved. In recognition of this collective effort, the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) broke with tradition in 1999 and awarded the City of Barcelona – and not an individual or group of architects – the royal gold medal. Bohigas was one of five individuals singled out in the citation. Equally sharp in manner of speech and dress – he spoke in short, staccato sentences delivered with rasping gravitas and wore immacutely ironed shirts, linen jackets and colourful socks – Bohigas had the air of a fin-de-siècle aesthete but the mind of a pragmatist. He was outspoken, often pugnacious, but always with a glint in his eye. He was keen to get things done, and resigned as elected councillor in charge of culture in 1991 when he felt Maragall was too slow in implementing one of his pet projects for neighbourhood libraries. Born in Barcelona, Oriol was the son of middle-class Catalan intellectuals, Maria Guardiola and Pere Bohigas, a professor of linguistics. His high school friend Josep Martorell convinced him to enrol in 1943 at Barcelona’s school of architecture, ETSAB, which he would go on to lead as director from 1977 to 1980. In his 30s, he formed the militantly pro-modern R Group and had the temerity to write to the architect Mies van der Rohe to propose the reconstruction of his elegantly minimalist Barcelona Pavilion, which had been designed for the 1929 International Exposition and torn down the following year. Happily, this plan was realised in 1986 and the reconstructed modern masterpiece stands in Montjuïc Park. With Martorell and David Mackay, Bohigas formed MBM Arquitectes, one of Spain’s most successful design practices, with a significant portfolio of public and private buildings that adhered to the principles of low-key, contextual modernism. Their buildings prioritised the relationship to the city rather than gymnastic self-promotion. For example, their design for the 1992 Olympic Village is memorable for the way in which the layout of the urban blocks opens out towards the sea, reconnecting the old city with its waterfont. Bohigas provided the critical intellectual and theoretical underpinning to the practice. He was a founding member of the publisher Edicions 62, an editor of the journal Arquitecturas Bis (1974-85) and chair of the Fundació Joan Miró museum (1981-88). He published more than 15 books, including Barcelona Entre el Pla Cerdà i el Barraquisme (1963, Barcelona Between the Cerdà Plan and Shanty-towns ). He argued strongly for the social responsibility of the architect. In a letter addressed to a member of the urban planning commission of Barcelona city council in 1964, he made his view explicit: “To be an urban planner is to begin to be a socialist now.” Together with the director of urban projects of Barcelona city council, Josep Acebillo, Bohigas was responsible for selecting some of the most talented final-year students - the so-called “golden pencils” – from the ETSAB architecture school and giving them responsibility for coming up with ideas for individual city districts. He also played an important role in attracting international figures, from Arata Isozaki to Frank Gehry, to build in Barcelona and giving opportunities to locally trained, younger architects to make their mark on its urban landscape. Bohigas believed that the cumulative effect of small, “punctual” projects – often referred to as urban “acupuncture” – could be more effective than large-scale, complex initiatives that took years to implement and required budgets that did not exist in Spain’s fragile early democracy. This approach can be seen as a precursor to the current vogue for “tactical urbanism”, whereby small-scale improvements – pavement widening, outdoor seating, street closures, tree-planting – are implemented quickly and on a temporary basis in close cooperation with local communities. In the 1960s and 70s, Bohigas was associated with Gauche Divine, a group of left-leaning intellectual bourgeois artists, film-makers, philosophers and artists who met regularly at the Boccaccio discotheque in Barcelona. Their spirit shaped not only his professional but also his social life. In the late 1970s, Bohigas and his partner, the landscape architect Beth Galí, turned their apartment in Plaça Reial – in what was then a run-down area of the old city – into a salon of international cultural exchange and heated debates on city politics. Bohigas, often accompanied by whiskey and a cigar, would argue deep into the night with professionals and politicians of different generations and persuasions in one of the most beautiful squares at the very heart of his beloved city. He is survived by Beth; by his wife, Isabel Arnau, from whom he was separated, and their five children, Josep, Gloria, María, Eulalia and Pere, nine grandchildren and a great-granddaughter. • Oriol Bohigas i Guardiola, architect, born 20 December 1925; died 30 November 2021The most widespread symptoms of the Omicron variant now match those of common colds, with calls for the government to update its public health messaging to include a wider number of likely Covid symptoms. The most common symptoms reported among users of the Zoe Covid app have been a running nose, headaches, fatigue, sneezing and sore throats, according to the study’s most recent analysis of confirmed cases in London. Half of those reporting cold-like symptoms also tested positive for Covid, with no clear difference in the symptoms reported for Delta or Omicron infections. But only about half of infected users also reported the “classic three symptoms of fever, cough, or loss of sense of smell or taste”, according to the Zoe analysis. The Zoe analysis was supported by the Sage committee of scientific advisers at a meeting held on Thursday. The committee said there was “preliminary evidence” of changes in symptoms accompanying Omicron infections, as loss of taste or smell “seem to be reported less frequently”. Prof Tim Spector, lead scientist on the Zoe Covid study, said public messaging needed to acknowledge that Covid symptoms would appear more like a common cold to many of those infected. Spector said he was shocked by what he called “misinformation” in the government’s latest stay-at-home guidance about the symptoms of Covid. “Zoe data clearly shows that the most important symptoms are no longer a new continuous cough, a high temperature or loss of taste or smell. “For most people, an Omicron positive case will feel much more like the common cold, starting with a sore throat, runny nose and a headache. You only need to ask a friend who has recently tested positive to find this out,” Spector, a professor of genetic epidemiology at King’s College London, told the PA news agency. “We need to change public messaging urgently to save lives as half of people with cold-like symptoms now have Covid.” The NHS website currently lists the “main symptoms of coronavirus” as a high temperature; a new, continuous cough including coughing a lot for more than an hour; a loss or change to your sense of smell or taste. It advises people with any of the three symptoms to get a PCR test as soon as possible and self-isolate. Peter Openshaw, professor of experimental medicine at Imperial College London speaking in a personal capacity, said there was evidence that the virus was changing the way it behaved, in terms of cells that it infected, leading to changing symptoms. Recent data, including a study from Hong Kong, found that Omicron was less able to infect deep lung tissue but more able to infect higher bronchial tissue. “It appears to be shifting towards a virus that infects higher up in the respiratory tract and is therefore adapting to be more transmissible partly because it is changing the cell types it infects,” Openshaw said. “That would go along with it producing more common-cold-like symptoms. Those laboratory studies support what the Zoe app is telling us.” Openshaw said it would be “sensible” to update the list of Covid symptoms: “The semi-lockdown has been terrible for colds, they are struggling to survive. So if you have a cold at the moment, there’s about a 50% chance that it is actually Covid.”A Covid outbreak in the Norwich squad means Dean Smith’s side have not played since 14 December and the disheartening 2-0 home loss to his former club Aston Villa. Arsenal have played three times in all competitions since then and won all three, with Emile Smith Rowe in rich form and the squad apparently not rattled by Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang’s exile from the first team. Smith’s stated aim on taking over at Norwich was to make Carrow Road a harder place to visit – and Arsenal have struggled on the road, losing five out of nine away league games this season. A sliver of hope for the hosts among the gloom. Alex Reid Boxing Day 3pm Venue Carrow Road Last season n/a Odds H 7-1 A 2-5 D 7-2 Referee Graham Scott This season G6 Y22 R0 3.67 cards/game NORWICH Subs from Gunn, McGovern, Byram, Kabak, Rupp, Tzolis, Lees-Melou, Sargent, Mumba, Giannoulis, Idah Doubtful Lees-Melou (match fitness), Normann (groin), Rupp (match fitness), Sargent (match fitness), Tzolis (match fitness) Injured Rashica (groin, 1 Jan), Hanley (shoulder, 15 Jan), Omobamidele (back, 15 Jan), Zimmermann (ankle, 15 Jan) Suspended None Form WDDLLL Discipline Y32 R1 Leading scorer Pukki 5 ARSENAL Subs from Leno, Okonkwo, Smith Rowe, Maitland-Niles, Holding, Tomiyasu, Pépé, Tavares, Elneny, Balogun, Nketiah, Aubameyang Doubtful Maitland-Niles (illness), Tomiyasu (knock) Injured Chambers (Covid, 1 Jan), Sambi Lokonga (Covid, 1 Jan), Marí (Covid, 1 Jan), Kolasinac (ankle, 16 Jan) Suspended None Form WLLWWW Discipline Y27 R1 Leading scorer Smith Rowe 7My mother, Shirley Wright, who has died aged 85, lived life to the full, travelling widely and completing a Shakespeare master’s as a mature student, despite a difficult start in life. Born in Chatham, Kent, to Kathleen (nee Hardie) and Alfonso Martinez Revasse (anglicised from Rivas), Shirley spent her early years accompanying her mother, who worked as a housekeeper, to various locations in Kent, London and Bath. From the ages of five until 10 her father was absent as a wartime Desert Rat in Egypt. Shirley described her confusion when on his return she enquired of this unrecognisable person: “Are you my daddy?” Recently she talked about how proud she felt walking through Rochester with her father, so handsome in his army uniform. She somehow succeeded in surviving and overcoming the ill-effects of a difficult relationship with her mother and a lonely childhood. After Wimbledon county grammar school for girls, she went on to grab life with both hands, and to keep holding on and embracing every moment with enthusiasm and passion. Shirley had several jobs, her longest-standing being senior secretary in the office of the department of education at Sussex University. The role we most enjoyed talking about was when she worked at a jewellery shop in the West End and used to transport precious gems by train in secret around the country by sewing them into her bra. In 1959, she married Alan Wright, whom she met at a youth club at Merton Park, south London, when she was 15 and he was 17. They lived in London, then moved to Cambridge where Alan taught at the Leys school; Shirley had a secretarial job and was also involved in Leys school life. In 1964, they went to the US on an exchange programme organised by the English-Speaking Union; my dad swapping roles with an American teacher in Princeton, where they spent about 18 months, travelling extensively. Back in the UK, they moved briefly to Hove in East Sussex before buying a house in nearby Kingston in 1968. Their final move was to Lewes in 1982. Shirley had a sharp intelligence and astonishing recall, both of which seemed to improve as she got older. She had many interests, and devoured books, plays, music and films. After graduating with an BA in cultural studies from Sussex in 1998, she went on to complete an MA in Shakespeare studies at Birmingham University’s Shakespeare Institute in Stratford-upon-Avon. These endeavours gave her huge pleasure and enabled her to finally accept how insightful she was. As age reduced my parents’ sphere of activity, the Depot cinema in Lewes became their favourite cultural location, a cherished home from home. They accumulated an amazing number of friends at every phase of their life. We met people they knew wherever we went. We still do. Shirley is survived by Alan, their children, Judith, Richard and me, and grandchildren, Millie, Niamh, Emily and Oliver.Disruption to train services is causing headaches for people making late dashes to spend Christmas with family and friends. National Rail had reported issues with at least a dozen operators, including strike action affecting services across Scotland and several parts of England. The Rail, Maritime and Transport union (RMT) said a strike by its members who were train managers and senior conductors at CrossCountry was being “solidly supported in all depots”. The action means the company is running a heavily reduced Christmas Eve service, with no trains operating between Aberdeen and Edinburgh; Glasgow Central and Edinburgh; Derby and Nottingham; Leicester and Stansted airport; Cheltenham Spa and Cardiff Central; Newton Abbot and Paignton; or Plymouth and Penzance. A limited service is in place between Edinburgh and Plymouth; Manchester Piccadilly and Bournemouth; and Birmingham New Street and Leicester. The cancellation of train services because of Covid-related staff shortages continues across operators, with LNER, CrossCountry, Avanti West Coast, Northern, ScotRail, Southern, Thameslink and TransPennine Express among those affected. This is involving a combination of planned and short-notice cancellations. Kelly Jones, who was travelling between Bath and Cornwall, said she had been left “cold, stranded and scrambling” to find her way home for Christmas. The 24-year-old told the BBC she was trying to get back to see her siblings after their dad died earlier this year. “This will be our first Christmas without him so I didn’t need this stress. I was given no notification of the cancellation until I [was] midway through my journey, trying to catch a connecting train in Bristol. “This has left me cold, stranded and scrambling to find my way to see my family for Christmas. I do not blame the train drivers themselves. They are striking for better work conditions and to cause disruption to get change – I just wish I had been notified.” With millions of people expected to make journeys on the UK’s roads on Christmas Eve, National Highways has reported severe congestion near Birmingham. The AA estimated there would be 17.8m cars on UK roads on Friday. According to the RAC and the traffic information supplier Inrix, the worst queues were expected in Wiltshire on the A303 between West Solstice Park and the A36. National Highways reported severe congestion on the M6 between junctions 5 and 6 near Birmingham on Friday morning. Thousands of people also learned their Christmas holidays would be cancelled owing to Covid restrictions imposed by their destination countries. The winter sports operator Crystal Ski pulled its trips to Austria departing on 27 December after the introduction of tougher entry requirements because of the Omicron variant. Austria announced on Wednesday that UK arrivals would be required to quarantine for 10 days from Saturday unless they were fully vaccinated, including a booster jab, and had evidence of a recent negative PCR test. Pandemic restrictions across Europe led MSC Cruises to cancel four sailings from the UK by its ship the Magnifica. The cruises, which were due to depart from Southampton on 21 and 28 December and 4 and 11 January, were to call at France, Germany and the Netherlands. The Netherlands has been put into lockdown until at least mid-January, while Germany has joined France in prohibiting UK tourists.Two married NHS A&amp;E doctors will spend Christmas Day together on the high seas as they race across the Atlantic to raise money for charity. Adam Baker and Charlie Fleury, both 31, are competing in the Talisker Whisky Atlantic Challenge and will row 3,000 miles (4,800km) over the course of more than 40 days in a 24ft boat called Percy – short for Persistence. They will be up against 35 other crews in what is hailed as the “world’s toughest rowing race”. They are likely to row about 1.5m strokes, burn in excess of 5,000 calories a day each and battle 30ft waves before they reach the finish line at English Harbour in Antigua in the Caribbean. The trip will mark the first time in six years the pair have both been “off” for Christmas at the same time. However, there will be little chance of them being able to rest or indulge in festive treats. Instead, the couple will take it in turns to row Percy, swapping every two hours around the clock. Baker said he was “looking forward to pushing through our perceived mental barriers and taking on the extremes of the ocean”. Fleury said: “It has been incredibly hard to keep the momentum going despite being so mentally fatigued with work pressures, but what good practice to prepare for this ultra-endurance challenge.” It is quite an ambition given that the longest the couple had rowed together before they set off was just five days. But they say their role as A&amp;E doctors at the Royal Devon and Exeter hospital will have prepared them for the challenges ahead and that being a husband and wife team is an advantage. Baker, who previously suffered from sea sickness, said it was his wife’s idea to take part after she went on a polar expedition in Norway, camping under the northern lights in -20C temperatures. When their sailing challenge was delayed for a year because of their commitments during the Covid-19 pandemic he used the time to research sea sickness cures so he could join her. The pair have set their sights on raising £100,000 for the Devon air ambulance, the RD&amp;E charity, which supports the Royal Devon and Exeter NHS foundation trust, the RNLI and Mind. They are also hoping to use their experience to help research into how ultra-endurance sporting events affect men and women differently. Keeping their energy up during the race, which set off on 12 December from La Gomera in the Canary Islands, has also taken some research. Their food for the trip comprises mainly lightweight, calorie-dense foods that can be stomached at sea and snacks including nuts, crisps, nut butters, protein powder and chocolate bars. Aside from their nutritional needs, the couple have credited Harry Potter audiobooks with helping them power on in their endeavour, tweeting author JK Rowling to acknowledge the books’ “powerful magical” effects. Encounters with the natural world have also been keeping their spirits lifted. In an Instagram video, Fleury recalled how “a couple of orcas” came to visit their boat and then a little while later a pod of five with a young orca also came to say hello. “It was really, really magical and was definitely an early Christmas present which was awesome,” she said. Under the team name Emergensea Duo, the couple will attempt to break the mixed pairs record for the crossing, which they state on their website is 43 days, 15 hours and 22 minutes. In 2012, the husband and wife team Helena and Richard Smalman-Smith made a crossing to Barbados in just over 75 days.That’s all for today. Hope you have a lovely festive break, and that Santa pays his traditional visit (although he didn’t linger long in the London stock market today!). Here are today’s stories: Merry Christmas! GW Last-minute shopper numbers are sharply down on their pre-pandemic levels today, although retailers are busier than last year. Data analysts Springboard report that retail footfall this morning was 21% lower than on Christmas Eve 2019, just before the pandemic, showing the impact of the omicron variant on retailers. But it’s 30% busier than Christmas Eve 2020 when non-essential shops in parts of the country had been forced to close, and vaccines hadn’t yet been rolled out. Retail footfall up to noon was 13.9% higher than a week ago. But struggling high streets have only seen a 6.7% weekly jump, while retail parks are 23.6% busier and shopping centres have nearly 20% more customers. Footfall in Central London has plunged by 30% week-on-week, reflecting that many more office workers are at home, perhaps cutting their social contact ahead of Christmas Day meet-ups. In city centres outside London, footfall was 10% lower than last week. Springboard says: The increased activity in retail parks today will in part be due to trips for food and grocery products as the majority of retail parks have a food store. However, since the start of Covid, retail parks has consistently been more resilient in retaining shoppers as they are large open spaces, with large stores which make shoppers feel safer and less nervous. Their shopper numbers throughout this period have been boosted by the presence of food stores, as despite the growth of online food shopping, it only peaked at 11% of total retail spend and is now at around 10%. The UK’s benchmark stock market index hit a 22-month high on Friday, coming within touching distance of the levels seen in February 2020 just before stock markets around the world were sent into a tailspin by the first European lockdown, my colleague Jasper Jolly reports. The FTSE 100 hit an intra-day high of 7,403.65 points – surpassing the previous post-lockdown high that it hit last month – before slipping back one point to close at a Christmas Eve loss. Traders on the London Stock Exchange downed tools at 12:30pm on Friday to mark Christmas Eve, while exchanges across much of Europe were closed. Markets have been boosted in recent days by data suggesting that the latest variant of concern, Omicron, is not as severe as previously thought. British Airways owner International Airlines Group was among the biggest gainers, up 1.9%, while hotels group Intercontinental also edged up by 1.2% – both are particularly sensitive to pandemic restrictions. The cautious optimism around Omicron has helped the FTSE 100 to gain 4.4% so far during December. That would be its best month since November 2020, when news of Pfizer’s first successful vaccine prompted a global rally. The morning rally left the FTSE just shy of its closing point on Friday 21 February 2020 of 7,403.92 – the day Italy imposed a lockdown in the regions of Lombardy and Padua, sending markets around the world plummeting when they reopened the next Monday. The value of the FTSE 100 companies dropped by £62bn that day. Investors look out for a “Santa rally” on markets at the end of the year, as the low volumes combine with other factors that may include end-of-year portfolio adjustments. The S&amp;P 500, Wall Street’s benchmark, appeared to catch that mood with a fresh record high on Thursday, although the positive sentiment faded on the FTSE 100 on Friday. Some late news: asset management group Apollo is acquiring UK housebuilder Miller Homes, which builds family homes in England and Scotland. They’ve struck a deal to buy Miller from current owner Bridgepoint Group. Financial terms aren’t disclosed. Miller is on track for a record 2021; it builds approximately 4,000 homes a year across nine regions and hopes to grow to 6,000 per year. The government is planning to send out a UK-wide mobile alert urging the public to get a Covid booster, a move mobile operators fear could spark a backlash from customers opposed to vaccinations, my colleague Mark Sweney reports. The UK’s biggest mobile operators – EE, O2, Vodafone and Three UK – have been asked by the government to send a message on Boxing Day. The campaign, in which mobile operators would send a message on behalf of the government to their tens of millions of customers, is understood to have not yet been given final signoff. The message is likely to be on behalf of the NHS, with the text encouraging all adults to get an additional vaccination. The proposed copy of the text message will say: “Get boosted now. Every adult needs a Covid-19 booster vaccine to protect against Omicron. Get your Covid-19 vaccine or booster. See NHS website for details.” It is understood that the mobile operators will all enable the message to be sent, but some are agreeing with reluctance given the highly politicised nature of the vaccination programme. “Operators feel a little nervous about angering some customers because it is such a heated issue,” a telecoms industry source said. “We will make it happen, but don’t want those who don’t agree with the message to blame us.” Here’s the full story: The London stock market is now closed until next Wednesday (the Christmas Day and Boxing Day holidays will be marked on Monday and Tuesday). And despite slipping back in late trading, the FTSE 100 could still post its best month in just over a year. Here’s Reuters take: Shares of heavyweight banks including HSBC, Barclays, Standard Chartered and Lloyds Group have all benefited after the Bank of England raised its interest rate to 0.25% from a record low of 0.1% (last week) for the first time since the pandemic. “The FTSE 100 has not had as stellar a year as some, but the recovery of 7,400 today puts it in good stead for the year ahead,” said Chris Beauchamp, chief market analyst at IG Group. “A run at the pre-pandemic highs could still be possible if Omicron concerns can be kept under control and earnings continue to recover in the fashion they have throughout 2021.” The mid-cap index was subdued at the close on Friday but logged its strongest week since early August, as travel and leisure stocks rose strongly in December. Here’s a chart showing the wild swing in European gas prices this week: The fabled Santa Rally didn’t hold across the channel either. France’s CAC index of the 40 largest listed companies in Paris fell 0.3%, away from the record highs set in November. Amsterdam’s AEX index lost 0.2%, while other bourses were already on holiday for Christmas..... We’re into the closing stock market auction.... and the rally has rather fizzled out. The FTSE 100 index has dropped back from this morning’s 22-month high, to close 1 point lower at 7372 points. That’s a bit of an anticlimax, after the blue-chip index was on the brink of recovering all its losses since the crash that began on 24th February 2020. More companies rose than fell today (55 vs 42, with three unchanged), but heavyweight stocks such as miners Antofagasta and BHP Group lost ground in a quiet session. But, travel and hospitality stocks did still strengthen, amid speculation that further pandemic restrictions may be avoided if Omicron proves to be milder than Delta. Airline group IAG rose 1.86%, and Premier Inns owner Whitbread gained 1.2%. Among smaller companies on the FTSE 250 index, holiday firm TUI jumped over 4%, easyJet gained 1.9%, and cruise group Carnival picked up 2.3%. The Christmas spirit is slipping away in the City.. with the FTSE 100 dipping back from its earlier 22-month high. It’s now up just 8 points on the day, or 0.1%, around 7381 points, with the half-day session nearly over. There is some relief for energy suppliers and users - gas prices have dropped back from their record highs today. The day-ahead UK gas prices has dropped by 18% to 246p per therm, having hit 457p per therm on Tuesday. That’s still unusually high (the contract was around 60 per therm back in January), but might take some of the pressure off. European gas prices have also dropped sharply today, with the benchmark contract for delivery in the first quarter of 2022 down 20%. The government is to hold emergency meetings with the bosses of the UK’s biggest energy suppliers, after providers warned on Thursday of a “national crisis” that could lead bills to increase by more than 50% to £2,000 a year. Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, is to hold virtual meetings on Monday with energy suppliers, who are pushing the government to intervene to alleviate the unprecedented rises in consumers’ bills caused by soaring wholesale gas prices. The energy industry believes the crisis, during which more than 26 energy suppliers have gone bust at a cost of £1.8bn to date, could be made more manageable if the government axed the 5% VAT on bills imposed when the UK was part of the European Union. More here: The FTSE 100 has now hit its highest level since the markets began to crash in late February 2020. The blue-chip index has touched 7403.65 points, a new 22-month high. That’s just over the previous pandemic high set in November 2021, in today’s thin pre-Christmas trading. It’s a broad rally, with 75 of the hundred companies on the index up today. Travel and hospitality companies are still doing well, with InterContinental Hotels (+2%) now the top riser. Stock markets in Europe and Asia have cemented gains in light holiday trade today, while the safe-haven dollar eased on signs the Omicron variant would not significantly derail global economic growth, Reuters reports. The greenback was set for its worst week in four months while other risk-friendly assets from bitcoin to the Australian dollar held onto their recent gains, buoyed by ebbing concerns over the severity of the new Covid-19 variant. A top European equity benchmark hovered around one month highs after a week of gains and the MSCI’s broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan added 0.1%, after a record closing high for the S&amp;P 500 on Thursday. Even though it is highly infectious, studies have shown how Omicron is less severe than the Delta strain, fuelling optimism about a limited fallout from new restrictions, and setting the MSCI world equity index for a 2% weekly gain. Giuseppe Sersale, fund manager at Anthilia in Milan, said: “The most popular motivation (for the rally) is the growing perception that Omicron is less lethal. This certainty helped risk appetite return, but self-fulfilling expectations of Christmas rallies and reduced liquidity also came in play.” “I still think the news on Omicron is good, but not as good as the market is taking it. So it really depends on how much the contagions will fly.” The FTSE 100 is currently on track for its best month in just over a year. The blue-chip index has gained 4.8% during December, as stocks recovered from their slump in late November when Omicron fears first rocked markets. That would be its best month since November 2020, when news of Pfizer’s successful vaccine prompted a global rally. Fawad Razaqzada, analyst at ThinkMarket, says investors should use the long weekend to assess the risks facing the economy and markets. Chief among those risks are high levels of inflation and potentially weaker economic growth, owing to the rapid spread of omicron triggering waves of restrictions around the world. Judging by the stock market rally this week, it appears as though investors are still confident that the ongoing recovery from the pandemic recession can survive the omicron wave. Sentiment has been lifted by several scientific studies showing that omicron is less severe than previous mutations. The new variant has also introduced a new element of uncertainty as to whether central banks will be able to follow up with more rate rises if the economic recovery falters. Cities are attracting more property hunters with demand for flats outstripping that of houses in the autumn, the latest sign that the pandemic-fuelled “race for space” could be waning. UK property prices hit record levels during the pandemic as factors including the rise of home and flexible working fuelled a buying boom outside cities. However, as staff returned to offices with flexible and hybrid working patterns through the autumn – prior to the emergence of Omicron – interest in flats has surged. “When the housing market reopened in May, there was an immediate rush for room from buyers to look farther afield from the capital,” said Tim Bannister, the director of property data at the property portal Rightmove. “However, in recent months we’ve seen higher demand to live near London, with buyer inquiries returning towards pre-pandemic levels. This is happening quicker than some will have anticipated, and is likely driven by many businesses encouraging a hybrid, rather than fully remote working model.” Rightmove said that flats have become the most in-demand property type among prospective buyers, supplanting the popularity of houses throughout the pandemic. More here: Holiday firm TUI (+3%), cruise operator Carnival (+2.8%) and budget airline easyJet (+2%) are also higher this morning, after several research studies this week suggested the effects of the Omicron coronavirus variant were less severe than Delta. But, experts have warned that this may make no change in the level of infection, due to the surge in Omicron cases. My colleague Richard Adams explains: In the UK, the huge surge in cases – with another 119,789 new infections reported on Thursday – means that even if only a small proportion of people with Covid need to attend hospital, it could cause difficulties for the NHS. Mark Woolhouse, a professor at the University of Edinburgh and one of the co-authors of the Scotland study, said the weight of new research meant that projections would be less pessimistic, although Omicron’s rapid spread meant there were still dangers ahead. “It’s good but it doesn’t get us out of the woods. Severity of infection is clearly very important but it is only one factor in terms of the public health burden,” Woolhouse said, speaking in a personal capacity. Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, points out that trading volumes are rather thin this morning, with many investors clocking off for Christmas: “With US, German, Italian and Swiss markets closed, the FTSE 100 has opened with a small move to the upside amid much thinner than normal volumes as the festive week rounds up and on risk-on sentiment. The UK index is enjoying its fourth day of gains, trading at six-week highs and inching closer to the next major resistance hurdle at 7,400. It is better late than never for the Santa rally, which helped drive gains for US indices yesterday with the S&amp;P 500 closing at a record high up 2.27% on the week while tech outperformed with the Nasdaq closing the week up 3.19%.” Stocks are creeping higher in London, lifting the FTSE 100 nearer to its pandemic high. The blue-chip index is now up 21 points, or 0.3%, at 7394 - putting November’s 20-month high of 7402.68 points in sight. The Footsie, which contains the hundred largest companies listed in London, has rallied by over 14% this year, helped by hopes of economic recovery from the pandemic. But it’s still below its pre-Covid levels, unlike US and other European indices, as the FTSE 100 suffers from a lack of major tech companies listed in the City. Pharmaceuticals group Hikma (+1.8%) is now the top riser, followed by BA parent company IAG (+1.7%), online grocery business Ocado (+1.5%), and Premier Inns owner Whitbread. Tiz the season...to test your knowledge with the Guardian’s Business Christmas Quiz. Good luck! Consumer giant Reckitt Benckiser has agreed the sale of skincare brand E45 for £200m, as it shifts its focus to higher growth areas. The Slough-based company, which also owns brand including Dettol and Durex, told investors this morning that it is set to sell the business to Swedish group Karo Pharma. E45 cream, which can soothe dry and itching skin and help with eczema, was created in 1952 by Reckitt subsidiary Crookes Healthcare and was initially only available in hospitals. Increased demand and positive results saw the brand move into traditional retail. In the financial year to December 2020, the E45 brand and related sub-brands had a combined net revenue of £43m. The proposed sale is the latest move by Reckitt to shake up its portfolio in a bid to focus on higher growth areas of its operations. Earlier this year it sold its infant formula and child nutrition business in China and its Scholl foot treatment brand. Reckitt benefitted from higher sales of Strepsils and Nurofen this autumn, as the lifting of global lockdowns led to more people catching coughs, colds and flu. But it has also been hit by rising costs due to the supply chain inflation. It’s not much of a rally.. but the UK’s blue-chip shares have opened a little higher in today’s shortened session. The FTSE 100 is up 7 points, or 0.1%, at 7380 points, nudging towards November’s 21-month highs. Airline group IAG, which owns British Airways, is the top riser, up 1.6%, with conference organiser Informa rising 1% and hotel operator Whitbread 0.9% higher. The Selfridges deal is the latest instalment of a rollercoaster history for the brand founded by a retail legend, our retail correspondent Sarah Butler writes: After more than 20 years rising through the ranks of the Marshall Field’s store in Chicago, in 1906 the US entrepreneur Harry Gordon Selfridge arrived in the UK with one intention: to found a great department store. By some accounts, he was tempted to the UK by Liverpudlian Samuel J Waring Jr, who had built up a string of furnishings stores in London and wanted someone to run a neighbouring shop to his new Waring and Gillow outlet on Oxford Street. It was initially intended to be called Selfridge-Waring store, but Selfridge took control when his partner hit financial difficulties and the new store opened in March 1909 under his name alone. From the start, Selfridge embraced retail theatre and was determined his store would be “a civic centre, where friends can meet and buying is only a secondary consideration”. On the opening day, which drew enormous crowds, the store dazzled shoppers with live music, abundant floral displays and copious lighting in its airy halls. The store sold a huge range of goods but, out of respect for his early business partner, not food or furnishings. It housed a library, a rest room for ladies, a picture gallery and a restaurant linked to a roof garden. Selfridges set a new benchmark for UK department stores, ditching the tradition of housing staff above the shop and opting for large modern window displays more akin to advertising than the practice of piling up as many goods as possible. When the store was awarded one of English Heritage’s blue plaques in 2003, the charity said: “It is largely thanks to Selfridge that Oxford Street remains the commercial heart of the West End.”. More here: The big news of the morning is that Selfridges, the UK-based department store chain, has been acquired in a £4bn deal by Thai conglomerate Central Group and Signa, an Austrian real estate group. The deal will see the return of the luxury department store’s former boss Vittorio Radice. The firms have bought the group from Canada’s Weston family, and are thought to have beaten off rival bids from the Qatar Investment Authority, which owns Harrods, and Lane Crawford, a Hong Kong-based department store owner. The Thai group, which began with one store in Bangkok run by Tiang Chirathivat in the 1950s, last year listed part of the business on the Thai stock exchange, and has other interests in convenience stores, shopping centres and hotels. Signa is owned and run by René Benko, one of Austria’s richest men. The deal with the Westons includes Selfridges’ four UK stores – in London, Birmingham and two in Manchester – as well as Brown Thomas and Arnotts in Ireland and De Bijenkorf in the Netherlands. It also covers about £2bn of the chain’s prime property assets, including the freehold of its listed Oxford Street flagship store in London. Here’s the full story: Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Just one trading day in the City until Christmas, and investors are straining to see signs of the fabled Santa Rally. US stocks rallied last night, as traders took heart from mounting evidence that the Omicron variant of coronavirus is milder. The S&amp;P 500 closed at a record high - it’s 68th this year - and European markets staged their own rally on Thursday. As Kent Engelke, chief economic strategist at Capitol Securities Management, told Morningstar: “Today, it is about economic optimism that this variant is not going to be as bad as delta and original virus.” Last night, a UK government study showed that the risk of being admitted to hospital is up to 70% less for people with Omicron compared to those infected with Delta. Australia’s share market has joined the festive cheer, with the ASX index rising 0.4% in the Christmas Eve session, with financial stocks, mining and gas companies and tech among the gainers. The markets have a habit of rallying around Christmas time (news depending...), and Jeffrey Halley of OANDA says it has arrived: Thankfully, reporters have stopped asking me if we will get a Santa Claus rally in stock markets, as it has well and truly arrived. Wall Street rose again overnight after a strong procession on US data and markets convincing themselves even more, that omicron is a mildly symptomatic storm in a teacup. But in the UK, concerns about rising financial distress on the high street and at hospitality firms is hitting the mood. My colleague Sarah Butler explains: More than 35,000 British retailers and 20,000 bars and restaurants are facing significant financial distress, according to new data, while shoppers are forecast to spend almost a quarter less in physical stores this Boxing Day than before the pandemic. If fashion and footwear shops, furniture businesses and other “non-essential” retailers are allowed to remain open from 26 December, £3.94bn is expected to be spent in stores and online that day, 10% less than before the pandemic and 1% lower than last year. Spending in physical stores alone is expected to fall by 23% compared with 2019 as many shoppers avoid high streets, shopping centres and retail parks amid fears over the Omicron variant of coronavirus. Yesterday, the FTSE 100 hit a six-week closing high, near to its highest since the pandemic crash in March. But it could be a subdued start today, with the blue-chip index expected to dip a little. It could be a quiet session, with trading finishing early at lunchtime (hurrah).We still don’t know how severe the Omicron wave will be, and debates are raging about closing nightclubs, alcohol curfews and work-from-home guidance. It can sometimes feel like last Christmas all over again. But one decision should be clear. Given the tools and knowledge we have now, school closures should be off the table. Why were schools closed at all in previous lockdowns? The best approach was to minimise risk, given the limited knowledge about Covid-19 transmission and with no vaccination available to protect against severe health outcomes and death. Concerns about many different groups factored into policy decisions on schools. The first concern was the risk to teachers and school workers such as cleaners and security guards being in an environment where they could contract Covid-19 during their working day. Then there was risk to family members, particularly grandparents and vulnerable parents, of children first contracting Covid-19 at school and then bringing it home to their households. There was also the risk to children themselves of contracting Covid-19 at school; the concern for children was less about severe outcomes and death, and more about long Covid and potential long-term health impacts. The final concern was modelling data that suggested that schools being open led to wider overall societal mixing, and a greater number of contacts per person, which could increase the R number and drive exponential growth in transmission levels. But vaccines, testing and knowledge on how to manage Covid-19 transmission have radically altered all of the previous considerations. We now have safe vaccines that are effective at reducing the severe health outcomes of Covid-19, especially with boosters for over-18s. It is positive news that the JCVI has supported vaccinating at-risk children aged between five and 11 and those living with immunocompromised people. However, the UK is again out of line with other countries, many of which opened up vaccination to all children in that age group some months ago. We know that we can reduce transmission in indoor settings such as schools through good ventilation and air-filtration systems: this can range from opening windows to allow a breeze through classrooms and hallways to HEPA filters that completely clean the air several times in an hour. And rapid at-home lateral-flow testing is a simple, quick way of identifying infectious individuals and ensuring they stay out of the school environment until they’re past the infectious period. Probably the biggest impact on slowing Covid-19 spread and breaking chains of transmission is to have infectious individuals isolate and not pass on Covid-19 to anyone else. The UK has led in offering free at-home testing to teachers, school staff and pupils, and that is seen as one of the factors in slowing spread within schools. We also now have concrete evidence on the harms of children being out of school, which we must balance against the risk of harms from Covid. While some cling to the idealised version of online learning with middle-class children with devoted parents sitting next to them teaching with fast broadband and a laptop per child at home, this isn’t the reality for most children, especially those in low-income households. Access to devices such as computers and tablets, and the internet – and having parents with enough free time to support students – are not guaranteed. Children may also have to do work within the household, for example taking care of younger siblings. And they may have to figure out how to set up the technology themselves if they are in households where parents are working outside or absent. In short, virtual learning works for rich families, but not for poor people. This is not just about educational attainment. In-person schooling is also about providing children with a safe, heated space during the day, food, books, outdoor play areas and access to adults trained in teaching and interacting with children. School closures also lead to a loss of play and social interaction, they’re associated with increased domestic abuse, a decrease in physical activity, delayed access to paediatric care, and more mental health issues. Whatever Covid-19 control measures are discussed, school closures should be off the table. Home or remote schooling just doesn’t work and shouldn’t be seen as an acceptable outcome for children. The risks from Covid are better known, and we have more tools to fight it. So instead of closing schools, we need to focus on improving the protections we now have: better vaccination coverage, ventilation and filtration of the air, and identifying infectious individuals with rapid testing. Now is the time to start making plans for schools as essential societal infrastructure, just as hospitals, supermarkets and other essential institutions stayed open even during the strictest lockdown measures. Prof Devi Sridhar is chair of global public health at the University of EdinburghAnother year spent indoors should have facilitated another bumper year for video games, that most indoorsy of artistic pursuits. Yet the games industry has shared many of the difficulties that have plagued other creative sectors, where dispersed teams have been forced to collaborate on complex creations. As a result, a clutch of 2021’s big-budget games have been delayed until next year, a situation that has let the sunlight in to draw up more modestly made, independent endeavours. Games such as Unpacking, which tells its unconventional story about a young woman moving into a series of homes exclusively through the act of unpacking the boxes of her belongings. Or Lake, in which you play as a burnt-out programmer who temporarily becomes a postwoman in her pastoral hometown and, by delivering letters and parcels, readapts to more fulfilling rhythms and connections. These and others titles have provided bright flares of creativity in a psychologically demanding year. Meanwhile, the so-called “forever games”, such as Fortnite, Call of Duty and Destiny, which aim to dominate the game space in our lives via regular and indefinite content updates, have provided a reassuring nightly routine with friends for many. Always a few years behind its more esteemed Hollywood sibling, the games industry has had to contend with stories of systemic abuses – particularly toward women – and a series of high-profile investigations into major companies. Activision Blizzard, publisher of the Call of Duty series, is being investigated by the California Department of Fair Employment and Housing following accusations of discrimination and sexual harassment across its studios. While the company’s harangued CEO Bobby Kotick – who, according to a recent Wall Street Journal report, allegedly helped cover up these abuses – remains resolutely in place, treasurers from six US states have called on the company to take drastic action. In video games, far more than any other medium, the effect of economics on design is clear. The earliest arcade games were calibrated so that a newcomer could only play for a few minutes before they had to clunk in another coin. Today, behemothic games such as Call of Duty: Warzone and Fortnite are ostensibly free, making money from the sale of virtual character costumes, Hollywood tie-ins and, somewhat distastefully, vibrant colour schemes and stickers for their weapons. 2021 was the year in which NFTs – limited edition digital assets – have entered the mainstream. With millions of players already groomed to accept the idea of spending £10 on, say, a Rambo costume for their video game character, it seems inevitable that numbered limited edition skins that players can later sell on – with the publisher taking a nifty cut at every stage – are imminent (and, in the case of the child’s game Roblox, fully actualised). Legal and moral questions around what will essentially be stock markets for digital collectibles loom. And the inevitable effects of economic design on the nobler art of game design remain to be seen and understood. A strange year for games, then, and yet one in which the medium remains ever interesting. The top 5 games of 2021 1. Deathloop Arkane Studios; PC, PlayStation 5 A professional killer stuck in a time loop must execute eight assassinations to break free – but at what cost? A scintillating, deadly take on Groundhog Day. 2. Wildermyth Worldwalker Games; macOS, PC Random fragments of story combine to make an epic, intergenerational storyline uniquely yours. 3. Unpacking Witch Beam; Nintendo Switch, PC, Xbox Arrange your character’s belongings into homes at different points in her life and learn what truly matters. 4. Genesis Noir Feral Cat Den; macOS, Nintendo Switch, PC, Xbox A dazzling whodunnit mystery about the beginnings of the universe – clever, beguiling and evocative. 5. Radiohead Kid A Mnesia Arbitrarily Good Productions, Namethemachine; PC, PlayStation 5 Exhibition of two seminal albums set in a liminal space between the physical and aural. Turkey Balan Wonderworld Arzest/Square-Enix; PC, PlayStation, Nintendo Switch, Xbox Sonic creator Yuji Naka’s involvement makes Balan’s mediocrity particularly sting.When Isaac, 16, tested positive for coronavirus a few days ago, he decided to self-isolate alone in his room. He wanted to make sure he did everything he could not to pass the virus on to his family and ensure they were able to have some normality over Christmas. After his mum, Debs, posted what he was doing on Twitter, she was flooded with loving messages to pass on to him. She plans to print them all and put them up on the wall opposite his room for him to see on Christmas Day. “It’s an amazing thing that he just went ‘no, I’m going to stay away’, and I have said to him ‘if you’re struggling come on in and we’ll just deal with it’. He says if he can, he’ll try to keep it away from us,” she said. It was not a difficult choice for Isaac, who is autistic and lives with his mum and three siblings in Ayrshire. “In his mind, he’s doing what he needs to do to keep us all safe,”Debs said. Isaac is far from alone. More than 600,000 people will be forced to isolate across the UK on Christmas Day after a record 119,789 tested positive, the highest daily figure since the pandemic began. For Mark, 44, a Church of England priest based in Manchester, the run-up to Christmas is an exceptionally busy time of the year. He normally runs church services and midnight mass, but since testing positive a few days ago he has been forced to self -isolate in his room. “Ordinarily, on Christmas Day, I’d normally spend the afternoon quite tired and often have a nap just because I would have been doing lots and lots of church services. So actually tomorrow will be a bit more relaxing than it usually would be for me,” he said. “I’ve got my two cats with me, a pile of books, and probably catching up on a few things on Netflix in bed as well.” His church, and many others across the UK, will be live-streaming some services, including midnight mass, which he plans to watch from the comfort of his bed. Emily, 28, will be self-isolating alone in her London flat with her dog. She works in retail and describes this time of year as “bonkers”. She said she was enjoying the rest regardless of the circumstances, and was Googling tips on what to include in her roast dinner. “I’m not someone who enjoys cooking that much. I don’t do it that often. I’m very much a takeout girl. So it’s actually out of routine for me to cook a massive meal. I’m actually kind of looking forward to it, and I’ve got all the trimmings,” she said. Most of those forced to isolate spoke of their determination to remain upbeat in the face of a second Christmas disrupted by pandemic. Lauren, 31, from London is self-isolating with her husband and has several ways to stay chirpy. “We will be sleeping in as normally Christmas has me up at 5am, have a nice cooked breakfast, opening our gifts to each other, then spending the day playing games, feasting on cheese, speaking to friends and family, skilfully navigating the eight, 11 and 13 hour time differences,” she said. The couple also plan to do some arts and crafts, including pottery, origami and making Christmas crackers, and will have a classic Christmas dinner in the evening. “Personally, a Christmas movie marathon isn’t the right approach as I’ve spent a lot of time in front of the TV the past two years. I want this Christmas to still feel like a special day so Justin and I remember it fondly rather than it just fade into the mists of memory.” Most importantly, she said she would try to remember that tomorrow was just a day and that there were better days ahead.During the past 20 months I’ve become addicted to TV shows about women trying and failing to make it. Broad City, Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt, 2 Broke Girls: it’s like looking in a mirror, if I could be bothered to do even that. But the absolute fabulous queen loser of all is Awkwafina, in her self-created show Nora from Queens. Awkwafina plays a bizarro-reverse-mirror version of herself as a nearly thirtysomething bum, living in her childhood home with her grandmother and her widowed father. It’s pure lockdown comfort TV, with every petty slight and worldly favour soothed away by familial love. Nothing Nora from Queens does ever works out, and yet it’s always fine in the end. Attempted jobs, moneymaking schemes, love interests and opportunities for growth come and go, with all the wit and humour being incidental. The laughs come from off-the-cuff comments, the quickest physical reactions and scathing jibes, but the emotion is gooey and true. And that’s how I live now – with Nora from Queens as my more adorable, charismatic, sexy, funny, hipster-chic proxy. I actually have the same sloppy tracksuit bottoms, oversized T-shirts, thick dorky glasses and button-down overshirts that Nora wears in the show. If she gets up at noon every day in TV fantasyland, heck, I do it every day in reality. And if she fails at everything while refusing to leave her childhood home or embrace adulthood, well, me too – and I’m 10 years older than Awkwafina herself and 15 older than the show’s character. So cosily attractive is Nora from Queens that it’s weird to splinter out the real, hugely successful writer and performer from the fictional loser she plays. Fictional Nora tries so hard, while Awkwafina (whose real name is indeed Nora Lum) gets profiled by Vogue, walks the red carpet and rises effortlessly to fame. And yet I still feel she’s only a quick FaceTime connection away. If she can make it, why can’t I? I mean, she first got famous with a laconic YouTube mumblecore rap hit called My Vag: “My vag like tasting heaven/ your vag manages a 7-Eleven … My vag a chrome Range Rover/ your vag hatchback ’81 Toyota.” I can do that, even though my own vag is solid Fiat Panda territory, and I don’t have her talent. My appreciation of Awkwafina isn’t different from most people’s desire for escapist narratives under lockdown, for the lives of the rich and famous and gifted, for success stories and transformation tales. It’s just that Awkwafina’s talent and drive are presented with a relatable contemporary veneer. Politicised and witty, she has cool-girl charisma that contains vulnerability and a dark side. She lost her mother when she was very young but is from a stable and supportive background, which enabled her to excel at LaGuardia – the Fame school, whose alumni include Timothée Chalamet and Sarah Paulson. And from there Awkwafina studied journalism at SUNY (State University of New York at Albany). A street hustler she is not. From the stasis of my Nora-from-Queens-like life, I watched her break into bona fide Hollywood stardom, going from small roles in Ocean’s 8 and Crazy Rich Asians (a scene-stealing turn) to a Golden Globe-winning lead role in Lulu Wang’s The Farewell and, most recently, starring in the global hit Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings. Awkwafina embodies the idea that if you rap, write and perform literally from your own street corner, you too might make it big. She’s pure wish fulfilment: the American Dream nimbly retooled for the 21st century.India The Great Indian Kitchen A leaking kitchen pipe is at the heart of this Malayalam language film, set in a relatively prosperous family home in scenic Kerala. Each day, the new bride asks her husband, a teacher, to get it fixed. Each day, she clears out pails of dirty water from under the sink. Each day, he returns having carelessly forgotten her request. Repetition is key in this merciless excavation of a woman’s life after marriage, written and directed by Jeo Baby. The camera returns time and again to her going through the motions of cooking, cleaning, supplying sex to her husband. The men do yoga and leave the house. The women are seen serving the men: cleaning their leftovers from the table, handing them a toothbrush each morning, fetching their slippers. But mostly, they are kept busy in the kitchen – endlessly chopping, grating, washing and sweeping. The sheer monotony of their chores recalls Simone de Beauvoir’s description of housework as being akin to sisyphean torture, as mundane tasks eat away the hours of their lives. There are no easy villains here. The people are ordinary, the cruelty normalised. The protagonist is everywoman, remaining unnamed through the film. Certainly her slow misery and thwarted ambitions touched a chord among audiences across India. Her eventual rebellion has elements of fantasy but is the kind of escapism one can cheer for. Watch The Great Indian Kitchen for its portrait of patriarchy in everyday guise, and how progressive ideas can often be comfortably discarded when entering the domestic space, like a pair of outdoor slippers. Taran Khan, Mumbai-based writer and author of Shadow City Ethiopia Faya Dayi Shot in black and white, with a cinematic style and rhythm that lets its characters and locations transcend the screen, this poetic, multilayered documentary by Ethiopian-Mexican film-maker Jessica Beshir captures the spiritual, psychological, familial and socioeconomic tensions and transitions experienced by a generation of Ethiopian youth. Set around the ancient town of Harar, the sensitive and unflinching nature with which Beshir constructs Faya Dayi demonstrates her intimate understanding of the region. Framed by the larger socioeconomic and political transformations of this eastern region of Ethiopia, where khat has replaced coffee as the main cash crop and ethnicity has become politicised, the side-effects of these shifts are felt through the experiences and dreams of a boy called Mohammed. Mohammed’s story is interspersed by multiple other narratives, which make his toiling in the fields, errand running for neighbours and despairing over his father’s addiction to “chewing khat”, while coming to terms with the fact that his mother left him for the promise of a better life abroad, all the more resonant with the burning existential dilemma facing Ethiopia today. Dr Michael W Thomas, postdoctoral research fellow at Soas, University of London on the African Screen Worlds project Peru Manco Cápac Manco Cápac is the name of the legendary founder of the Inca civilisation, and this minimalist feature film has been selected to represent Peru in the Oscars’ best international feature film category. It tells the story of a young internal migrant’s survival, as he travels to the southern city of Puno with no more than 2 sol (£0.37) and a mobile phone card in his pocket. “It’s a story of classism and indifference,” says film-maker Henry Vallejo. He began writing the screenplay in 2010, but the project stalled due to lack of funding. The central character, a timid 20-year-old called Elisbán (played by Jesús Luque), was inspired by a former classmate. “He is looking for work. The antagonist is the city itself,” says Vallejo. “It’s a story about lack of empathy. But there are Elisbán’s in every part of the world.” “We had to make it with little money and resources. We wanted to dispense with all sensationalism,” he adds. Shot in single takes with sparse narrative in Spanish and Quechua, it is a realistic glimpse at the daily struggles of millions of Peruvians. Given the subject, Vallejo admits it is a huge achievement that the film has made it to the big screen. The film premiered in Peru at the beginning of December. Dan Collyns, co-director of documentary film The Adventures of Wonder Woman: Inside the War Against Illegal Gold Mining in Peru’s Amazon Djibouti The Gravedigger’s Wife A seemingly simple love story, The Gravedigger’s Wife, set in Djibouti, tells the tale of Guled (Omar Abdi) who digs graves for a living, his sick wife, Nasra (Yasmin Warsame) and their son, Mahad (Kadar Abdoul-Aziz Ibrahim). Somali-Finish director, Khadar Ayderus Ahmed, says he made the film because he wanted to give voice to “members of society whose contribution to the society is overlooked or not appreciated”. The most significant aspect for Ahmed “was … being on set in Djibouti city, directing an entirely Somali cast in my own mother tongue and bringing the story to life”. This is possibly the most important aspect of this film. The Gravedigger’s Wife has drawn attention to Somali storytelling, having won top prize at the 27th Pan-African Film and Television Festival of Ouagadougou (Fespaco), and is the only film in the Somali language to ever be submitted for consideration at the Oscars. Sagal Ali, executive director of the Somali Arts Foundation (SAF) Nepal I am Belmaya In 2015, film-maker Kesang Tseten released Castaway Man, a haunting documentary of the life and mysterious death of controversial anthropologist Dor Bahadur Bista, which exposed the complexities of caste and ethnicity in modern Nepal. This year’s I Am Belmaya does something similar for gender through the extraordinary story of a determined young woman who uses her camera as a lever to escape a life mired in poverty and domestic violence. Sue Carpenter met her future co-director Belmaya, who is also the title character, when she was 14 and living in a girl’s orphanage in the tourist town of Pokhara. Carpenter was running a photography project there to give these forgotten children a voice. Belmaya proved the the project a success, but the orphanage was badly run and later closed its doors to outsiders. Carpenter and Belmaya lost touch. When they met again in 2014, Belmaya was 21, a mother and struggling in an abusive marriage. For the next seven years, they worked together to document Belmaya’s struggle to work as a film-maker and raise her daughter. The result is an uplifting and life-affirming film that never loses sight of the realities of a woman’s place in the modern Himalaya. Ed Douglas, author of Himalaya: A Human History Bangladesh Antara: Songs of Afternoon As soon as she was freed from lockdown, Antara planned to fly a helicopter over to the next building and retrieve her stranded football. The Bangladeshi toddler, who this short documentary was named after, had little else to entertain her, isolated high in one of the towers that dominate Dhaka. This film by Antara’s parents Farid Ahmad and Salma Sonia, focuses on the little girl and her longing to retrieve the ball to relieve her boredom, but splices it with the cries for help from women in the street below, who cannot afford to remain inside during a lockdown. These scenes, captured from their flat, are stitched together into a powerful portrayal of Dhaka’s harshness. Even in normal times, the city is stifling and isolating for children, with its confined living and lack of open areas, and unforgiving for the poor, who work informally and have no safety net. Through Antara, we learn how lockdown pushed the city’s residents even closer to the edge. Kaamil Ahmed Colombia Suspensión On the edge of Colombia’s Amazon rainforest, workers toil on a massive bridge that has remained unfinished for generations. The herculean project – ambitious given the hostile terrain, intermittent landslides, and warring rebel groups – was supposed to replace a winding, unpaved road between two provincial capitals. But local people doubt it will ever be finished and it is now an ironic tourist destination overlooking the perilous old road, nicknamed “the trampoline of death”. Visitors pose for selfies above while workers pour concrete behind them. Suspensión, an elegiac documentary by Colombian film-maker Simón Uribe Martínez, shows how unkept promises and corruption across successive governments have dramatically impeded the lives of local people. The film garnered rave reviews in Colombia and played at festivals in Amsterdam, Mexico City, São Paulo, Barcelona, Austin and London. Joe Parkin Daniels, a British journalist based in Bogotá, Colombia, covering human rights, the country’s internal conflict and health The Democratic Republic of the Congo The Rumba Kings The infectious groove, captivating guitar licks and smooth vocals that inspired jazz in New Orleans, zouk in the French Caribbean and Afrobeats in Nigeria – and which have just been inscribed into Unesco’s intangible cultural heritage list – are captured in Peruvian director Alan Brain’s first feature-length documentary film. Brain is also a salsa musician and was introduced to rumba by a fellow band member while he was documenting the humanitarian crises engulfing the DRC for the UN. What he discovered changed him. “I fell in love with rumba,” Brain told Peter Krausz of Movie Metropolis, “it began to dawn on me that there must be a documentary here.” Starring rumba stalwarts, including Papa Wemba, poet Lutumba Simaro and Manu Dibango – the artists who popularised rumba internationally and who died in 2016, 2019 and 2020 respectively – the riveting documentary concerns itself with Congolese beauty, creativity and resilience. But despite being stocked with musical sequences, it is not a concert film. Using archival footage of rumba and the DRC’s colonial era, and commentaries from rumba scholars, including Antoine Manda Tchebwa and Lubangi Muniania, Brain traces the rebirth of Congolese people from King Leopold II’s Congo Free State – which Joseph Conrad is thought to be referring to in Heart of Darkness when he described “the vilest scramble for loot that ever disfigured the history of human conscience” – to freedom and independence in 1960. In The Rumba Kings, we meet not only the artists, musicians, producers and lyricists who made rumba the soundtrack of pan-Africanism but also people such as Le Grand Kallé, Papa Noel, Docteur Nico and Franco who, in the 1950s Belgian Congo, used music – not bullets, bombs or ballots – to end European colonisation in central and southern Africa. The Rumba Kings is a love letter to Congolese people. Vava Tampa, a freelance writer focusing on Africa’s great lakes, decolonisation and culture Egypt Feathers This absurdist drama, directed by Omar El Zohairy, catches you off guard with a grey and grimy city environment that is almost post-Soviet in style. In post-1970s Egypt, a working-class family – a domineering father, an abused, almost mute wife and three kids – throws a party and a magician mistakenly turns the dad into a chicken. Tormented by trying to find a sorcerer to revive her husband and providing for her family, the wife’s situation reflects on social inequality and subjugation of women, as she fights off harassers and bureaucracy while taking care of the chicken. As the plot thickens, with few words, and a dark comic twist to her transition into the breadwinner, she takes matters into her own hands. Zohairy’s cinematic take on poverty, although apolitical, angered several ultranationalist figures. State-owned newspaper Al-Akhbar, one of the biggest in the country, accused him of “distorting Egypt’s image” in exchange for “receiving €40,000 in funds”. Pro-state TV personality and MP Mostafa Bakry demanded the government sack the film’s producer, Mohamed Hefzy, from his position as head of the Cairo international film festival and called for the film to be banned from being screened commercially. Nevertheless, Zohairy believes he made “a film with a human story, a very deep, painful story with a poetic cinematic language”. Adham Youssef, a freelance journalist and film critic, based in Cairo Nigeria Eyimofe Eyimofe (This is My Desire in Yoruba) is a beautifully subtle and moving film that follows two unrelated people, Mofe and Rosa, who are both full of dreams of leaving overwhelming economic struggles in Nigeria for a fresh start in Europe. Just as striking as their layered, individual stories, which each form half of the film, is the backdrop of Lagos and how it is depicted by debut film-makers, twin brothers Arie and Chuko Esiri. Shot entirely in 16mm, the film offers a sensitive and pensive illustration of a city that is often cast as teeming and frenetic, full of vibrancy and the extremes of wealth and poverty. Yet in Eyimofe, the reality of working-class life is shown with nuance, hope and hopelessness. In the intense struggles of the main characters to leave Nigeria, the film spotlights the desperation of migrants, while revealing, but not demonising, the world they fight to escape. Emmanuel Akinwotu, the Guardian’s west Africa correspondent Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Tottenham looked energised in the 2-2 draw with Liverpool and Antonio Conte’s obvious impact is proved by a notable stat: his players have collectively covered 115km per match, on average, since the Italian took over, compared with 100km under Nuno Espírito Santo. The hard-running Conor Gallagher is sure to have his work cut out in central midfield for Crystal Palace, then, while Patrick Vieira will hope to welcome Joachim Andersen back to bolster the defence. The manager revealed that Palace have “a couple of cases” of Covid-19 in the squad, although he did not say which players had been affected, and that “we hope we are going to be OK” for the match on Boxing Day. Luke McLaughlin Boxing Day 3pm BT Sport 1 Venue Tottenham Hotspur Stadium Last season Tottenham 4 Crystal Palace 1 Odds H 3-4 A 4-1 D 11-4 Referee Jonathan Moss This season G10 Y21 R3 2.70 cards/game TOTTENHAM Subs from Gollini, Doherty, Gil, Rodon, Lo Celso, Alli, Bergwijn, Tanganga, Ndombele, Skipp, Clarke Doubtful None Injured Seesegnon (knock, 1 Jan), Romero (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Form LDWWWD Discipline Y28 R1 Leading scorer Son 7 CRYSTAL PALACE Subs from Guaita, Matthews, Milivojevic, Tomkins, Olise, Eze, Mateta, Schlupp, Clyne, Benteke, Kelly, Banks, Hannam, Riedeweld, Street, Rak-Sakyi Doubtful None Injured Ferguson (match fitness, unknown), McArthur (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Form DLLLWD Discipline Y32 R0 Leading scorer Gallagher 6The number of Christmas Eve shoppers in British city centres has slumped as people stay in to avoid the risk of being infected with the Omicron coronavirus variant, data suggests. Central London was hardest hit, with footfall down 30% compared with Friday last week, and 48% compared with Christmas Eve in 2019, according to data covering morning trading from Springboard. Footfall also fell by 10% week on week in other cities. The government has so far held off on imposing new restrictions on England. However, shopper numbers have fallen dramatically as people avoid crowds to ensure they are able to see family at Christmas. Footfall was lower than Christmas Eve 2019 across high streets, retail parks and shopping centres – although all categories were also stronger than Christmas Eve 2020, when large parts of England were placed in a surprise lockdown and other parts of the UK put restrictions in place. Retail parks suffered the smallest declines this year, down only 7.1% compared with Christmas Eve 2019 – and up by nearly a quarter on last week. Numbers were up 6.7% across high streets overall compared with last week when including visits to towns. “The increased activity in retail parks today will in part be due to trips for food and grocery products as the majority of retail parks have a food store,” said Diane Wehrle, Springboard’s insights director. “However, since the start of Covid, retail parks have consistently been more resilient in retaining shoppers as they are open spaces, with large stores which make shoppers feel safer and less nervous.” The Omicron variant has severely hit trading for many shops during what is usually their busiest time of the year, and forecasts for the coming days are bleak. Analysts at GlobalData said it expected Boxing Day sales online and in shops to be 10% lower than pre-pandemic levels, and 1% lower than last Christmas. Spending in stores is likely to be 23% lower than 2019, they said. England’s chief medical officer, Prof Chris Whitty, last week advised people to cut down on socialising, while Wales and Northern Ireland have both announced a return to the “rule of six” for hospitality starting on Boxing Day. Scotland restricted sporting events and advised people to stay at home as well. Retailers and hospitality companies will have to cope this Christmas without much of the emergency government support that helped them through a similar period in 2020. The government’s coronavirus job retention scheme, which supported the wages of furloughed workers, ended in September. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, last week announced a plan to spend £1bn on struggling hospitality and leisure businesses hit by the Omicron slump, but grants of only £6,000 a venue were criticised as insufficient to make up for the decline in business. Retailers were not included.E-scooter trials are to be prolonged until late 2022 as the government weighs up legalisation, with use of public rental vehicles dwarfed by that of an estimated half million illegal e-scooters in Britain. Legislation has been put on hold amid increasing safety concerns over private unregulated e-scooters – especially with tens of thousands more vehicles expected to be sold in the UK this Christmas – and scepticism that legal e-scooters can ameliorate congestion or public health. A negative decision would come as a blow to mobility firms that have invested tens of millions of pounds to enter the UK market, which has lagged European neighbours in embracing e-scooters. Businesses have become concerned at the length of trials which were originally due to last 12 months from mid-2020, but are now being extended to November 2022. Evangelists for micromobility argue that e-scooters are far greener than cars, and are a transport solution that tackles the “last mile” from home or work, allowing users to connect to buses or trains. But influential voices in government suggest that far from switching from cars, most e-scooter users were previously cycling, walking or on public transport, which have better health benefits and environmental credentials. Meanwhile, scientists have warned that the UK’s Christmas scooter spree will consume hundreds of tonnes of precious elements, mainly lithium and cobalt in batteries. According to the Royal Society of Chemistry, unless e-scooters are used daily for many years and replace a car, their impact on the environment is ultimately damaging, with high carbon costs in manufacture as well as mining raw materials. While MPs on the transport select committee last year recommended legalisation of all e-scooters, privately owned as well as those on rental schemes, government sources suggest that ministers are far from convinced – with safety concerns at the forefront. At least nine people are known to have died in crashes involving e-scooters in 2021, according to the parliamentary advisory council for transport safety (Pacts). NHS trauma specialists cited in a recent Pacts report said they were now treating more and more e-scooter riders, many with “life changing head injuries”. One London-based neurosurgeon said the severity of e-scooter riders’ injuries were “more similar to those of motorcyclists than pedal cyclists”. An interim report is due to be published by the Department for Transport (DfT) showing data from the trials which started in July last year in Middlesbrough and now are taking place in 34 areas of England (with Wales and Scotland so far declining the opportunity). While the government data remains under wraps, a source said it was “not encouraging”, suggesting it showed only a small fraction of e-scooter trips replacing a car journey, with many simply riding for fun, and the biggest proportion riding instead of walking: “On those figures, there wouldn’t be a carbon saving, there would be a carbon increase.” Ministers wrote to retailers before Christmas to remind them of the law on private e-scooters, after being urged by the executive director of Pacts, David Davies, to hold them liable, as well as warn users of the risks. Davies said: “There is a lot of confusion and we’d like to see more awareness-raising … certainly some retailers are not going out of their way to inform their customers. They are significantly more risky than bicycles.” The Guide Dogs charity recently commissioned independent testing that showed a pedestrian hit by a legal e-scooter at the top permitted speed, 15.5mph, could suffer fatal injury. Operators, as well as Pacts, stress that the safety differences between legal, regulated models and private e-scooters is huge. According to Alan Clarke, director of public policy at Lime, which launched its e-scooters in Milton Keynes in August 2020, followed by Greater Manchester and London this year, the former have “two independent brakes, [are] stability tested, [with] lights you can see 300 metres away”; most people will buy a model with “small wheels, one handbrake, and not fit to be used on roads or cycle lanes.” Fred Jones, regional general manager at Tier, which operates e-scooters in 13 countries and is part of the trials in York and London, said: “What’s clear is that the majority of anecdotal issues of safety and concern is almost exclusively with the private side. If someone’s willing to do something illegal, they may have a greater disposition to do something irresponsible when riding them.” Almost 200,000 people have used Lime’s vehicles, making more than 822,000 trips, on average travelling 2km each time. While casualty reports from illegal scooters have overwhelmingly involved male riders, Clarke said rental e-scooters are used by a broad demographic across sex, race and age groups. Clarke maintains e-scooters can be part of multi-model public transport – even if for now all remain banned from London’s trains and buses after a spate of battery fires – with the busiest docks in the capital found next to tube stations. “That shows us people are using them to link into another transport mode.” The DfT says it is waiting to gather all the evidence from trials before making any decision. Meanwhile though, it has extended the deadline for a further eight months, until 30 November 2022, to get more data while tweaking the trials to introduce compulsory ID plates. Operators remain largely upbeat, despite the delay, which will have hit the business plans of the firms hoping to expand across the UK after the trials. Jones said: “Any business would love clarity for five years when you’re taking out warehouses and things.” But he remains confident e-scooters will be legalised in some form in the UK, with Ireland recently starting legislation to permit their use on roads, one of the last EU states to do so: “The momentum across Europe bodes well.” • This article was amended on 26 December 2021 to refer to e-scooter crashes rather than accidents.My father Robert Chenciner, who has died aged 76 of cancer, was a scholar and writer on the ethnographic and material cultures of the Caucasus and former Soviet states. He first obtained permission to visit Dagestan in 1986. Through years of ethnographic fieldwork, and with the help of Dr Magomedkhan Magomedkhanov and local scholars, Robert – known to many as Bob or Chence – visited hundreds of Dagestani villages. He became a senior associate member of St Antony’s College, Oxford, in 1987, and an honorary member of the Dagestan Scientific Centre of the Russian Academy of Sciences in 1990. My father would talk of how his heart should return to the Dagestan mountains as he loved them so dearly, and wrote definitively on the region in Daghestan Today (1989), Daghestan: Tradition and Survival (1997) and Tattooed Mountain Women and Spoonboxes of Dagestan (2006). This last was shortlisted for the Bookseller’s Diagram prize for oddest title of the year. For more than two decades he also worked as an immigration expert, championing people fleeing former Soviet states. To meetings at Chatham House and St Antony’s College he brought his characteristic energy and a healthy distrust of authority. As part of this commitment, he worked for OSCE – the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe – as an election monitor in Ukraine, Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan and Belarus. Born in London, Robert was the son of Ellen (nee Perls) and Mark Chenciner, a lawyer. He and his mother joined relatives in Canada after his father’s death, but he returned to Britain to attend Fonthill prep school, in East Sussex, and Epsom College in Surrey, after his mother’s death. He wrote about his early esoteric interests in Dragons, Padlocks and Tamerlane’s Balls in 2012, citing the essay he had written aged 18 on Swedish padlock keyhole covers, for which he was awarded a Trevelyan scholarship to read mechanical sciences at Pembroke College, Cambridge. My father had an original perception of textiles, objects and people. His understanding of natural dyes and colour was manifest in Madder Red: A History of Luxury and Trade (2000). His collection of Kaitag textiles formed the basis of the books Kaitag: Textile Art from Daghestan (1993) and Kaitag: Daghestani Silk Embroidery, An Italian Collection (2007). He lectured widely on these interests, and tickled controversy with papers including The Bayeux Tapestry Shish Kebab Mystery, delivered at the Oxford Food Symposium in 1990, which appeared to call the tapestry’s authenticity into question. He would happily accept compensation for lectures in the form of salt-cured sturgeon, Caspian caviar or well-hung horsemeat, depending on the location. Despite the early loss of his parents, my father had a great sense of generosity, home and food; his lunches were a delight, and such was his warmth that his former home in Shepherd Market, London, was “borrowed” as a fictional safe-house in John le Carré’s Our Game, set amid the first Russian-Chechnya war. Robert was a force; a beacon; a bracing optimist. He is survived by his wife, Marian Ellingworth, whom he married in 1993, and two daughters, Isabel and me.Southampton are on a winless run of six matches but Ralph Hasenhüttl can point to an injury crisis in attack. Adam Armstrong and Che Adams have been absent but both could return at West Ham, who have had problems at the other end, with David Moyes unable to pick any of his first-choice back four for the 2-1 Carabao Cup defeat at Tottenham. Vladimir Coufal, at least, will be back from suspension on Boxing Day and, while the hosts have only one win in their last six league games, they have a habit of hammering the Saints: their last eight encounters have seen six West Ham wins and two draws. Alex Reid Boxing Day 3pm Venue London Stadium Last season West Ham 3 Southampton 0 Odds H 5-6 A 3-1 D 11-4 Referee Kevin Friend This season G5 Y31 R1 6.67 cards/game WEST HAM Subs from Areola, Martin, Randolph, Cresswell, Lanzini, Vlasic, Noble, Fredericks, Masuaku, Kral, Oko-Flex, Alese, Ashby, Chesters, Longelo, Forson, Potts, Perkins, Baptiste Doubtful Cresswell (back) Injured Antonio (Covid, 1 Jan), Ogbonna (knee, unknown), Zouma (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Form LLDWDL Discipline Y19 R2 Leading scorer Antonio 6 SOUTHAMPTOM Subs from Lewis, Lyanco, Stephens, Long, A Armstrong, Adams, Perraud, Small, Djenepo, Smallbone, S Armstrong, Elyounoussi, Diallo, Bednarek, Valery, McQueen Doubtful Adams (match fitness), A Armstrong (match fitness), S Armstrong (match fitness) Injured Forster (match fitness, 28 Dec), McCarthy (hamstring, 15 Jan) Suspended None Form LLDDLD Discipline Y33 R1 Leading scorer Broja 4My friend Andrew Garrett, musical instrument maker, conservator and restorer, who has died aged 83, was one half of the Clayson &amp; Garrett partnership and the National Trust’s adviser on the conservation of musical instruments. Andrew, reading history, met Richard Clayson, reading English, at Oxford, where they built their first harpsichord in their last undergraduate year. Richard playing piano and organ did not have the same opportunities for music-making as Andrew, a violinist. Their musical taste was baroque, instrument hire was expensive – why not make their own harpsichord? That first instrument created a stir in Oxford in 1962. The harpsichord-maker Michael Thomas invited them to work with him in his workshop and collection at Hurley Manor, near Maidenhead in Berkshire. The spartan lodging was a converted Thames barge and the cold endured in the severe winter of 1962-63 was long remembered. After this brief and idiosyncratic further education the pair were able to move to Richard’s home village of Lyminge, near Folkestone in Kent, to set up independently. In 1969, after six years making harpsichords and clavichords to Thomas’s and their own ideas, assisted by the cabinetmaker Ted Burren, they changed direction, becoming pioneers in the UK of copying surviving historical instruments rather than reimagining a “modern” harpsichord. Andrew and Richard’s long association with Alfred Deller’s Stour Music festival in Kent had introduced them to historically informed performance, especially in the Netherlands, where the harpsichordist and conductor Gustav Leonhardt was at the heart of the early music movement. Leonhardt was a significant influence, advising and encouraging them during their bold transition. Similarly oriented players in Britain, such as Trevor Pinnock and Colin Tilney, commissioned instruments, and by the mid-70s Andrew and Richard were making harpsichords after Flemish, Italian and English originals. All were prized for their immaculate craftsmanship and refinement of adjustment. Andrew’s achievement in continuing the business after Richard’s tragically early death in 1987 was heroic. Both were active in hiring instruments and influential in establishing the use of historical temperaments in tuning. From 1982 until 2016 Andrew was the National Trust’s adviser on the conservation of musical instruments. In this role he transformed both the care and state of knowledge of these holdings; more than 1200 instruments of vastly different kinds and conditions were surveyed and catalogued. Adventures when touring and hiring, or the discovery in a granary of an 18th-century harpsichord untouched for 200 years, were points of departure for Andrew’s delightful way with a story. Never predictable, he will now often be the cause of affectionate anecdote in others. At a conservators’ day to introduce the work of the conservation experts to National Trust staff, Andrew opened his six-minute presentation with a picture of his beloved Citroën DS Safari to illustrate the dilemmas arising in the use and conservation of historic artefacts. Andrew was born in Halifax, west Yorkshire, the son of Mona (nee Granby) and the Rev Robert Garrett. Before Lincoln College, Oxford, he attended Lancing college, West Sussex, on a music scholarship. He is survived by his wife, Paddy Fraser, whom he first met in Leeds in 1959 and married in Rome in 1976.Ho, ho … oh no. This second Covid Christmas will not be a huge improvement from the first for many in the UK. More than 600,000 people will be forced to self-isolate on Christmas Day after a record 119,789 tested positive for Covid, the highest daily figure since the pandemic began. Officials say the self-isolation figure could rise to 750,000 as the Omicron variant continues to drive a record daily number of new cases. While not being able to spend Christmas with loved ones will be devastating for most, some people are turning to unique methods to keep the festive spirit alive. Here are four things to look out for if you’re self-isolating over Christmas. #JoinIn hashtag Self-isolation at Christmas will probably leave you feeling alone, but you’re far from the only one. You can join the comedian Sarah Millican’s #JoinIn Twitter hashtag on Twitter and speak to others in your position. Now in its 11th year, #JoinIn is a space for people who have not chosen to be alone but find themselves on their own on Christmas Day. With hundreds of thousands of people unable to see loved ones because of Covid, the chat is likely to be busier than ever. Order to-go drinks Instead of drinks at the local pub, those self-isolating can order them for delivery. From pre-made cocktails to special cases of wine, there are boozy options to suit all tastes, so bring the bar home. Livestream events There are plenty of livestream events to attend from the comfort of your own home, with extensive listings on Eventbrite and DesignMyNight. Whether it is tuning in for midnight mass at Westminster Abbey, cook-along events, or comedy shows, there is something for everyone. A decadent feast for one A small joy of self-isolation is not having to compromise (or share) what you eat on Christmas Day. Whether it’s having an entire pizza to yourself to spending the day cooking a roast with all the trimmings just how you like it, don’t hold back. It is the season to indulge, after all. There is also no need to limit yourself to grocery delivery slots or takeaway apps. For those feeling creative, it is worth seeing if you can order recipe boxes from one of your local restaurants or specialised companies and make a delicious meal.Christmas is an NBA holiday, but this year the NFL is taking aim. Besides two tasty Saturday games, the league has a pair of films coming down the chimney that will rival any Hallmark TV feature for sentimentality. Coming only to theaters is American Underdog, the Lionsgate biopic on the former NFL quarterback Kurt Warner – a rags-to-riches tale after my own heart. I moved to Missouri for college when Warner washed up on the 1998 St Louis Rams roster as a 27-year-old third stringer and watched every game of his breakout 1999 season. Years later as a Sports Illustrated cub reporter I’d vibe with pro football insider Michael Silver over his 2000 Warner biography All Things Possible, the text upon which American Underdog is based. Viewers who know Warner’s story will be relieved to know the script hits all the major beats: the “Kill Kurt” college drills that instilled his patience in the pocket, the arena league football experience that honed his viper-quick release, coach Dick Vermeil’s weepy “We will rally around Kurt Warner” news conference that came after a low-blow hit to the knee by Chargers safety Rodney Harrison wiped out Rams starter Trent Green. As for viewers who don’t know the story, oh yes, it’s all true. Warner really did stock grocery store shelves after going undrafted. His beloved future in-laws really were killed by a tornado that swept through their Arkansas home. And when Warner finally did get his shot he really was that freakin’ good, like some 100-rated passing god that could only be created in a video game. Also premiering Christmas Day is All Madden, the much-anticipated Fox TV documentary on the American icon. Like American Underdog, this too is a nostalgia trip, a chance to spend 75 minutes with a genuine character who’s been fairly reclusive since his 2008 retirement. Co-directed by Fox Sports reporter Tom Rinaldi, undisputed champion of the soft-focus interview, All Madden doesn’t offer much in the way of story twists; most who’ve switched on a football game in the last 40 years are doubtless familiar with Madden’s success as a coach, analyst and pitchman. Where the doc surprises is in whom it gets to talk about Madden – not least boss Rupert Murdoch, who paid a king’s ransom to bring Madden to Fox after outbidding CBS for NFL broadcast rights. Besides Murdoch, among the doc’s three dozen interviewees, insights range from Madden’s wife and sons (What? He has a family?) to ex-Cowboys QB turned Fox NFL analyst Troy Aikman. “John Madden narrated my career,” he says. Madden was in the booth for Warner’s epic 1999 season, which saw “Pop Warner” pace the league in touchdown passes and QB rating while leading the Rams past the Tennessee Titans in Super Bowl XXIV. Along the way he became one of six players to be named MVP of the regular season and the Super Bowl in the same year. Most memorably, he brought the arena league experience to the NFL, hanging in the pocket just long enough to hit an in-stride Isaac Bruce or Az-Zahir Hakim. American Underdog tarries in the fallow years before his Rams breakthrough, but spends most of its 112 minutes homing in on the romance between Kurt and Brenda Warner – the original ride-or-die. (They are executive producers on the film.) St Louis Rams fans, who should feel seen by directors Andrew and Jon Erwin, will vividly remember Brenda calling into sports talk shows to defend her man. When they first met, Kurt was an overlooked QB at second-tier Northern Iowa, and Brenda was an ex-Marine single mother of two. The surprise here is the spot-on casting. Zachary Levi nails Kurt’s sweetness as much as Anna Paquin does Brenda’s toughness. But the revelation is Hayden Zaller as Zachary Warner, the son who was blinded after his biological father dropped him as an infant. And then there’s Dennis Quaid as Vermeil, a choice that will make football movie buffs who remember him as the over-the-hill quarterback in Any Given Sunday feel ancient. Besides the understated title, there isn’t much to quibble with American Underdog. (Although I could see Mike Martz, the chatty brains behind the Greatest Show on Turf attack, feeling salty about doppelgänger Chance Kelly not getting more lines…) If that hero’s journey sometimes feels like a faith walk, it’s because the Warners make no secret of their profound Christian belief. (He famously thanked Jesus on live TV after the Super Bowl win.) In another film, the religiosity might feel heavy handed. But in this one, you can’t say it isn’t earned given how miraculously things turned out for Warner, a Pro Football Hall of Famer who might well be the best undrafted player, if not the greatest Cinderella story in sports. That he continues to prosper on television is a testament to Madden’s lasting impact as a teacher who did more to demystify the game than anyone. He did this not only with plainspoken commentary, but with graphics innovations like the telestrator, which allowed him to scribble on our TV screens the way he might do on a blackboard. Even the Madden video game franchise has had pronounced effect on the camera angles and graphics presentations used in live games. And then there’s the stuff you forget about Madden: that he hosted Saturday Night Live, that he was second only to Michael Jordan as a pitchman. Sprinkling some of those classic commercials was a nice touch, as was the conceit of watching Madden watch himself through the years, and watch some of what his admirers had to say about him. When Mike Madden gets going about his love for his father – “All of your careers have been Hall of Fame careers, even your role as father” – well, the line opens the floodgates as suddenly as American Underdog’s Martz telling Warner he believes in him just before siccing him on Ray Lewis’s Baltimore Ravens. As Covid threatens to shut down sports again, you could do worse than tuck American Underdog and All Madden. If anything, they lay bare the paradox at the heart of football, showing how a game that produces so much brutality can really make you feel all the feels.There are three spectres haunting Boris Johnson as the prime minister spends a tense Christmas monitoring hospitalisation data in order to make a call on whether or not to cancel New Year’s Eve celebrations and place new restrictions on the country from January. Cabinet Office sources have suggested there will now be no update before Christmas to the potential reopening of an investigation by Lord Geidt, the adviser on ministerial standards, into Johnson’s flat redecoration. That will make it a hat-trick of potentially serious censures awaiting Johnson in the new year – firstly from Geidt, who is said to be considering his position, as well as from Sue Gray, the senior civil servant investigating Downing Street lockdown gatherings. The third and potentially most serious is one by the parliamentary standards commissioner Kathryn Stone into Johnson’s donations to cover the refurbishment of his residence. Geidt’s investigation, which he undertook in May, cleared Johnson of wrongdoing over a £52,000 donation to the Conservatives from the party donor Lord Brownlow to cover the costs of redecorating the No 11 flat he shares with his wife, Carrie, and their two children. Geidt reported that Johnson told him “he knew nothing about such payments” until February 2021. However, WhatsApp messages that emerged during an Electoral Commission inquiry into the funding showed that Johnson had been in direct contact with Brownlow in November 2020. Downing Street has said Johnson only knew Brownlow was handling the donations, rather than funding them. Pressure is piling on Geidt from opposition parties and campaigners to make a call on whether to censure Johnson – or resign if there are grounds to believe he was misled. Tom Brake, director of the campaign group Unlock Democracy, said the silence from Geidt could mean one of three things. “Either the PM has refused to allow Lord Geidt to open a fresh inquiry, or the PM is stonewalling him, or he has interviewed the PM and is waiting to publish his report. Whichever it is, the public deserves to know. Lord Geidt should confirm, without further delay, whether our PM subscribes to the Nolan principles of integrity, accountability, openness and honesty.” The Liberal Democrat chief whip, Wendy Chamberlain, said Geidt’s position was becoming compromised. “We cannot allow another public servant to be dragged down by Johnson’s desire to cover up the avalanche of sleaze that is engulfing his government,” said Chamberlain. Geidt is said to have asked Johnson for the WhatsApp messages exposed by the Electoral Commission. He is also said to have been frustrated by the emergence of the new material, with suggestions he could consider his position if he concludes he has been misled by the prime minister. A resignation by Geidt would be a further embarrassment. Johnson’s previous ministerial standards adviser, Alex Allan, stood down in November 2020 after the prime minister ignored his findings that the home secretary, Priti Patel, had bullied staff. Stone, who looks into standards breaches by MPs, has not yet made a call on whether to investigate Johnson. Stone said she would not investigate until the Electoral Commission had finalised its inquiries, but has now been urged by MPs to do so. That could be the investigation that has the most serious implications for Johnson – Stone has sanction powers, including the ability to suspend an MP, which can lead to a recall petition and a potential byelection. Though highly unlikely to result in the prime minister losing his Uxbridge seat, it would at the very least add more fuel to backbenchers who believe Johnson could become an electoral liability.Marc Weiner has two voices. There is his speaking voice, engaging and booming, sharpened over years in front of the camera as a TV news reporter. And then there is the voice in his head, normally ringing with the same positivity he exudes in everyday life. But when Weiner was left hanging after telling loved ones he needed a kidney – a handful got tested; none were a match – that voice took on a darker tone. “Do people not love me?” he wondered. Weiner, 56, found out he had bladder cancer in July 2015 and had his prostate, bladder and both of his kidneys removed the following year. After another tumor was later removed from his stomach, Weiner was cancer-free and optimistic: All he needed was to find a kidney donor. But after finding no refuge in his friends and family, he looked at the numbers: more than 90,000 Americans are in need of a kidney transplant, with 13 people dying everyday waiting for a kidney. In New York state, the average wait time for a kidney from a deceased donor is seven to 10 years. Weiner didn’t like those numbers. He thought of his daughter, Lily, who was nine when he was diagnosed. He thought of the mornings he’d spend, waking up at the crack of dawn to hook himself up to a machine that drew out his blood over hours, filtered it for waste and pumped it back into his body. Dialysis helped to keep Weiner alive, but it was exhausting, and not a permanent fix. He was resolved. “Was I going to wait five, seven, 10 years on a list?” Weiner said. “Hell no.” Then, one day, a glimmer of hope appeared. Weiner’s wife, Lisa, heard about a man named Robert Leibowitz in New Jersey. On a family trip to Disney World, Leibowitz had worn a shirt emblazoned with a message – “In Need of Kidney” – and his phone number. He found a donor. A plan hatched in Lisa’s mind. Lisa, a longtime advertising executive, was on a car ride back from Hershey Park when she got the call confirming the good news. She turned to her husband. “Oh my god,” she said. “They’re going to do it.” “What are you talking about?” he replied. “The billboard,” she said. On a sunny day in late August 2018, Weiner stood on the corner of Broadway and 47th Street in Times Square, where a 5,000-sq ft billboard bore his smiling face and a link to his new website. “My name is Marc,” the billboard read. “I need a Kidney. YOU can Help!” Weiner posed for a photo in front of the billboard with Lily, posted it to social media and, with hope in his heart, waited for one kind stranger. ••• More than 1,800 people responded to Weiner’s call for a kidney, crashing the portal for prospective donors Weill Cornell Medicine had set up for him. Still, he couldn’t find a match. Only a small fraction of respondents were truly interested. But hiding among them was a person who would go on to change Weiner’s life – if not in the way he expected. It was about 3am on an August morning in 2018 when Mike Lollo, a slender man with close-cropped gray hair and a warm smile, read about Weiner’s billboard in the New York Post. The humanity of Weiner’s story appealed to Lollo, then working as an NYPD detective. And so, within days, he was undergoing blood work and a 24-hour urine collection, preparing to give his kidney over to a man he’d never met. Lollo wasn’t a match for Weiner. But something had changed in his mind that day. If he was ready to undergo surgery to change one stranger’s life, he figured, why not do it for someone else instead? Lollo underwent the two-hour surgery that December, taking six weeks off work to recover. While people usually don’t donate their kidney to a stranger – most worry about the surgery; the scar; the costs; or panicky scenarios, where life might change without one of the organs with which they were born – Lollo joined a small but growing number of people in the United States who do. So when Weiner learned of Lollo’s gesture – a New York Post reporter had called him, asking for comment – he rushed to Lollo’s hospital room, brandishing a Kron chocolate basket and a wide smile. Weiner walked into the room, looking at Lollo in his gown, talking to his wife and introduced himself. “I know who you are,” said Lollo, before he could finish. “That guy,” Weiner said, “He cared about me.” ••• Mike Lollo was so moved by meeting Weiner and donating his own kidney that he decided to volunteer for the National Kidney Donation Organization. Later, he was named its president. Weiner, meanwhile, was beginning to realize the power of human connection. So, in late 2020, he came up with another plan. He launched a second billboard in Times Square, this time on Seventh Avenue and West 43rd Street. Weiner knew he still might not find a kidney, but he wondered if there were more Mike Lollos out there. Living kidney donations, oftentimes, are sparked by others speaking about their own donations. On 31 December, CBS News, Weiner’s employer, ran a story on This Morning documenting his journey. “If you’re in the spirit of giving, think about giving your kidney,” Weiner said on the broadcast. “You’re going to save a life, and, ultimately, who knows, you might help me out.” Two years on from when he launched his first billboard, Weiner had learned some lessons. He knew people might see the billboard, sign up and lose their nerve. So he and Lollo came up with a new system partnering people who signed up to donate with “mentors.” Now, if a potential donor got cold feet; if they woke up in a cold sweat in the middle of the night wondering, “Why on earth am I giving someone I don’t know my kidney?” the mentor would be on call, to remind them the process was safe, having been through it themselves already. Humans need only one functioning kidney to live an active, healthy life, despite being born with two. ••• For Hillary Baude, it was the thought of Weiner’s daughter that jolted her into action. She’d watched the This Morning report live on television, then spent the rest of the day watching it over and over on her iPad, while researching kidney donation. She knew all too well the pain that comes when you can’t provide a loved one the help they need. Baude and her husband, Jim, had their first child in 2013. They were supposed to have two. Ellie, born premature at 33 weeks, had an identical twin who died halfway through Baude’s pregnancy. Ellie’s first moments in the world were marked by pain. She had stopped growing around the time of her twin’s death, and was 13 inches long, weighing two pounds, three ounces. She had two holes in her heart. Five months after her birth, Ellie underwent open-heart surgery. The operation stabilized her, but concerns about her health lingered. Doctors indicated she was likely to have suffered brain damage. And her body bore a reminder of the sibling the world would never meet: she was diagnosed with type V cutis aplasia, a rare skin defect occurring in surviving twins. Ellie was born with no skin from her hip to her knees, symmetrical in length on both legs. The Baudes were able to get Ellie laser treatment that allowed her skin to expand over the exposed parts, but that would not be the end of the family’s health struggles. About a year after Ellie’s birth, Jim was diagnosed with prostate cancer. That’s when Baude started to run. Running from her grief, yes, but also running because she could. She’d strap Ellie into a running stroller and hit the streets. “I was like, ‘wow, all of these people around me are just going through these very difficult experiences. And I am healthy,” Baude said. “I have the ability to do this.” Jim made a full recovery from the prostate cancer, and Ellie defied doctor’s prognostications and is now a happy older sister to two-year-old Josie. But Baude kept running, eventually graduating to marathons, the compounding miles deepening her well of gratitude. Not long after she watched the CBS segment on Weiner, Baude’s mind was made up. His family deserved the same relief hers had experienced, she thought. And she had a kidney to spare. ••• Baude wound up being a match for Weiner, but because it wasn’t the strongest match – some kidneys will last longer in some recipients than others – she didn’t end up giving her kidney to him. Instead, she decided to initiate a “kidney chain”: Her organ would go to someone else in need of a kidney, who had another willing recipient who wasn’t a match. That person’s kidney, like Baude’s, went to a stranger – and Weiner, thanks to Baude’s donation, got a “voucher” for a kidney he can cash in when his health permits, receiving a kidney from a donor who is an optimal match. Four more people who wanted to donate to Weiner completed testing, Lollo said, and plan to donate their kidneys to strangers. As Weiner waits on his kidney, he takes solace in knowing his efforts have helped to save at least six people’s lives. Lollo attributes the efforts to the mentorship program, which he believes could help eradicate the kidney waitlist if there was more awareness around donation. There are more than 253.8 million adults in the nation – most of whom presumably have a kidney to spare – according to the 2020 US Census. “If less than half of 1% of those people came forward,” Lollo said, “we would be able to find 100,000 (donors), I guarantee it.” Two weeks after her donation, Baude began running again – she was preparing for the New York City Marathon. When she ran the largest US marathon on 7 November 2021, she wanted to show people kidney donors could still be athletes. But finishing in under four hours wasn’t the only surprise she’d have that day. As Baude galloped through the streets of New York City, her blond ponytail flapping against her back, her husband secretly met up with Lollo and, for the first time, the Weiner family. They huddled together in a crowd on a packed city street, a makeshift family amid a sea of strangers wielding signs and smiles. At 1:50pm, as Baude came into view, they all shouted her name: “Hillary!” She locked eyes with Jim first, and then Lollo, who pointed to another man, a stranger who looked like a friend. “Ahh!” she yelped, noticing the face of the man she knew from the billboard. She embraced Weiner. They hugged, and Weiner turned to his wife and daughter, looking back at Baude incredulously. “One kidney!” he shouted. The group ducked into the first bar they found. Amid the humdrum of hugs and salutations, Baude ordered an IPA and fielded questions about the race from Weiner, who’d slipped into reporter mode. It felt like a family reunion. They laughed and exchanged stories. After about an hour, Weiner picked up the tab. “Thank you!” Hillary said. Weiner looked at her, astonished: “Are you kidding?” he asked. When the Weiners drove back that evening, they left the marathon knowing they were approaching their own finish line. Because of the chain initiated by Baude’s donation, in early 2022 Weiner will finally receive a kidney. Lily, his only daughter, is 15 now, a high school sophomore, and he’s excited to watch her get older. The dark voice in his head had quieted. Back inside the dimly-lit bar, Baude and her husband chatted with Steve Wilson, Baude’s kidney mentor, but a piece of the Weiners remained. The bar was called Lily’s. Those would like to learn more about kidney donation are encouraged to visit nkdo.org/considering-kidney-donation.I have been a cat lover my whole life. That is to say, I have never liked dogs. Or at least, this was the case until earlier this year. There was no conscious desire to beat the aversion – it just happened, and all it took was a puppy in an orange jacket, shortly after the end of lockdown. But before that, my low opinion of dogs. I decided at a young age that they were dangerous and uncouth – the pirates of the pet world who would cock their legs shamelessly on street corners and had great big wet dishcloths for tongues. As a child, I remember clutching my mother’s coat as the neighbour’s dog growled at us every morning over the garden fence and bared its monstrous teeth. We had just emigrated from Lahore to a racially hostile Britain of the 1970s and this dog only made us feel more unwelcome. On top of that, my mother had been attacked when she was a girl; perhaps I saw her flinching every time a dog walked by and took on her fear as my own. I have spent a lifetime crossing roads, leaving cafes and making excuses to dog-owning friends so that I am never at close quarters. This hasn’t always been easy. There was one blood-curdling lunch invitation from a friend who had just bought a puppy. I imagined a yappy little thing so I went along but it turned out to be a great dane who charged around the dining table and stuck its tongue in all the tubs of hummus at once. Another time, a stranger invited me for coffee and at the end said we must do it again. “Yes,” I said, but just as he was leaving he added, “next time I’ll bring my Afghan hounds.” I made sure to hold my smile in place but I thought, “Well, that’s the end of that.” Then, my 10-year-old niece started asking for a puppy for her birthday and I thought, “Oh God, am I going to have to ghost my niece, too?” Thankfully, she lost interest in dogs and started asking for an axolotl. News stories of random maulings and child deaths kept my suspicions intact over the years and even if my visceral fear has lessened, there is still the disapproval of a dog’s ridiculously slobbering and ingratiatingly buoyant personality. The same goes for dog owners who assume you find their pet as lovable as they do. In the 1980s, when it was the rage to wear white trousers, a dog jumped on me while I sat on a park bench and left a permanent smear of mud across mine while its owner just stood and smiled. But then the pup in the orange jacket. I was on a tube train and a couple came into my carriage, the woman carrying it in her arms. The dog was so little it was shivering even though it was dressed in the orange padded jacket. I waited for the discomfort to kick in but as I watched it take in the world with big, overwhelmed eyes and curled up paws, I felt a shift which couldn’t have occurred in that moment but must have been the accumulation of an unconscious process. The couple sensed my interest and brought the puppy over for me to stroke, which made me bristle, but I gave it a quick pat on the head and then felt bereft when they got off the train. This was shortly after lockdown and I wrote it off as an aberration, born of so many months of isolation. But since then I have noticed that I no longer flinch when a dog walks past and increasingly throw backward glances at it. What’s led to this change? I think to myself, and can’t formulate an answer. Maybe some of us have been marked by social isolation in ways that can’t quite be rationalised yet. Living alone for so many months, I did find myself questioning opinions and beliefs that had, over the years, become absolutes: that I never get lonely, that neighbours are never there for you in London, that independence is always empowering, that nature doesn’t thrive in a city. The end of lockdown was a chance to reset and go back into the world slightly more joyfully, more open to things, even if most of the resolutions to work less, cook more and meditate every day quickly fell by the wayside. I’m not sure that dogs featured in this mental recalibration, but maybe being more open to things has shifted my prejudice towards them. Since the puppy on the train, I have found myself admiring the sleek silver fur of a greyhound resting in a sunny spot of a pavement cafe, and making eye contact with what I’d previously have dismissed as a scratty mongrel outside the supermarket. I’ll occasionally stop and make clucking noises at a mutt, ready to make friends, but it will be the one to turn its back on me or simply stare, as if it’s unsure. Dogs, I realise, are picky about humans too. Not so different from cats, after all. Arifa Akbar is the Guardian’s chief theatre criticIn 2004 I met Brian Marshall while I was setting up a storytelling company of people with learning disabilities in Somerset. Brian, who has died aged 70, was the first to join, and his commitment never wavered. He revealed himself to be a natural and compulsive narrator with a genius for saying exactly the right words at the right time. “The thing is …” he pronounced at the end of a show at the grounds of Glastonbury Abbey “everyone’s got a story to tell!” To the local MP at a campaign meeting against cuts in mobility allowance, he said: “You’re going to leave people with disabilities staring at walls. And that’s not right.” He went on to co-deliver projects in schools, residential homes and day centres, and to offer remarkable staff training through telling his life story. When the company became a charity, Open Storytellers, in 2009, he joined the board as a trustee. He had a deep well of experience and wisdom that cut through bureaucracy and jargon, and grounded the organisation in the values that he exemplified – respect for others, generosity, risk-taking and fun. Brian was born in Templecombe, Somerset, one of six children of Joan and Derek Marshall, who worked in various jobs during his childhood, including agricultural, factory and cleaning work. His early life was not easy. He was in and out of hospitals, and moved eventually to long stay institutions: first Norah Fry in Shepton Mallet, then Selwood hospital in Frome. The residents formed deep and lasting friendships, and one of the sadnesses for Brian after the inevitable closures was the sheer difficulty of keeping in touch. This was remedied when he co-led, along with Professor Dorothy Atkinson, a leading academic in life story work by people with learning disabilities from the Open University, a funded project to collect memories from both residents and staff. For a time Brian lived for a time in a group home in Frome and then relocated joyously to his own flat in the town, festooned with Liverpool FC memorabilia, and with a tiny yard for growing the tomatoes and sunflowers he loved. When he became too frail to cope independently, he accepted a move to residential care with his usual grace. Well known in Frome, Brian taught those who knew him how to laugh, how to embrace change, how to treat every challenge as new learning, with great humility and self awareness; and how to be a true and lasting friend. His autobiography, Great Strides, is available at the Openstorytellers website. Brian kept in touch with and is survived by his brother Richard, two nephews, Christopher and Lee, and niece, Justine.British police have been testing out Tesla cars as part of a drive to electrify more of their fleet, and the results so far are promising, according to a Tesla spokesperson. Early findings show “great results” around the suitability of the firm’s Model 3 vehicle for emergency service operation, said Max Toozs-Hobson, emergency services lead at Tesla. He told the Guardian that while the average blue light run in the UK was seven to 15 minutes, the Model 3 had been able to take part in runs that lasted four hours on active deployment under advanced driving conditions, and said that “it’s achievable to do over 200 miles of blue light advanced driving with the [Model 3]”. Positive results could lead to more Tesla Model 3 cars being adopted by UK police, paramedic and fire services. The trial began earlier this year when the electric car firm offered UK police an adapted and liveried version of its Model 3. The test comes as UK police look to invest in more electric-powered cars ahead of a 2030 government ban on new diesel and petrol motored vehicles. Tesla made a number of adaptations to the car, but according to Toozs-Hobson, the systems did not impact the car range. Running automatic number plate recognition for three hours would take less than a few miles of range off the car, he said, and the LED lights could run for days off the battery pack. The charging system was successful. Toozs-Hobson said he had “joined a traffic unit who got into the car with just 80 miles of range. We stopped at a V3 supercharger and gained 70% power in less than 20 minutes. This gave us another 5-6 hours of driving for the shift. Plus, this fill up cost less than £20”. However, the trial results were not all positive. Toozs-Hobson criticised the light bars found on emergency vehicles, saying that they were like “running with a parachute” on. He suggested integrating police lights into the car cabin, similar to many unmarked police cars, which he said would reduce drag and the drop in car value that comes from drilling holes into vehicle roofs. The Tesla Model 3 Performance, the vehicle type believed to have been used in these trials, is more expensive than non-electric or hybrid high-performance equivalents. A Tesla Model 3 Performance is available from £59,990, while a BMW 3 Series Saloon costs nearly half that at £33,250. However, high initial costs may also come with lower operating costs, reducing the total cost of the vehicle over its lifetime. Toozs-Hobson said that the public response to Tesla’s active units had been “mind-blowing” and that the firm would continue working with police ahead of the 2030 combustion motor ban. A government spokesperson said, “Over the next few years police forces across England and Wales will play a significant role in achieving the government’s net zero carbon ambition through the de-carbonisation programme for policing”. He added that “some forces have already made significant progress in decarbonising their fleet”.Thousands of additional care workers are to be recruited from abroad to fill chronic gaps in the workforce, the government has announced, after figures showed more than 40,000 social care staff had left the sector in the past six months. Immigration rules will be relaxed for care workers, care assistants and home care workers, who will be added to the Home Office’s shortage occupation list. The Department of Health and Social Care said the pandemic had brought unprecedented challenges. The change follows a recommendation from the Migration Advisory Committee, which said there were “severe and increasing difficulties faced by the care sector”. Care workers who arrive on a 12-month health and care visa must receive an annual salary of at least £20,480 to qualify, with the measures expected to come into effect early next year. They will be entitled to bring dependants, including a partner and children. Priti Patel, the home secretary, said the sector was “experiencing unprecedented challenges prompted by the pandemic”, adding: “The changes we’ve made to the health and care visa will bolster the workforce and help alleviate some of the pressures currently being experienced.” Health providers have predicted worsening staff shortages, with a requirement for all frontline healthcare workers to be fully vaccinated against Covid by 1 April. The same was asked of care workers by 11 November. Earlier this month, the Nuffield Trust said the care sector was facing an extremely challenging winter of staff shortages. The health thinktank found staff numbers had fallen by about 42,000 between April and October. The Home Office also announced that a visa scheme to allow seasonal horticultural workers to come to the UK would continue until the end of 2024, but the government added it wanted to see a new plan from the sector to cut the reliance on foreign labour. There will be 30,000 visas available next year, with the number being tapered down from 2023. The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs said a review had found the reliance on foreign labour had held down wages and was a disincentive to investment. George Eustice, the environment secretary, said a seasonal workforce long pre-dated membership of the EU but there was a determination to improve pay and skills to attract UK workers. “We recognise that agriculture has unique and seasonal requirements for labour at harvest and have listened to our world-leading fresh produce industry to understand their needs,” he said. Wes Streeting, shadow health secretary, said: “Sneaking this announcement out on Christmas Eve is an admission of failure from the Conservative government that they don’t pay carers enough to recruit or retain the staff we need, and have failed to tackle this building problem for years. Labour will ensure care workers get the pay, terms and conditions they deserve, tackle high vacancy rates, and transform training to improve the quality of care.” Daisy Cooper, the Liberal Democrat’s health and social care spokesperson, said: “This measure is too little too late for everyone who has had their visits to a loved one in a care home cancelled this Christmas. The paltry offer of a one-year visa will likely fail to attract the numbers of care workers we so desperately need. “The government needs to think again and offer three-year visas to carers with immediate effect.”Two former Georgia election workers have filed a defamation lawsuit against Donald Trump’s ex-lawyer Rudy Giuliani, the rightwing One America News Network and several of its senior executives, claiming the workers became the target of vote-rigging conspiracy theories that put them in physical danger and threatened their livelihoods. During the 2020 election, Ruby Freeman and daughter Wandrea “Shaye” Moss worked as poll workers counting ballots at State Farm Arena in Fulton county, Georgia. They claim they became the center of a series of unfounded conspiracy theories promoted by former New York mayor Giuliani, who was then serving as an advisor to Trump, and several top employees at the California-based OAN news network. “As a result of their vital service, Ms Freeman and Ms Moss have become the objects of vitriol, threats, and harassment,” they said in Thursday’s complaint, filed in federal court in Washington. “They found themselves in this unenviable position not based on anything they did, but instead because of a campaign of malicious lies designed to accuse them of interfering with a fair and impartial election, which is precisely what each of them swore an oath to protect,” the suit said. The action targets San Diego-based Herring Networks, which owns and operates One America News Network, as well as the channel’s chief executive Robert Herring, president Charles Herring, and reporter Chanel Rion. Giuliani, Trump’s former personal lawyer often appeared on OAN and spearheaded the drive to claim voter fraud in the aftermath of the election and was also named as a defendant. In the complaint, Moss and Freeman claim that OAN broadcast stories falsely accusing them of conspiring to produce secret batches of illegal ballots and running them through voting machines to help Biden, who ultimately won the state by 12,670 votes. Election workers in states closely won by Joe Biden, in particular, have faced a barrage of abuse from extremists pushing a lie that Trump was denied a win last November because of widespread electoral fraud. Trump himself pressured Georgia’s top election official, Brad Raffensperger, a Republican, in a phone call to “find” the necessary votes to wrongly secure him a win in the state in the November, 2020, presidential election. Meanwhile, in an interview, OAN chief executive Robert Herring Sr told Reuters he was not concerned about the lawsuit and that his network had done nothing wrong. “I know all about it and I’m laughing,” he said of the lawsuit. “I’m laughing about the four or five others who are suing me. Eventually, it will turn on them and go the other way.” The plaintiffs in the action have also filed a defamation suit against The Gateway Pundit, a far-right website, claiming that the site’s managers and writers, twins brothers Jim and Joe Hoft, “instigated a deluge of intimidation, harassment, and threats that has forced them to change their phone numbers, delete their online accounts, and fear for their physical safety”. Among the accusations levelled at Freeman in the month after the election a year ago, Gateway Pundit accused her of “counting illegal ballots from a suitcase stashed under a table”. Trump also singled out Freeman during that phone call with Raffensberger, claiming she “stuffed the ballot boxes” and was a scammer. Giuliani accused Freeman and Moss of acting suspiciously, like drug dealers “passing out dope,” their lawsuit asserts. Georgia state officials have said such “suitcases” were standard ballot containers and votes were properly counted under the watch of an independent monitor and a state investigator.Derek Pearsall, who has died aged 90 of cancer, was one of my earliest academic colleagues and a friend for more than six decades. When he joined the English department at King’s College London in 1959 as assistant lecturer in Old and Middle English, Derek was four years my junior, both in years and in the job, and there were similarities in the social background and experiences of national service and earlier teaching that had brought us together in this role. Born in Birmingham, the second child to Elsie (nee Rawlins), a housewife, and Joseph Pearsall, a shop fitter and toolmaker, Derek attended King Edward grammar school in Camp Hill. From there his brilliant school-leaving results gave him entry to Birmingham University as a student of English, the first person in his family to go to university. A first-class degree gave Derek the opportunity of postgraduate study under the medievalist Geoffrey Shepherd, which he completed after a period of national service in the RAF. His MA thesis on the Gawain poet received a mark of distinction. From KCL, Derek went on in 1965 to a lectureship, and later a professorship, at the newly founded University of York, where he collaborated with Elizabeth Salter and Barrie Dobson of the history department to found the Centre for Medieval Studies in 1968. He built up a core following of postgraduate students who were inspired by his teaching to become pioneers of research in medieval literature in universities throughout the world. They were joined in later years by a multitude of scholars who could claim Derek as sometime mentor. In 1987, after a number of visiting professorships in the US and Canada, he became Gurney professor of English literature at Harvard University, where he remained for 13 years, continuing to train new graduate students and adding to an impressive record of publication in 14th- and 15th-century literature. In 1952 he married Rosemary Elvidge in King’s Lynn, Norfolk. They had met three years previously, while students at Birmingham. In all, during a lifetime of scholarship and research, he was sole or joint author of 32 books, among them definitive lives of the poets Geoffrey Chaucer and John Lydgate, and an edition of the C-text of the Middle English Piers Plowman. He was also author of 120-plus articles on medieval literature, and reviewer of more than 100 books published by other scholars in this area of research. Nothing of this huge learning was ever on display in the exchanges of everyday life. In casual conversation he was always the same benign and affable, very ordinary person. Rosemary died in 2004, and their eldest son, Simon, five years later. Derek is survived by four children, Sarah, Mary-Ann, Judith, and Daniel, and his grandchildren, Jamie, Elspeth, Tom, Gregor, Ben and Jessica.My father, Trevlyn D’Cruz, who has died aged 83, was an accountant who became managing director of the publishing company New English Library (NEL) in 1974. His years there read like a primer of 70s culture: he distributed Bob Guccione’s Playboy magazine rival, Penthouse, was involved in the launch and distribution of the feminist magazine Spare Rib, and published Richard Allen’s hugely popular youth culture novels, including Skinhead and Suedehead. He also worked closely with authors such as Harold Robbins, Stephen King and James Herbert, and secured the UK rights to L Ron Hubbard’s Battlefield Earth. On one occasion he was invited to lunch with Hubbard in California, but arrived to find the great man represented at the table only by a framed portrait and some senior Scientologists. Trev, as he was widely known, was born into India’s mixed-race Anglo-Indian community to Kathlyn (nee Belletty), a telephonist, and Samuel D’Cruz, a commercial buyer, in the Entally district of Calcutta (now Kolkata) during the last years of British rule. Evacuated to the countryside during the second world war, he was again moved away from the city in 1947, this time to avoid the civil strife that accompanied independence and partition. As a result he was schooled at Goethals, an austere Congregation of Christian Brothers school in the Himalayas. After studying intermediate commerce in Calcutta, he went to England on his own, aged 16 in 1955, doing articles with a firm of accountants in Battersea in south London and qualifying as a chartered accountant in 1961. The move to the UK was supposed to be a temporary one, but in the event he never went back to live in India. In 1961 his father died, and instead of returning home, he brought his mother and youngest sister to London. Trev’s new roots in England were already firmly planted as he had, upon arrival, fallen in love with Jill Rogers, the daughter of the couple who ran the boarding house where he lived in Balham. They married in 1964 and remained together until Jill’s death this year. Working first as an accountant at the Morgan Crucible factory in Battersea, in the early 70s he became financial director of NEL, and was appointed as its managing director in 1974. Leaving NEL shortly after it was sold to Hodder &amp; Stoughton in 1982, he established a new publishing company, Quadrant Books, before going on to manage the commercial arm of the Institute of Chartered Accountants from 1985 to 1999, when he retired. He then became immersed in voluntary work for various charities, including Wandsworth’s Foster Board, Merton Women’s Aid, the Rosemary Simmons Housing Association and the Diabetic Society. Widely admired for his charm and wit, Trev was a noted host and entertainer. He is survived by my sister, Emma, and me, our foster brother, Jason, five grandchildren, Jack, Raphael, Ollie, Theo and Evie, and his sisters Anita and Yvonne.A white Christmas may be on the way for the uplands of north Wales and northern England, while festive flurries and bracing temperatures will set in on Boxing Day, with the Met Office issuing warnings for snow and strong winds across the north of England and central Scotland from the early hours of Sunday. Snow is predicted to fall in Snowdonia and the Pennines on Christmas Day, with more expected from the early hours of Boxing Day across the north of England and southern Scotland. With cloud and rain forecast for southern parts of the UK on Saturday, this band is expected to move northwards before turning to snow. Motorists in south Wales and south-west England have been warned to take care on the roads, with heavy downpours expected. Temperatures are forecast to plunge to as low as -2C in some parts of the north and east of England between Christmas Day and 28 December, although weather across most of the UK will be slightly warmer than average for this time of year, with southern England enjoying mild temperatures of 7C-9C. A warning has been issued for snow over some upland areas, coupled with strong, gusty winds. The Met Office says that winds gusting between 35mph and 45mph in places could lead to challenging travel conditions across higher Pennine and Cumbrian routes, as well as the Scottish Southern Uplands during the early hours of Boxing Day. The Met Office also warned that temporary blizzard-like conditions may be encountered above 300-400 metres elevation. These conditions will probably move into hillier central parts of Scotland during Sunday morning, while snow turns back to rain further south. The chief meteorologist, Frank Saunders, said: “The Christmas period will be unsettled for much of the UK this year. Many will see wet and cloudy conditions as mild air dominates the south and west. This contrasts with the cold air in the north-east, which brings the chance of some snow, most likely over the Pennines and the southern half of Scotland, and is perhaps a little more likely into the early part of Boxing Day. Added to the mix is a strong easterly wind, especially in northern areas, which will make it feel particularly cold.”Ministers could meet as soon as Monday to determine whether new restrictions are needed in England over the new year amid growing concerns that soaring Covid cases could hit public services. They will be expected to assess new modelling from the University of Warwick, given to the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) in documents published on Thursday. Scientists have looked at the effects of a potential return to step 2 restrictions from 28 December or 1 January, lasting either two weeks, four weeks or three months until 28 March. No 10 said the data had not yet been considered by ministers. Step 2 – part of last year’s roadmap – includes a ban on indoor social mixing, a return of the rule of six, and bars and restaurants only able to serve outdoors. It comes as new ONS figures showed one in 35 people in England had Covid last week, with 1.7 million people testing positive across the UK. No 10 said officials would continue reviewing the latest hospital data over Christmas but that ministers would not meet again until Monday at the earliest. “We are worried about workplace resilience,” one government source said. “That’s a key reason to reduce the isolation days [from 10 to seven] but a decision will have to be taken in the round, taking in hospitalisations and severe illness, which should be clearer over the weekend.” A Whitehall source said any restrictions based on workplace concerns would probably be targeted at sectors rather than being broadbrush but ministers had not ruled out legal guidance coming in next week. The government’s Covid-O committee, which has been focused on the functioning of services and workplace absences, is expected to review the situation again after the Christmas weekend. Pat Cullen, head of the Royal College of Nursing, told the BBC there was a “very, very depleted workforce” due to the number of staff forced into isolation. Dr Jenny Harries, the head of UK Health Security Agency, said there were a number of factors as well as the variant’s severity, that would be taken into account when ministers convene after the Christmas weekend to discuss further restrictions for England. Despite the soaring cases, hopes have been raised that new restrictions could be avoided after analysis showing the risk of hospitalisation is up to 70% less for people with Omicron compared with those infected with Delta, according to the first UK government study of its kind. Harries said ministers would need to take a holistic approach about how widespread the impact of case rates was on essential services – as well as numbers being hospitalised. “Ministers will look at all of the data that we have available – and that isn’t simply what the epidemiology is saying, it’s how it’s impacting society,” she told the BBC. “So, for example, we have very high rates of individuals off sick – we know that particularly in London, around one in 35 have currently got Omicron. Now that’s having an impact on the workforce. So these are not simply about hospitalisation rates.” She added that ministers are being kept updated daily and that will continue throughout the Christmas period. “I don’t think we do know yet that this is going to be a significantly less serious disease for the population – the older population – that we are normally most concerned about in relation to serious disease and death.” The Sage documents found “an apparent slowing of growth rates” which could be linked to self-policing of behaviour. But the papers said there were still “doubling times in most of the country … in the region of two to three days and, importantly, test positivity rates are still rising.”The home secretary, Priti Patel, has repeatedly promised to curb the number of people arriving on UK shores in small boats by making this route “unviable” but more than 27,000 refugees have crossed the Channel this way, up from 8,500 in 2020. The Home Office is now planning to introduce a tagging scheme for asylum seekers after a reportedly “exasperated” Boris Johnson ordered a review. It is the latest proposal in a string of ideas aimed at clamping down on small boat arrivals, none of which have been successful at curbing numbers so far. The “turn-around” tactic In autumn it emerged that Patel was preparing to push small boats carrying migrants back to France, despite warnings from government lawyers that such manoeuvres might be unlawful. The Home Office confirmed that Border Force staff were being trained to employ “turn-around” tactics at sea under plans developed for two years. Patel was also seeking to introduce legal protections for Border Force staff sending boats back in the event of a refugee drowning as a result. The French government rejected the turn-around plan on the grounds it could endanger lives. Offshore asylum processing Another much-mooted idea was to send asylum seekers to another country, such as Gibraltar or islands in the South Atlantic, while their claims are processed. It triggered cross-party anger. Plans for a “potential offshoring of asylum processing centres for those using clandestine entry routes to the UK” were quickly likened to Australia’s problematic offshoring of asylum seekers to places such as Manus Island in Papua New Guinea. Criminalising the steering of small boats Since the start of 2020, the UK government has been seeking to crack down on Channel crossings by prosecuting people who steer small boats carrying asylum seekers. But the policy, under which the government brought 67 successful prosecutions related to the piloting of small boats under smuggling laws, was challenged last week, resulting in a defeat for the government. The court of appeal ruled that convictions of four asylum seekers for driving small boats across the Channel “must be quashed in due course”, citing systemic failings. The judges said convictions of this kind were subject to the prosecution being able to prove that the person accused of steering the boat “knew or had reasonable cause to believe that his act was assisting entry or attempted entry into the United Kingdom without leave”. Tagging Under the Home Office’s “new plan for immigration”, Patel is expected to announce early in the new year that small boat arrivals will be electronically tagged. Ministers hope tagging working-age people will make it harder for them to work illegally while their asylum claims are processed, and make it easier to remove those whose application for asylum has failed. The plan has been described as “desperate and draconian” by the chief executive of the Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants. Cooperation deals with France Patel has also tried to solve the issue financially: so far, she has agreed two multimillion-pound deals with the French authorities – one for more than £28m in November 2020 and one for at least £54m in July – to increase surveillance of the 93 miles of French coastline from which attempts to reach the UK have been launched. Repeated requests from the UK government for joint Channel patrols with the help of Border Force and French navy personnel have been rejected by France. Campaigners for refugees have claimed that opening safe and legal application routes for asylum seekers hoping to come to the UK – an option that does not exist for almost all people seeking refuge in Britain – would deter many from attempting to make the dangerous crossing in small boats. The Home Office still requires people to physically reach the UK before an asylum application can be lodged.Washington Football Team safety Deshazor Everett was involved in a road crash on Thursday that left a passenger dead, the team said. The 29-year-old was transferred to a hospital with non-life-threatening injuries after the incident, which occurred on Thursday night about 35 miles outside Washington DC in Loudoun County, Virginia. The cause of the crash remained under investigation on Friday. No charges were immediately filed, said sheriff’s office spokesman Kraig Troxell. “Our thoughts and prayers are with everyone who has been affected by this tragedy,” the Washington Football Team said in a statement. “Our team has alerted the league office and is working with local authorities as we continue to gather more information.” According to a report from the sheriff’s office, Everett’s 2010 Nissan GT-R left the right side of the roadway, struck several trees and rolled over. The passenger, Olivia S Peters, 29, of Las Vegas, later died at a local hospital. Everett’s management agency did not immediately respond to a request for comment. A special teams captain in 2018, Everett is in his seventh season for Washington. He was placed on the team’s reserve/non-football injury list. Everett has two career interceptions. He has played in 14 games this year, making five solo tackles and assisting on five others. “The only thing I want to say is that I was very saddened to hear the news,” Washington coach Ron Rivera said Friday. “My thoughts and prayers go out to the family of the young lady and also go out to Deshazor and his family as well. It’s a very difficult situation and we’ll let things go on and let the police and the investigation go through and find out what happened.” • This article was amended on 26 December 2021 to bring references to the crash in line with style guidelines.On the eve of their tribe’s settlement with the crown, Gabrielle Huria and Te Maire Tau walked out on to the cracked, dry earth of Tūtaepatu lagoon’s bed. The lagoon’s edges, once thick with flax, had been choked by imported weed, spiralling blackberry and English willow. The streams that fed it had been giving up their waters to irrigate the surrounding dairy farms and having them returned in a swill of effluent. Finally, they had run dry. On the far shoreline was the place where the tribe used to give up their dead to the mud, lowering them into its dark, hidden reaches along the waterline. Now the mud had baked to concrete, cracked and cratered like a desert. On its surface, thousands of tuna, the native eels so valued by the tribe, lay dead or dying in the sun, their smell mingling with that of the drying silt. Above them, birds were circling – so large that Tau thought for a moment he was seeing eagles. But they were only hawks, fat from so much carrion. “We wondered if it was a tohu” – an omen or sign, Huria says, looking out at the lagoon more than 20 years later. “But Te Maire said it just signified a change – things were different.” The lagoon would be returned to them that year in the tribe’s 1998 treaty settlement, and in the decades since, volunteers have gradually transformed it: pulling out the introduced weeds and vines, replanting with harakeke flax and fern, nursing back plant species to help filter the waterways that feed it. Huria and Tau are two prominent leaders within Ngāi Tahu, New Zealand’s largest southern tribe, and they now have their sights on a larger battle: authority over the South Island’s water. The tribe is taking New Zealand’s government to court, for what they allege have been repeated failures over successive governments to protect the country’s waterways. They argue that the crown must recognise their rangatiratanga – governing authority and self-determination – over waterways stretching across most of the South Island. The legal case is unprecedented and dances across political, cultural and economic battles playing out across the country: New Zealand’s economic reliance on dairy, and a colonial legacy placing farming at the heart of its culture, is increasingly pitted against its clean green image, climate commitments and growing movements for Māori sovereignty over their natural resources. Those currents compete in the argument over South Island rivers, which flow through some of the country’s most fragile natural landscapes and its most prosperous farming country. ‘Something broken and dying’ Te Maire Tau moves along the banks of the Ashley/Rakahuri River at a steady lope then pauses to hold up a hand. “This is good wind for eeling,” he says. The cold easterly sweeping down off the alps will dry a hanging eel fillet quickly. To his right the water flows, sluggish brown, its bottom thick with mud, algae carpeting the shingle. A blue heron moves slowly through the sludge then its beak spears down, the silver slip of a minnow catching the light. “You know what I feel sorry for? These poor birds, eating out of this bloody filth,” Tau says. “Well,” says Huria, following him in a green raincoat. “We eat out of it.” Many of the waters that flow through Ngāi Tahu lands have been contaminated. The fish and eels that the tribe has hunted for generations are threatened. The puha watercress they pull from the creekbeds reeks of effluent. The rivers bloom green and black with toxic algae, so poisonous that a clump the size of a coin can kill a dog in 30 minutes. Their state reflects a much wider, long-brewing crisis with New Zealand’s fresh waterways. About 60% are unswimmable, 74% of freshwater fish are threatened or at risk of extinction and 95% of rivers flowing through pastoral land are contaminated. University of Otago research this year found 800,000 New Zealanders were drinking water with unsafe levels of nitrate contamination. In 2016, more than 5,000 people fell ill after a town’s waterways were contaminated with E coli. In 2017, then prime ministerial candidate Jacinda Ardern made cleaning up the country’s waterways a campaign promise. “Clean water is the birthright of all of us. I want future generations to be able to swim in the local river, just like I did,” she said. Since then, however, progress has been slow or nonexistent. The government introduced stricter regulations last year, but they are expected to take five years to improve water quality. The degradation of those waterways represents far more than the loss of a food source or recreational playground, Tau says. Rivers are woven deep into the fabric of Māori identity. A pepeha, the traditional form for greeting, begins by stating those foundational connections: this is my name, my tribe, my river, my mountain. “Fundamentally to us, there is no other identity. This is who we are,” Tau says. “All our old people, they weep about it,” says Huria, chief executive of Te Kura Taka Pini, the tribe’s freshwater group. “When they get together and talk, they start weeping about what the river was to them and what it is now. “Spiritual identity is tied up in it, their sense of place and our sense of place. For me what breaks my heart is our kids won’t be able to do any of it [fishing, swimming or gathering traditional foods] because it’s too dirty. As a parent your whole purpose is to pass on to your children the messages of your generation, and what do we pass on to them? Something broken and dying.” A rich and abundant food basket The takiwā (tribal territory) of Ngāi Tahu covers almost all of the South Island. Lying at its centre are the Canterbury plains, New Zealand’s largest area of flat land, formed over thousands of years as gravel and sediment washed down from the mountains of the Southern Alps. The debris formed a land of porous layers – soil, shingle, gravel, silt. An often-hidden network of water seeps endlessly through it via braided rivers and ribboning creeks, flood plains, wetlands, subterranean aquifers. For Ngāi Tahu, the plains were a jewel – a rich and abundant food basket, filled with eels, fish, bird life, cress and root vegetables. Today the plains are still a provider of food and prosperity: they form the heart of New Zealand’s lucrative multibillion-dollar dairy industry, which accounts for 3% of the country’s GDP and 20% of total exports. Over the past 30 years, Canterbury dairy cattle have increased 973% – from 113,000 to sit at 1.2-1.3 million in the last five years. Among them are Ngāi Tahu’s own cattle – the tribe’s business arm has a substantial farming investment. To transform the dry, wind-whipped plains into the lush grass expanses dairy cattle need to graze, farmers began pumping up vast quantities of water and pouring it out over the land, along with nitrogen-rich fertiliser. The region has become the most irrigated in the country. “The problem is not so much the irrigation, it’s what it allows,” says Dr Mike Joy, a freshwater ecologist at Victoria University. “It allows the intensification. It goes from a few scraggly sheep to thousands – actually 1.3 million – cows.” Courtesy of those cows, many of Canterbury’s fields are doused in nitrates twice, Joy says – fertiliser to grow the grass and then again with their effluent. In high concentrations, nitrogen becomes toxic: linked to cancer and blue baby syndrome in humans, and causing the algal blooms that suffocate life in the rivers. Most proposed solutions, Joy says, are nowhere near radical enough – focusing on mitigation strategies when New Zealand needs to radically diminish the pollutants it puts into waterways. “If you have a pot of milk on the stove and it’s boiling over, the solution that seems to be the popular one is to get a tea towel – and then maybe buy some more tea towels,” Joy says. “The only way you fix this is to turn the gas off. You can’t fix something while you’re still polluting it.” Ripples of outrage Ngāi Tahu’s court case, they say, is a step towards a more radical approach. “For too long, governments have talked about addressing these issues but have made piecemeal progress,” Ngāi Tahu chair Lisa Tumahai said as the court case was filed. “That is not enough. Now is the time to act.” The argument is part of a wider raft of cases over water from iwi (tribes), and their claim follows a precedent-setting 2017 case, in which the Whanganui River was granted legal personhood. Rangatiratanga, the tribe says, is not the same as ownership – it indicates governing authority and rights but also responsibility for protection. The office of David Parker, the environment minister and attorney general, did not return a request for comment – the government does not typically comment on ongoing litigation. But any possible shift in the balance of control of the water that feeds the country’s biggest export can cause ripples of discomfort or outrage. As the government floated a set of reforms towards co-governance with iwi over water, opposition leader Judith Collins claimed the tribes would “own” the water – and took to social media to stir controversy. “What is your view – should your local council have to pay iwi for drinking water? Who owns water?” she asked supporters online. “No one should have to pay iwi anything, for anything,” came one reply. “They are tearing our country apart,” said another, while others decried it as “separatism” and “racism”. Collins subsequently accepted she had mischaracterised the tribe’s proposal, and that Ngāi Tahu has not proposed ownership of water. But her rhetoric set a tone that would continue over the coming months, and in 2021 “separatism” became an increasingly prominent thread in the centre-right of New Zealand politics. Chris Allen, spokesperson on water quality for the lobby group Federated Farmers, says with hindsight there’s “a lot” of dairy conversions that wouldn’t have been carried out. “But there’s a free market and some decided to perhaps learn the hard way. We didn’t have rules or limits … We now do.” Farming alone was not responsible for water degradation in New Zealand, Allen said, adding some of the country’s most polluted rivers ran through cities. He said farmers were aware of the problems and focused on solutions. Some Canterbury farmers would have to dramatically reduce their nitrogen loss – some by up to 30% – or face penalties. “We’re on a journey. And that journey has been going on for Canterbury for well over 10 years. “We’ve got to get the balance right,” he says. “That’s really hard. If it was easy, it would have been done a long time ago.” For Māori, Tau argues, the degradation of the waterways and the loss of healthy rivers and streams is another form of confiscation, layered atop the historic expropriation of land and waterways. “The one traumatic event that featured in the lives of the grandparents and parents was dislocation from the land,” he says. As the rivers die, he sees the resulting alienation from the natural landscape and waters as a similar process, repeating. “The same has happened with culture and identity in the landscape: you become more and more dislocated.”LadBaby have scored their fourth consecutive UK Christmas No 1, making them the first artist to ever achieve that feat – while an expletive-strewn protest against Boris Johnson has reached the festive top five. LadBaby’s four Christmas No 1s puts them level with the Beatles, who topped the Christmas chart in 1963, 64, 65 and 67. But where the Beatles’ songs – I Want to Hold Your Hand, I Feel Fine, Day Tripper and Hello, Goodbye – covered everything from LSD dilettantes to the joys of young love, LadBaby’s have all been focused on the gastronomic brilliance of sausage rolls. The duo – YouTuber Mark Hoyle and his wife Roxanne – have created the series of comedy cover versions to raise money for the Trussell Trust, a food bank charity. In 2018 they covered Starship’s We Built This City (its foundations recast from rock’n’roll to sausage rolls), and followed it with Joan Jett’s I Love Rock’n’Roll twisted into I Love Sausage Rolls. For 2020, they reheated the formula with Don’t Stop Me Eatin’, their riff on Journey’s perennial soft rock anthem Don’t Stop Believin’. This year, the couple looked to have stiff competition from Ed Sheeran and Elton John, who seemed to regard the Christmas No 1 with the kind of determined festive focus shared by high-street retailers, the hospitality industry and children – they called their song Merry Christmas, and decked it with sleigh bells and lyrics about mistletoe, snow and fires aglow. It too was a charity release, to benefit the artists’ foundations. But the pair gave LadBaby a boost by letting them do a cover of Merry Christmas and appearing on the recording, titled Sausage Rolls for Everyone. Their own version is at No 2 this week, having spent two weeks at No 1, though they are still each credited alongside LadBaby with a Christmas No 1 win. It marks Sheeran’s fourth No 1 of the year, and Elton John’s third. LadBaby thanked everyone who had streamed and downloaded Sausage Rolls for Everyone, saying: “Thank you for helping us raise the profile, raise money and awareness for the Trussell Trust, the food banks in the UK and helping support the 14 million people in this country that are living below the poverty line. We couldn’t have done it without you.” At No 3 in the chart is Wham’s Last Christmas, which is yet to achieve a Christmas No 1 spot, though did finally reach the top just after Christmas last year – its first such placing since its release in 1984. At No 4 is another classic, Mariah Carey’s All I Want for Christmas Is You, which also reached No 1 for the first time last year. At No 5, the festive mood darkens considerably for the protest song Boris Johnson is Still a Fucking Cunt, by punk band the Kunts. Lifting the tune from Gary Glitter’s Rock and Roll Part II, it’s a 64-second follow-up to their 2020 song Boris Johnson is a Fucking Cunt, which also reached No 5. The similarly sweary and un-festive ABCDEFU, by 17-year-old TikTok star Gayle, is at No 6. New Christmas recordings elsewhere in this year’s chart include George Ezra’s Come on Home for Christmas at No 10 (a cover of Please Come Home for Christmas by Charles Brown), and Olivia Dean’s cover of Nat King Cole’s The Christmas Song at No 27. There are 29 Christmas songs in the chart in total, including favourites such as the Pogues’ Fairytale of New York (No 7), Shakin’ Stevens’ Merry Christmas Everyone (8), Brenda Lee’s Rockin’ Around the Christmas Tree (9), Chris Rea’s Driving Home for Christmas (12), Wizzard’s I Wish It Could Be Christmas Everyday (17), Leona Lewis’s One More Sleep (21) and Slade’s Merry Xmas Everybody (24). Adele has the No 1 album at Christmas, with 30 spending its fifth week at the top. It is now the joint longest-running No 1 album of the year, with Olivia Rodrigo’s Sour.Antonio Conte has criticised Thursday’s meeting between the Premier League and managers as a waste of time – because he believes everything was decided in advance. Tottenham’s manager barely concealed his frustration as he described a meeting intended to discuss issues arising from the latest Covid outbreak – including player welfare and fixture congestion – as like talking to a wall. “If I have to be honest, it was a meeting where we tried to speak and some coaches tried to speak, to ask about solutions but I think everything was decided,” said Conte. “It was a wall. For this reason, I prefer not go into the discussion.” When asked if the meeting was a waste of time, Conte replied: “I think so. Because when you have a wall in front of you, you can speak and ask for what you want, but every decision was taken.” He added: “I didn’t want to suggest anything myself because I think I would waste time and waste words. I understood that nothing can happen. I prefer to use the time to work and to improve my players.” Conte’s side have been hit hard by a Covid outbreak which led to the postponement of two fixtures: a league game against Brighton and the Europa Conference League match against Rennes. But while the Spurs manager made his displeasure with the Premier League and Uefa clear, he played down Pep Guardiola’s suggestion that players may need to strike to get the authorities to act. “We are all professional,” he said. “Two weeks ago we faced a really bad situation. And don’t forget that during a really bad situation we lost the Conference League. No one tried to do something. No Uefa, no Premier League. If they decide we have to play, we have to play because we are professionals. But in the last two weeks, no one helped us.” Conte warned that the glut of fixtures over the Christmas period, with games against West Ham, Crystal Palace, Southampton and Watford over an 11-day stretch, would put even more pressure on his squad, which he said was still feeling the effects of Covid. Sunday’s game against Palace is followed by Tuesday’s visit to St Mary’s. “It is not easy for us, and it is not easy for all the teams,” he said. “To play after only one day is not simple. You have to manage the situation very well because of the risk of losing players to injuries, so we have to pay great attention, especially my team. “Don’t forget we had half our squad with Covid – and then you have to live with this situation for two to three weeks after you finish Covid. We have to try to manage the situation very well because for sure physically the players with Covid are not 100% fit. So in these next two games we try to rotate the players to find a good balance and a good solution.” Conte said he would monitor Harry Kane’s fatigue levels especially closely, and was aware that the striker had ruptured a hamstring on New Year’s Day in 2020 after a busy period of games. “I know this and it’s difficult to start the game without Harry because he is a point of reference in our team,” said Conte. “I will speak to him and with all the players because I want to understand very well what is their real physical condition, and if there is someone that has a bit of fatigue.” Norwich also face games on Sunday and Tuesday after a recent Covid outbreak that forced off one of their fixtures and their manager, Dean Smith, said: “We are having to push rehab forward and people are breaking down in rehab because of that … It is lunacy that we are having to play two games in 48 hours and there has got to be a question about the integrity of the competition when teams are playing weakened teams against other teams and it is affecting league positions.”The growing wave of Omicron cases has helped drive Covid rates to record highs in England, with one in 35 people now infected across the country and one in 20 infected in London, official figures have shown. Based on random swab tests taken in the community, the Office for National Statistics estimates that almost 3% or 1,544,600 people in England had Covid between 13 and 19 December, with infection rates higher than last week in all regions except the south-west. Rates of Covid were highest in London in the week studied, and lowest in the north-east where the rate was one in 55 people, according to the ONS infection survey released on Friday, While London remains the centre of the omicron wave, the ONS said swab results compatible with infections of the new variant rose in all regions of England, and in all nations of the UK, compared with last week’s survey. Esther Sutherland, a senior statistician on the Covid-19 infection survey, said the rise in infections was across almost all age groups, with the figures suggesting the rapid spread of omicron was “a significant factor in recent trends”. Further data from the ONS showed people from Pakistani, Caribbean and African backgrounds were least likely to have taken up the offer of a Covid booster or third dose of the vaccine, which provides substantial extra protection against omicron. Uptake of boosters and third doses among those 50 and over was 42.2%, 44.4% and 45.4% respectively, the ONS said. Figures up to 12 December suggest more than a quarter of people of black Caribbean ethnicity have yet to receive a first dose of Covid vaccine, making them the least vaccinated ethnic group in the UK. “This is deeply worrying because in many ways I fear a repetition of what happened in the first wave, where … we saw this rather alarming and disturbing disparity in illness and deaths among ethnic minorities from Covid,” Dr Chaand Nagpaul, the council chair at the British Medical Association, told BBC Radio 4’s World at One. “What we know now of course is that the patients, people who are becoming seriously ill, who are being hospitalised, are those who have not been vaccinated and those who have not had their boosters,” he added. The ONS figure came as documents from the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) noted that infection rates and hospitalisations were “rising fast” in London, and that “as infections move into older age groups, a large wave of hospital admissions should be expected”. According to the minutes of a Sage meeting held on Thursday, scientists were unclear whether an apparent fall in the growth rate in omicron infections was a genuine slowing down in the spread of the virus. A real slowdown could be driven by changes in people’s mixing patterns and behaviour – such as being more risk averse in the run up to Christmas – or a fall in the number of susceptible people to infect in particular groups. But other factors may feed in, the scientists stress, such as people not testing in case they have to isolate, and longer testing turnaround times.There is that famous photo of Joan Didion, taken in Malibu in 1976, in which she leans on a deck overlooking the beach, cigarette in hand, scotch glass at her elbow, and regards her family – John Dunne, her husband, and their then 10-year-old daughter, Quintana – through lowered, side-long eyes. Like other iconic photos of Didion from the period, she is at one remove from the group, off to the side and in this case, looking not at the camera but at her family as they look at the camera. It’s the pose Didion perfected, in life as in art, and when news of her death at the age of 87 broke on Thursday, it was a shock to see another frame from that sequence surface online. In it, Didion, eyes fixed forward, smiles broadly at the camera in the conventional style – a rare glimpse behind the persona. The paradox of Didion was not unusual among writers, whose confidence is often born of a million anxieties. But her ability to operate outside herself – to measure the gap between inside and out and slyly mock any effort to conceal it – was unparalleled. She was, famously and by her own account, diffident, brittle, runtish, prone to migraines, afraid of the telephone, and as she wrote in the preface to her 1968 collection Slouching Towards Bethlehem, “bad at interviewing people”, apparent deficits that, in Didion’s hands, were of course precisely what permitted her entry to places her rivals – particularly the blow-hard men of 1960s journalism – couldn’t reach. She was also generous and kind to younger writers. I interviewed her twice at her elegant, sprawling apartment on Manhattan’s Upper East Side, where the doormen referred to her gallantly as “Mrs Dunne”. She wasn’t difficult to interview, but she was a leaver of silences that could unnerve. The second time we met, I brought her biscuits and, handing them over at the door, she looked down at the package as if I’d passed her a rattlesnake. It’s an effect of chain-reading Didion that small moments become overburdened with spurious meaning and, recalling that scene, it seems to me that when she looked back up at me, it was with an expression that indicated, simultaneously, she was touched by the gesture and that, if we were honest, we might also acknowledge it as gaucheness amounting to lunacy. Interpretations of what her elegiac voice meant to the country that made her are best left to the Americans. I just liked her sentences. She is one of the few prose writers I remember whole sections of by heart and they play like old songs. Her line on Joan Baez, written in 1966, remains unseated as a description of what celebrity does to people. (Baez, she wrote, after weeks of observing her, “was a personality before she was entirely a person, and, like anyone to whom that happens, she is in a sense the hapless victim of what others have seen in her”.) I remember the “artificial blue rain” in the opening paragraph of John Wayne: a Love Story as if I myself had been at the Officers’ Club in Colorado Springs in the summer of 1943. The line “the centre was not holding” thumps one as squarely in the chest as it did on first reading. And then there is the Year of Magical Thinking, a piece of writing about the double blow of her husband’s death in 2003, followed 16 months’ later by the death of their daughter. She should not have been able to write about it. The fact that she could, and so soon, still seems outrageous to me and the lesson of that book and her writing in general seems clear; that there was nothing that Didion and by extension we, her readers, could not absorb, fix, stake out the furthest boundaries to. The sense of safety through the horror that came from this skill is a definition of what writing is for. It delivered a comfort amounting to love.It has been one of the paradoxes of the year: as TV viewers continue to hunger for updates on the pandemic – the biggest story since the second world war – a slew of broadcasting giants have bade farewell to their regular news slots. On Thursday night, perhaps the biggest of them all, Jon Snow, signed off on his last ever appearance as the face of Channel 4 News, just days after the last ever Andrew Marr Show went out on the BBC. At Sky News, Adam Boulton has slipped away in a somewhat quieter manner after more than 30 years, a departure that he has linked to what he described as the need for “baby boomers” like himself to make way for new faces on screen. With other 2021 retirements of longstanding regional news figures – Fred Dineage (79) at ITV Meridian and Stewart White at BBC Look East – and impending reshuffles of much younger figures elsewhere, itis not surprising that media watchers view the present moment as a changing of the guard. Factors ranging from 24-hour news, the loss of prestige on the part of evening flagship programmes, the rise of the internet and a push for greater diversity have all been linked to an apparent end of the age of the news anchor as a household name. Ben Abbotts, a communications consultant, cautioned it may yet be premature to bring down the curtain on that age. “There’s that debate but one only has to consider the very high profile of anchors like Fiona Bruce, for example, to realise that there are still particular figures and faces that are hugely important,” he said. Yet – perhaps echoing a feeling felt by many who watched Snow’s farewell – Abbotts also evoked a sense of mourning. “As a long-term devotee of the news since, oh, John Craven’s day on Newsround, I struggle with this loss of the greats. I grew up listening to the vastly experienced Dimbleby – either of them – I relished the familiar Northern Irish lilt of John Cole, the BBC’s political editor of the time, and spent time when I was younger working on Channel 4 News under Jon Snow,” he wrote in a blog for Haggie Partners, where he is a director. Another media commentator, Raymond Snoddy, suggested that the departure of Marr, Boulton and Snow left Andrew Neil “sort of” as “only one of the big male beasts standing” – although the future of Neil is unclear after his parting of ways with GB News. Snoddy, looking back at 2021 in a blog, added: “There are many women of substance in broadcasting not least Emily Maitlis of Newsnight, Kay Burley of Sky News and Susanna Reid of Good Morning Britain, who all know how to skewer a dissembling minister. But it still feels a bit like a changing of the guard, or at least the old male guard.” He also singled out Ros Atkins, a BBC broadcaster sometimes lauded for his ability to navigate the challenges and opportunities of social media. Elsewhere at the BBC, Amol Rajan, Faisal Islam and Chris Mason have all been mentioned as possible replacements for Laura Kuenssberg as political editor. Kuenssberg – already a veteran at the age of 45 – has been singled out as a possible Sunday morning replacement for Marr. Abbotts agreed that she was certainly a runner, but suggested that the BBC’s former North America editor was the odds-on favourite: “I imagine that Jon Sopel is feeling pretty comfortable at the moment.” Meanwhile at Channel 4 News, the shoes (or fluorescent tie) of Snow is regarded a harder – perhaps irreplaceable – act to follow, perhaps even for other stars there such as Cathy Newman, Matt Frei or Krishnan Guru-Murthy. As a Channel 4 News hand who has worked closely with Snow over the years put it: “The next Jon Snow will not be one of the kids in the newsroom who might feel that they are in a position to carry on his legacy, because that legacy is now 750,000 viewers a night. “Broadcast TV just doesn’t hold any sway any more. There’s just nobody coming up now who is going to become a household name just by hosting the evening news. The internet is already creating the next news stars.”Grace Mirabella, the editor of American Vogue throughout the 1970s and much of the 1980s, has died aged 92. Mirabella was a no-nonsense champion of practical fashion. She succeeded the more whimsical and bohemian Diana Vreeland as editor in 1971 and remained in the role until 1988. A native of New Jersey and an economics graduate, she began her career at the New York department store Macys before joining the publicity department at Saks Fifth Avenue. Mirabella set about reining in Vreeland’s fashion fantasy, and ascribed her loyalties to a new generation of working women who wanted to put careers and financial independence first. “I’m a firm believer that the key to dressing well, the key to style, is that you don’t have to reinvent yourself every day,” Mirabella once said. Her ambition, she wrote in her autobiography In and Out of Vogue was to no longer “showcase women who had no other credit to their names but their names”. “I wanted to give Vogue back to real women … I wanted to give Vogue over to women who were journalists, writers, actresses, artists, playwrights, businesswomen,” she continued. Under her tenure the magazine grew in circulation threefold. But by the 1980s, Mirabella felt, and was perceived as, out of step with the times. “The 1980s just were not my era,” she wrote in her autobiography “I couldn’t stand the frills and the glitz and the $40,000 ball gowns.” Clothes in the 1980s, she added, “were about labels, designers were about being celebrities, and it was all, on a bigger and bigger scale, about money” and fashion had turned “into a self-reverential game full of jokes and pastiches that amused the fashion community enormously and did nothing at all for the woman shopping and trying to find something to wear”, In 1988, owner Condé Nast replaced Mirabella at Vogue with Anna Wintour, who remains in the title role. “Grace guided Vogue through a momentous time in American history – emancipation, sexual freedom, and vital and hard-won rights for women,” Wintour said in tribute Friday. “She eschewed fantasy and escapism in favor of a style that was chicly minimalist and which spoke clearly and directly to the newly liberated ways we wanted to live.”Christmas Day will start early at Sydney’s Wayside Chapel. From about 6am volunteers will be blocking off the street and “rolling out the green carpet”. “We’re going to cover Hughes Street in astroturf and lay down some picnic blankets, appropriately socially distanced spots reserved for our very important guests,” the Kings Cross charity’s chief executive, Pastor Jon Owen, says, adding: “many of whom will be waking up in the gutter that morning.” The Wayside Chapel is among many Australian organisations that will open its doors to those with nowhere else to go on Christmas Day, offering a sense of something that has been particularly hard to grasp over the past two years: togetherness. Other organisations will hold their massive Christmas lunches as takeaway affairs, albeit still with plenty of colour and movement, but Owen is delighted this year’s street party (or picnic) can go ahead. Last year’s event was cancelled due to Sydney’s Northern Beaches outbreak. “We’ve been told by our governments to go and have a family Christmas,” he says. “This is family Christmas for so many people who are going to wake up with no one else in their lives except us.” But there are still Covid considerations. Despite the many volunteers in isolation, Owen says there are plenty of eager helpers on the “reserves bench” – who will be fully vaccinated and wearing PPE. Covid marshals will be in place as the day rolls through the Christmas chapel service with a street choir, Santa’s visit, and into a lunch “with all the trimmings”. Owen insists that the event is more important than ever. “The common refrain is, ‘I don’t know what would have happened to me if I hadn’t been able to come here today’,” he says. “That’s not said in a flippant way. They look me in the eyes with a sense of depth and clarity. It gives you pause in the midst of all the chaos.” Across Sydney in Ashfield, the Rev Bill Crews will be spending his 50th Christmas Day with the poor and disadvantaged. His foundation’s Christmas lunch will be takeaway – but they’re expecting to pump out as many as 3,000 meals across the day. “People are crying out for community now, we’ve been so isolated,” says Crews. “You see a crowd and you kind of get a bit nervous. There’s going to be this need in all of us to get together.” Wayside Chapel’s message is all about love, and Crews expresses a similar sentiment when talking about the importance of his foundation’s Christmas lunch. The last census found there were 16,427 people across the country without a safe, secure place to sleep at night and Owen notes with distress recent food bank research noting many Australians are experiencing food insecurity. This reality only becomes more stark at Christmas. The Salvation Army said in a report released in 2018 that about 15.5% of Australian adults were likely to contact a charity for help with basic necessities such as food, power or other bills at Christmas. “This is a challenging time of the year for people,” says Chris Middendorp, the manager of client services at Sacred Heart Central in the Melbourne suburb of St Kilda. The Sacred Heart Mission Christmas lunch has been running about 40 years, says Middendorp and, like Crews’ operation in Sydney, it will be takeaway again this year. The charity is expecting to serve about 400 lunches of roast, or mushroom wellington for vegetarians, and Christmas pudding. Most who will come for lunch will be experiencing homelessness or struggling financially and are local to the area, which is known for its stark economic divide between the wealthy and disadvantaged. They’ll take their Christmas lunches to the park next door to dine together, or back to rooming houses, or nearby public housing, Middendorp says. “It’s not just about the food of course,” says Middendorp. “A lot of the people we work with are experiencing disadvantage. They don’t have as positive an experience of the community as the rest of us. It’s good to have a place of non-judgment.” Crews has a similar message: “Many come here feeling left out, isolated, not cared for by society. I hope they leave here feeling, ‘I am part of society and I am loved for who I am, just as I am.’” Owen uses a broader term when asks who’ll be coming around for Christmas lunch. It applies to the volunteers, as well as those being served lunch. “We invite everyone to come and celebrate with us who has a hole in their heart,” he says. “I’ve got a whole bunch of volunteers who over the past few years have lost children, and they say, ‘I cannot bear the thought of sitting at home staring at an empty chair at our Christmas table, with a hole in my heart.’ “[They say,] ‘I’d rather take that love that’s been robbed from me and give it to people who desperately need it.’”Quote of the year Lee Anderson MP, shrugging off the critics in July after his boycott of England didn’t catch on. Anderson, who called players taking the knee at the Euros “an attack on our very way of life”, said he wasn’t bothered about being mocked: “I don’t go on Twitter because it’s full of idiots.” Also getting involved last summer, but taking a more nuanced view: Boris Johnson, rejecting England players’ anti-racist “gestures and symbols” in June before they started winning – then posing on a giant anti-racism cross of St George in July with extra England bunting. Priti Patel, backing the booing of knee-takers in June due to players’ cheap “gesture politics”, then putting on England kit in July to slam the “vile” racists. And Tory MP Brendan Clarke-Smith, comparing England players taking the knee to players performing the Nazi salute in 1938 – then showing off his C’Mon England wallchart on Twitter. Rising above all that Was the then education secretary, Gavin Williamson, sitting down with the Evening Standard in September to relaunch himself after a run of missteps. Standard: “Many of his critics have been high profile, including Marcus Rashford who called for an urgent review of free school meals. Has he met the footballer? ‘We met over Zoom and he seemed incredibly engaged, compassionate and charming but then he had to shoot off. I didn’t want to be the one that was holding him back from his training.’ Later Williamson’s team tell me he actually met the rugby player Maro Itoje, not Rashford.” Plus: the year’s other top diversity champions Uefa – moving to “send a clear signal” in April by banning Slavia Prague’s Ondrej Kudela for 10 games for racism, and Rangers’ Glen Kamara for three games for reacting to it. @BorisJohnson – left reeling again in November by news that, in the past, people had used offensive racist language. “Brave testimony from Azeem Rafiq. I commend him for speaking out. There is no excuse for racism anywhere in society.” Juventus Women saying sorry in August after tweeting a photo with matching emojis of defender Cecilia Salvai using her fingers to narrow her eyes. Juve clarification: “This tweet was not meant to have any racial undertones.” And Serbia’s Volleyball Federation apologising after Sanja Djurdjevic did the same thing in a game against Thailand, four years after the whole team posed for a photo doing it in Japan. “We apologise sincerely. But please, don’t blow this out of proportion! Sanja didn’t mean any disrespect.” Meanwhile: still holding the line Lazio – demanding Amazon Prime delete an “odious” scene in their Maradona drama where the lead character refers to Lazio as “fascists”. The club said the scene – aired a month after their eagle mascot handler gave fascist salutes as fans sang a Mussolini tribute chant while Mussolini’s great-grandson made his first-team breakthrough – had “clear defamatory intent.” But – personal breakthrough of the year @Nigel_Farage in September, finally finding a Romanian family he’d live next door to. “A global megastar is born. @EmmaRaducanu winning the US Open – truly incredible.” Sports politics awards Fans’ ally of the year Boris Johnson – standing up for fans by slamming the European Super League “cartel” in April and threatening a “legislative bomb” to stop it, days after Manchester United’s Ed Woodward left No 10 with “the impression Johnson was in favour of it”. No 10 source: “Boris doesn’t know much about football so he said it was a great idea. So Dan [Rosenfield, chief of staff] told the clubs No 10 wouldn’t stand in their way. Then it all kicked off …” Most all over the place The Premier League: launching their new owners’ charter in August to “protect the integrity of our game”, committing owners to “core principles” of fair play, equality and human rights, two months before signing off Newcastle’s takeover. Runners-up The Premier League: relaxing rules for Saudi Arabia, but not for the homeless charity Shelter, who wanted clubs to wear away kits on Boxing Day. “Clubs are entitled to support charitable causes… provided it is in compliance with Premier League rules.” Plus: honorable mention for The Premier League: backing the first #GameZero carbon-neutral match in September to “raise awareness of the threat of climate change and inspire fans to make simple changes to reduce their carbon footprint”, a week before shareholders held fresh talks over staging “meaningful matches” abroad – a new “attempt to grow the game”. Clarification of the year Came from Japan’s Olympic organisers – handing out 160,000 free condoms to athletes in June with a warning not to use them. Organisers said anyone engaging in “unnecessary forms of physical contact” amid strict Covid rules faced fines or deportation: “The condoms are not meant to be used at the Olympic Village.” Core values of the year Uefa’s PR team – releasing a rainbow-coloured Uefa badge in June in a bid to stem a run of tough headlines over Uefa’s Euro 2020 decisions to ban the Allianz Arena using rainbow colours, to investigate Manuel Neuer for wearing them and to ban sponsors using them to avoid upsetting Russia. Uefa said the badge “embodies our core values, promoting everything that we believe in”. And the best response to all that At a tournament where fans had rainbow flags confiscated: teenage pitch invader Finn-Luca taking a rainbow flag to the Hungary team to protest against the country’s anti-gay laws. Fans crowd-funded his fine. Worst PR moment Came for Uefa’s Europa Conference League in December – the tournament already struggling for credibility before a dog invaded the warm-up at Partizan Belgrade and fouled the pitch while staring into the camera. 3.3m views. Investigation of the year Was carried out by Concacaf in September after Ronnie Brunswijk – Suriname’s 61-year-old vice-president, ex-rebel leader, bank robber, father of 50, convicted drug trafficker and owner of Inter Moengotapoe – named himself captain in a Concacaf League game. Brunswijk played an hour at Ronnie Brunswijkstadion, subbed himself off then handed out cash to opponents. Concacaf said the episode had raised certain “integrity concerns” and, after “considering written statements”, banned him. Plus: best annual sports governance tradition Sepp Blatter, 85, denying wrongdoing. “What can you do against the international media … People should realise that I have given 41 years into the Fifa. What I have done for football, they should appreciate.” Sepp’s 2021 festive message: “I am not a criminal.” Social media awards 2021’s top corporate missteps April: Spurs’ new paint partner @DuluxUK apologising after their tweets mocking Spurs unsettled the fanbase: “These posts do not reflect how proud we are to be the Official Paint Supplier.” November: Spurs announcing their new Italian manager in Spanish, deleting it and trying again. July: Spurs plugging their bold new multicoloured kit with the tweet: “Describe this kit in one word.” 3,400 people did. August: Everton tweeting a video eulogy to fans who died in the pandemic, having failed to vet online submissions, resulting in tributes to Faye Knewse and Mike Oxsmall. July: Adidas using an image of Millie Turner to launch the new Manchester United home kit under their “never forget where you came from” tagline, captioning her “Amy Turner”. And March: Manchester United’s social media operator going live on Instagram by mistake. 37,000 fans watched as they microwaved their lunch. Purest non-league tweet From @CurzonAshton’s in-play feed, 27 Nov: “15, Pause in play as the ref needs to move his car.” Runner-up: 13 Nov, @MarineAFC: “Thanks to @dunstonutsfc player Philip Turnbull for attempting to fix our floodlights.” View of the year Was for neighbours at a locked-down Marine watching Spurs win 5-0 in January. @Cmcm1991: “Watching Gareth Bale whilst leaning out my window. Unreal”; Bale sent back a waving emoji. Marine sold 30,697 virtual tickets for £10 each. Thread of the year 2021’s best use of excess time online. And Twitter storm of the year Came in February: #BoycottSpiderman trending in India after a controversial cricket tweet written by historian @holland_tom, not Spider-Man actor @TomHolland1996. Fans said the tweet criticising the renaming of the Motera Stadium was “sedition … This is India’s internal matter. We will teach you a lesson of lifetime. #BoycottSpiderman.” Growth industry of the year Standing out in a solid 12 months of sportswashing: Arsenal: denying making bad choices in March after taking £40m shirt-sleeve money from a Rwandan regime which denies serial human rights abuse and skewing poverty figures: “We have worked together to challenge perceptions and tell Rwanda’s story of culture, heritage and transition – as well as raising awareness of the country as a luxury holiday destination.” Fifa head Gianni Infantino: starring in a Saudi Arabian government video in January doing a ceremonial sword dance and telling the camera: “This country is amazing, incredible, the world should come and see.” Infantino told critics: “Engagement is the best way to make change happen.” And David Beckham, signing a reported £150m deal to front Qatar’s rebrand. A source told the Sun: “By signing David, the hope is more westerners will be encouraged to see Qatar’s beautiful beaches, vast expanses of sand dunes and incredible skyscrapers.” Press awards Fake news of the year BT Sport, 22 Oct: “There’s been speculation about you Steven, what would you say to those linking you with a move away from Rangers?” Steven Gerrard: “Do I look happy? Do I look settled? Don’t ask me silly questions then.” 11 Nov: Joins Villa. 20 Jan: Brescia’s former Leeds owner Massimo Cellino moves to shake off his unfair media “manager eater” image by extending new coach David Dionigi’s contract to 2022 to guarantee proper stability. 4 Feb: Sacks him. 28 Oct: Norwich sporting director Stuart Webber lays into “disgraceful” headlines about Daniel Farke. “To be questioning Daniel at this point would be incredibly unfair. This isn’t about focusing on one man.” 6 Nov: Focuses on one man. Employer of the year Genoa president Enrico Preziosi, styling out an 11-year epic. Nov 2010: Preziosi hires coach Davide Ballardini as a long-term fix for “a brighter future”. June 2011: Sacks him. “I told him on the phone, he’s done here.” Jan 2013: Offering “a second chance”, rehires Ballardini. May 2013: Sacks him. “I say this now: me and Ballardini, we will never, ever meet again.” Nov 2017: Seeking fresh ideas, rehires Ballardini. Oct 2018: Sacks him. “I consider Ballardini to be a terrible coach. He doesn’t know how to put his players on the pitch, he can’t do anything, he provides such a terrible spectacle. I don’t enjoy firing him, but the decision was inevitable. He’s a terrible coach. Hiring him was my mistake.” Dec 2020: Rehires Ballardini. Nov 2021: Sacks him, then sells the club. “Over the years I had many clashes with Ballardini. But it’s clear that I do respect the guy. You know, I don’t speak ill of anyone. It’s just something I’ve never done.” Toughest HR policy Hamilton Academicals, sacking in-house co-commentator Bobby Bulloch in February after he started the second half silent then said: “Sorry, I hadn’t pressed the button when I went away for a jobby at half-time, excuse my language, and I’ve not pressed the wee button when I’ve come back.” Hamilton: “A contractor used by the club overstepped the mark. The person will not be used again.” Direct action of the year Came from Everton fans in June, trying to put off Rafa Benítez. The Guardian: “Animosity towards the 61‑year‑old has already spilled over into personal abuse on banners … one left near his family home in Wirral warned: ‘We know where you live,’ although it was left outside the wrong house.” Pre-match press conference of the year Was in March: Dinamo Zagreb coach Zoran Mamic meeting the press before their Europa League last-16 tie with Spurs. Mamic told them he was quitting after being sentenced to jail for stealing £13m then fled the country. He denies wrongdoing. Also doing it differently St Mirren manager Jim Goodwin, giving his pre-game zoom interview headless in December. Scamp of the year This ballboy, keeping busy in Algeria. Best startle reflex Euro 2020 stadium announcer Edit Szalay, reacting after Hungary’s Attila Fiola slapped her desk in celebration after scoring against France while she was looking for a dropped earpiece. Fiola apologised later for “overwhelming you … I’m glad that after your fright you were happy.” Szalay: “At first I thought I was going to die. Later I was overjoyed.” And headline of the summer Capturing the off-field spirit in London – Metro, July: “Idiot drank 20 ciders, snorted coke, put flare up backside then stormed Wembley.” His view on it: “I was off my face and I loved every minute. See you in Qatar.” Top attention seekers Headlining 12 months of animal cameos: 1) An alsatian in Chile ghosting into the box for a Deportivo San Miguel de Rio Viejo free-kick and nodding it home from an offside position. 2.6m views. 2) Russia’s chess world title challenger Ian Nepomniachtchi making a series of tactical blunders in May in an online semi-final as mosquitoes swarmed his room. “I swear I never had more annoying playing conditions than this.” 3) A sea lion “storming the pitch” in July as Dunedin Technical AFC 9th grade Diamonds took on Grants Braes AFC in New Zealand. Reports said when the game was moved to another pitch the sea lion “stormed that one too”. 4) The Colorado Rockies reassuring fans after an in-play cat bit security at Coors Field in April then “escaped in the service level”. ”Both guards are fine.” 5) A dog joining the home stretch of a 4x200m in Utah, clocking the final 100m in 10.5sec. Race leader Gracie Laney: “I thought: ‘Holy cow, that dog is fast.’” 6) A racehorse making off down a US highway in July after being spooked at a Kentucky race track and tossing its jockey. Bold and Bossy made it on to Interstate 69, was chased by police for 30 minutes, then had to be rescued again after the barn she was put in caught fire. Owner Michael Ann Ewing: “She’s just exhausted by all this … but still sweet as pie.” 7) FC Zürich president Ancillo Canepa’s dog Chilla escaping from his executive box, making her way “through multiple doors and barriers” to join play against Sion. Canepa: “I can’t explain, it’s very frustrating. She loves football.” 8) An alligator joining training in Florida as Toronto FC prepared for their Concacaf Champions League match against Cruz Azul in April. Defender Chris Mavinga: “It’s good to be in Florida … I never see this in Toronto.” 9) And Scottish club Ferguslie Star denied a goal due to “outside interference” in August after a stray dog made a goalline save, sparking brave “Stray Given” headlines. Plus: fondest farewell Cologne vice-president Eckhard Sauren paying tribute to the Bundesliga club’s late mascot, celebrity goat Hennes VIII, in April. Sauren said the goat “experienced many highs and lows in his 11 years here. Hennes VIII was a special goat, in many ways.” Stoic of the year Jon Rahm, forced out of the Memorial golf tournament on live TV in June while leading by six strokes after an official told him he’d tested positive for Covid. Rahm called it “one of those moments where how we respond defines us”, then won the US Open, his first major, a fortnight later. Most prescient blooper Australia’s ABC News Breakfast sports presenter Tony Armstrong on Tim Paine’s fitness in September, two months before Paine’s sexting scandal broke. “Tim Paine is set to undergo neck surgery but medical staff remain confident the veteran will be fit for the Ashes. Paine has a bulging dick that has… disc that has been causing pain.” Co-host: “A bulging what?” Armstrong: “I said disc.” Millionaire of the year Snooker’s Shaun Murphy, weighing up amateur Si Jiahui beating him in November. “He shouldn’t even be in the building. Amateurs shouldn’t be allowed in professional tournaments, the end. This is our livelihood. This is how I put food on the table. It’s not fair, it’s not right.” Murphy later apologised for “taking the shine off” Si’s win. Mansplaining of the year As tweeted in August by US long distance runner Molly Seidel. Most unexpected rule change Was F1 ending grid access for rappers’ bodyguards after Martin Brundle’s grid walk brush-off. Brundle: “I get ignored by Megan Thee Stallion, biffed out of the way by a man mountain and then told off by a Malfoy lookalike … I put out a simple tweet about it and got five million impressions. I don’t understand any of that, to be honest.” Olympics awards Assist of the year Tokyo 2020 volunteer Tiana Kawashima Stojkovic, paying £65 for a taxi for Jamaican hurdler Hansle Parchment after he took the wrong bus and turned up at the aquatics centre. Parchment later won gold, Jamaica gave her a luxury mini-break. Retrospect of the year Tokyo’s least anticipated headline: “German modern pentathlon coach thrown out of Olympics for punching horse.” Kim Raisner, who also told her rider to “really hit” Saint Boy to relax him, said: “In retrospect you can perhaps say that was too harsh.” Worst attempt to impress the boss South Korean broadcaster MBC’s on-screen caption writer, helping viewers through the opening ceremony with penpics summing up nations’ characters – including Chernobyl exploding for Ukraine and “presidential assassinations” for Haiti. MBC president Park Sung-je issued apologies to embassies, calling it “the most painful and disastrous time since I took office … Again, I bow my head down and apologise.” Best Olympic incentives Came from Indonesia, rewarding their badminton gold medalists with five cows, a meatball restaurant, coffee and £260,000 cash. President Joko Widodo hailed Greysia Polii and Apriyani Rahayu’s “tough and thrilling” display; Badminton association spokesperson Broto Happy said the gifts were “a sign of love”. Most relatable Amelie Morgan’s dad on why the bronze medal winner first took up gymnastics: “We had twins full of energy, so we had to find something to do. Gymnastics was an hour and a half on a Saturday morning, and everything else was just an hour.” Most pregnant pause The five seconds after Clare Balding told 4x200m gold medalist swimmer Matt Richards: “Honestly, your third leg was just phenomenal.” Best expert @joetracini. Most reluctant Olympic sensation Chinese badminton star Chen Qingchen, weighing up global headlines in July including: “Chinese Olympian couldn’t stop saying ‘f***’ during badminton match and fans loved it”. Chen said fans who lapped up her “nonstop” use of the Mandarin word “cao” during her doubles against South Korea – including “Wo Cao! Awesome! Cao!” and “Wo Cao! Wo Cao! Wo Cao, Cao, Cao!” – had misheard. “I was just giving myself encouragement for scoring. Thank you for your support.” Best double-checking And best homecoming video One of many: an airport moment for Max Whitlock. Breakthrough sport of the year Didn’t come at the Olympics. 135k likes for indoor balloon keepy-uppy. Reaction of the year At the French Open in June, a boy failing to play it cool after winner Novak Djokovic gave him his racket. Djokovic: “I don’t know the boy, but he was in my ear the entire match. He was like: ‘Hold your serve, get an easy first ball, then dictate, go to his backhand.’ He was coaching me, literally. I found that cute, very nice.” Best post-match interview New Zealand’s rugby sevens prop Rubes Tui. Best pre-match interview Bristol Bears front-rower Max Lahiff. Most compelling 34 second video Village cricket action from September. Mood-lifting moment of the year Emma Raducanu winning the US Open in September, hearing the crowd singing Sweet Caroline, and joining in. Award for almost holding it together BBC Olympic diving commentator Leon Taylor, taking viewers through Tom Daley and Matty Lee’s forward four-and-a-half somersault with a 3.7 degree of difficulty. “Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, that’s it. That. Is. It. That is untouchable, that is it, that is it, that’s it, that’s it, that’s Olympic gold, that’s Olympic gold, that is Olympic gold, oh my goodness me, unfaltering, yes, what a dive, what a dive, no one can catch them. Oh my word. Oh my goodness. Oh wow.” Victory speech of the year Came in August: ParalympicsGB’s Chris Skelley, who starting losing his sight in 2010, reacting to his gold: “Eleven years ago, I was at the darkest part of my life. There was nothing left for me. The only thing that was left was my judo … To stand here and talk to you now as a Paralympic champion … I’m lost for words. I just want a pork pie.” And ovation of the year Came at Wimbledon, but not for the tennis. Prof Sarah Gilbert, co-creator of the Oxford/AstraZeneca jab: “I didn’t know it was going to happen … and I’d rather not have been filmed when it suddenly, unexpectedly did.”One always thought that going past Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo at the summit of individual achievement would require a different approach, and a different awarding criteria. No one could match their freakish numbers, and a new age would recognise something else – Luka Modric-esque artistry, or the sort of defensive mastery produced by peak Virgil van Dijk, for example. The most remarkable aspect of Robert Lewandowski’s rise to the summit of the world game, then, is that he has done so by putting up cold, hard figures that compare with the two greatest of the past decade or so. If it is felt that the sport’s individual awards should be justified by team conquests – and February’s Club World Cup win meant Bayern became only the second club, after Pep Guardiola’s Barcelona, to rack up a sextuple – then Lewandowski’s continually climbing standards at the age of 33 made a pretty compelling solo case for recognition. On a purely individual level, beating Gerd Müller’s record for the most goals by a single player in a Bundesliga season was the high point. In early January, we knew it was on as he surpassed Müller’s Hinrunde record for the amount of goals scored in the first half of the Bundesliga campaign – Lewandowski had 21, compared to Müller’s 20 from 1968-69. Fast forward to May and his last goal of the season with virtually the last kick of the Bundesliga campaign, against Augsburg, saw him eclipse Müller’s tally of 40 from 1971-72 with his 41st, in the nick of time. It was wildly celebrated, and a magnificent moment that revealed just how much this meant to a publicly modest man. In the era of Messi and Ronaldo we have become almost numb to statistical excellence. Yet Lewandowski has entered the same realm as those two, where new milestones are required to find a way to describe his brilliance, because we’ve run out of superlatives. There were so many during 2021 – the most consecutive games scoring in the Bundesliga, scoring in the most home games in a row, scoring in nine straight Champions League games in multiple seasons, with going past Klaus Fischer into second on the Bundesliga’s all-time list and taking Raúl’s third place in the Champions League goalscoring table dotted in-between. The Müller season record really mattered, though. Partly because it was Müller, of course, and Lewandowski always showed his respect to the great man, revealing a T-shirt with Müller’s image on after equalling the record at Freiburg and spending time with Müller’s wife, Uschi, to let her know his admiration for her husband before his death in August. It was partly, too, because of the sheer scale of Müller’s achievement nearly 50 years ago. If we are desensitised to big numbers at elite level these days, this never extended to Der Bomber’s season record and its status in Germany. Most German football fans and journalists simply thought it would never be bettered. Lewandowski’s achievement in doing so is rightly recognised as genuinely remarkable in the country that has been his home for more than a decade. It wasn’t all plain sailing. That knee injury he sustained in Poland’s March win over Andorra (he scored twice before his night was curtailed, naturally) probably ended up wrecking his shot at the Ballon d’Or, keeping him out of both legs of the Champions League quarter-final with Paris Saint-Germain and making all the difference, as a Bayern side that were injury-hit but superior for much of tie were agonisingly eliminated on away goals. Injuries are a part of any tournament but the sheer insatiable drive of Lewandowski meant that the story of last year’s Champions League would not be complete without flagging his absence, when his fitness could have further garlanded Hansi Flick’s glorious spell in charge. Now established on the podium in the competition’s all-time scoring chart behind the big two, Lewandowski’s current fettle – improving, rather than simply maintaining – and his total (82) suggests that he is more likely than not to become the third player to pass 100 Champions League goals, which one fancies his chances of managing at some stage next season if little changes. Even Müller’s Bundesliga record total of 365 – another presumed insurmountable – isn’t off the table at the current lick (he is on 296), should he resolve to finish his career in Munich. Lewandowski’s all-round game remains formidable; he relishes physical combat with opposition defenders as much as he ever did – and is even better equipped for it these days, with significantly more muscle than when he arrived in Dortmund in 2010. As he ushered in December in time-honoured fashion by making his former club suffer in Der Klassiker (after that latest win on his return to Westfalen, he has scored 22 in 15 against his former employers in the Bundesliga alone – and has celebrated all of them), we were offered a reminder that there is no more dangerous Lewandowski than a defiant one. After a year in which he revealed himself as more like Messi or Ronaldo than we thought, he could be motivated to even greater heights in 2022 after this winter’s Ballon d’Or snub.With all of the worrying news emerging from the fields of health and science this year, some of the incredible advances that occurred may have been overlooked. But there have been many weird and wonderful feats in the world of research. Life-saving tests, treatments and vaccines were developed and rolled-out – including those led by Australian doctors – and a world-first malaria vaccine for children was endorsed by the World Health Organization. A new species of dinosaur was discovered in south-west Queensland, adding to our understanding about how they evolved. We learned from Nasa that the much-feared asteroid, Apophis, won’t hit Earth for at least 100 years, so that’s a relief. Meanwhile, approval was given for the construction of the Square Kilometre Array (SKA) telescopes in Australia and South Africa, with hope that the two largest and most complex networks of radio telescopes, once built, will redefine our understanding of space. Guardian Australia asked some of the leading experts in a range of fields to share the scientific advances they found most interesting, inspiring, or surprising this year. Among the doom and gloom, there is much progress, innovation and hope to celebrate. Prof John Shine President of the Australian Academy of Science, molecular biologist, and former chairman of CSL Limited The development and the success of RNA-based vaccines has had enormous global impact during the past year. There’s enormous short-term success but it also opens up a lot of potential long-term opportunities in delivering RNA as a vaccine for emerging diseases and also as a means of developing new therapeutics to treat a whole range of disorders. To get a new type of vaccine out there requires very big clinical trials because a crucial thing with a vaccine, of course, is safety. RNA research has been going on for decades. The difficulty in translating that into practical use in the vaccine area has been because we’ve got lots of great vaccines for other diseases. If you’ve got great vaccines that work already, it’s very hard for a new vaccine to enter the market. That was one impediment to the practical development of RNA vaccines, which the pandemic suddenly produced a reason for, [because] we needed something new.” Dr Dana Bergstrom Applied Antarctic ecologist and principal research scientist at the Australian Antarctic Division Antarctica is a bellwether for climate change impacts, with recent evidence of ecosystem collapse and that a major ice shelf in west Antarctica may fail within the decade. So for me, this year’s most exciting advance is not a discovery but solid investment in future Antarctic science, heralded by the arrival of Australia’s new icebreaker, RSV Nuyina, the most advanced polar research vessel in the world, and the initiation of not one, but three new university-based Antarctic research initiatives.” Prof Dominic Dwyer Medical virologist, Australian representative on the World Health Organization’s investigation into the origins of coronavirus, director of public health pathology at NSW Health. From my point of view, the origins of Sars-CoV-2 has been the big story. Knowing from where viruses and pandemics start is crucial to understanding the interactions between humans and animals, and how this is influenced by human behaviour, industrialisation, and climate change. Then once a virus has entered humans, how human actions affect its spread – travel, mass gatherings, the medical system, access to health care and other actions. We need this knowledge to prepare for the next pandemic – rest assured, there will be another one! This was then overlaid by the politics, to an extraordinary extent not seen before. Everyone was blaming each other for causing the pandemic, often to cover their own poor pandemic responses. This has led to secretiveness and suspicion, delay and obfuscation, denial and accusation. An investigation into the origins of a disease is core scientific and medical business – politics has made this an almost impossible task and has been depressingly ‘anti-science’. It needs to be fixed.” Associate Prof Tari Turner Director of the National Covid-19 Clinical Evidence taskforce, and Associate Professor at Cochrane Australia. In both my personal and professional roles, it’s incredibly difficult to look past the incredibly rapid development of effective Covid-19 vaccines in terms of amazing scientific advances over the last couple of years. But, in my other life I’m a wannabe astronaut, and I am completely astonished by Nasa’s Ingenuity helicopter, which has made 18 successful flights on a whole other planet in 2021! In a year when I’ve barely managed to leave my house, the ability to have helicopter flights on Mars seems even more like science fiction than it normally would.” Prof Matthew England Professor of ocean and climate dynamics at the University of New South Wales, and co-founder of UNSW’s Climate Change Research Centre I think the most important finding that came out in 2021 is a study relating to ocean conditions around the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS), which locks up in total about seven metres of global sea level. Lose the WAIS and hundreds of millions of people worldwide would be displaced. The WAIS is known to be the most vulnerable component of the Antarctic ice sheet system and uncertainty about future melt rates is one of the biggest unanswered questions in polar climate science. The published ocean measurements were taken adjacent to Thwaites Glacier, which is the most rapidly changing outlet of the WAIS. Using an autonomous underwater vehicle, the study documents the first ever temperature, salinity and oxygen measurements at the Thwaites ice shelf front. The measurements revealed warm water impinging from all sides on what are known as ‘pinning points’ of the glacier – these are critical to ice-shelf stability. This confirms what scientists have long been concerned about for the Thwaites Glacier; namely that warm water is driving melting at key pinning points. The location of the warm water shows that there is an increased risk of unpinning of the glacier and increased melt of the WAIS.”Coming back to Australia after doing most of my primary school years overseas involved a couple of moments of cultural discord – chief among them the bizarre, almost organic stage-musical moment of watching everyone suddenly break into The Nutbush, unrehearsed. But nothing has ever made me feel truly like I’m living in a strange make-believe country than when I first heard an Australian Christmas carol. I don’t know what it is about our national psyche, this urge to remake Christmas carols that are hyperspecific to our nation. But it probably has to do with climate dysphoria – when almost every Yuletide song mentions the snow, the fireplace, the warm eggnog and Santa getting frostbite and losing his fingers, the contrast between the Australian Christmas experience of a stinking hot summer day and various prawn-related crises becomes stark. So let’s talk about how baffling these songs are to anyone from overseas, suddenly plonked into an Australian Christmas. 5. The 12 days of Aussie Christmas Now this song is pretty easy for people to understand: almost a parody of the original 12 Days of Christmas, with the various birds of the original (turtledoves, geese, French hens, etc) replaced with Australian birds (galahs, emus, kookaburras). I think most people would quickly understand what is happening here, a bird-for-bird lyrical equivalence. However, it did make me realise that the original carol is mostly about being given various birds for Christmas, and some jewellery, before it suddenly escalates into maids, pipers, ladies and lords-a-leaping (which is a surreal and potentially problematic gift). Australia doesn’t really have any of those things, so it kind of sheepishly continues the native fauna motif instead, ending with some numbats. Numbats are confusing for most people (half wombat, half emotionally repressed?), but any questions brought up by this song could be solved by an informative book or an educational trip to the zoo. Confusion rating: Not very confusing. Australian rating: Definitely a good list of Australian flora and fauna. Amount of birds: Almost all birds. 4. Aussie Jingle Bells Similar to the last entry, Aussie Jingle Bells takes the original beloved Jingle Bells carol and makes it “Aussie”. Instead of snow, we have bush; instead of a sleigh, a “rusty Holden ute”. It’s a game of juxtaposition, inverting the tropes of Christmas as put forward by Jingle Bells, and proposing the realities of what Christmas is like in Australia – hot, “beaut” and featuring someone named Uncle Bruce. Most people from overseas, even if they don’t understand exactly what an “Uncle Bruce”-type figure entails (I would say off-colour jokes and the propensity to monologue at the dinner table), would quickly understand the clever game of replacement that this carol is playing. Confusion rating: Still not very confusing. Australian rating: A kind of idealised version of rural Australia is put forward here, which is perhaps a more mythological idea of what being Australian is. Amount of birds: No birds unfortunately, but there is a kelpie (a dog). 3. Carol of the Birds Here we have another Australian Christmas carol, which I believe is extremely popular in primary schools around the country and which once again notes Australia’s wealth of interesting birds. However, unlike The 12 days of Aussie Christmas, we are given no inkling that this song is meant to be about birds unless you read the title (which is never mentioned in the song). Instead, the listener is launched into a terrifying world of “brolgas” dancing, “lifting their feet like war horses prancing”. I’ve never heard of a brolga, and they sound terrifying. Confusion rating: Quite confusing. Australian rating: I think the most Australian thing about this song is being forced to sing it at school assembly. Amount of birds: Just so many birds, but also mostly birds I have never heard of before. 2. Three Drovers “Across the plains one Christmas night / Three drovers riding blithe and gay.” Now this is an old Australian Christmas carol, credited to 1948, and upon close reading, I have discovered that the drovers are meant to be a stand-in for some famous shepherds of biblical myth and are assumed to be recognisable as such. Furthermore, I have discovered that drovers are, in fact, basically Australian shepherds. There is a lot of assumed knowledge in this carol, and without it, it seems like it’s a song about three men who see a UFO and start singing. Confusion rating: Very confusing. Australian rating: The word “drover” does a lot of heavy lifting here as an Australian concept. I think it’s great that we get drover representation in Australian Christmas carols; it’s very important that young drovers are able to see themselves in popular art. Amount of birds: Not a lot of birds, but some black swans are mentioned, and it’s wonderful that Natalie Portman’s tour de force is still being namechecked. 1. How To Make Gravy – Paul Kelly Not so much a carol, but apparently Australia’s most popular Christmas song – a classic festive tale of a criminal, perhaps even a murderer, who is extremely concerned with the right way to make gravy on Christmas Day and is calling from inside a prison to deliver his recipe. Now, I don’t know what about this song resonates with the Australian public, other than Paul Kelly’s voice which is that of a laidback bourbon angel, but I would say this is the most baffling to an outsider by far. Does it imply that every Australian citizen has a deep parasocial relationship to correct gravy recipes? Sure. Does it also normalise the idea of most Aussies either having spent a bunch of time in prison or having loved ones in the clinker? Also yes. Confusion rating: Absolutely baffling. Australian rating: Geographically, this song is very specific, mentioning some classic Australian locations (Queensland) as well as the great Aussie tradition of talking about how hot it’s gonna be. Amount of birds: One, a jailbird, who is singing.Rebecca Miller is cooking up a Christmas Day feast – even though she can’t taste a thing. Both Miller and her partner Steven have Covid. They’ve cancelled their plans to go to Tasmania – where they were due to be celebrating her 50th birthday for 3 January, and his delayed 50th from last year. Instead they will spend Christmas at home in Adelaide instead, video-calling family and friends. “Even though I’ve lost my sense of taste and smell, I’m still cooking up a full vego roast, a big stuffed butternut pumpkin with roast veggies,” Miller said. “We’ll do the things we normally do Christmas Day but without people. We’ll drink, we’ll have fun.” The couple are double vaccinated, and are now mostly recovered. “It turned around quickly to feeling quite normal again,” Miller said. “It’s quite surprising how good we feel.” The Millers are among thousands of Australians isolating this year. Some, like them, caught Covid. Others are close contacts, and still others are choosing not to go out and expose themselves as case numbers increase sharply. Ros Ben-Moshe, an adjunct lecturer at La Trobe University’s school of psychology and public health, said it is critical for people to connect with others if they’re isolating. “If you can, in some way, whether it’s FaceTime, Skype or Zoom, beam in to see another person’s face, that can be very comforting,” she said. “We’ve got some very clever brain cells called mirror neurons. So when I have a smile on my face, my brain is firing and wiring these mirror neurons and if that’s shared with someone, they also will have their own mirror neuron activity, and it’ll be enhanced.” Emma Stevens, from regional Victoria, is expecting a baby boy in mid-January. It’s a high-risk pregnancy in a high-risk time, and she didn’t want to take the chance of catching Covid, even though she’s double-vaccinated. “I’m so close now, and the numbers are up,” she said. “I’m actually really looking forward to some time, just me and him.” Stevens’ partner is spending Christmas with his children from a previous relationship, then he’ll isolate himself and get tested before joining her. While they’re apart they’re going to read the same book (The Lincoln Highway by Amor Towles) so they can talk about it. She’ll enjoy mince pies and custard, and virtual catch-ups with friends. Ben-Moshe said that finding things to be grateful for is another really important way to cope with being alone. “Rather than focusing on the obvious downer of not being with family or celebrating the way you want to, spend some time with a grateful mindset,” she said. “That will help steer your brain away from what you don’t have, to what you do have. That helps people from going down that emotional spiral.” Tracy Crisp’s son is a close contact, so the whole family is in isolation in Adelaide. The 52-year-old said she had been really sad, but often finds Christmas a bit sad anyway, “remembering all the people that aren’t there”. “But it’s fine. We’ve got pavlovas and cherries. It’ll be a nice day still.” That’s four pavlovas for four people in the house, with Crisp, her husband and one son ferrying food up to the other one, who’s confined to his room. “I am frustrated that here in SA … I’m not against borders opening, I just feel like we could have done it later,” she said. Ben-Moshe said another idea for people who are missing out is to look through photos of past Christmas celebrations with loved ones. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “When we do this and connect to the feeling, our brain relives these experiences as if it was happening in the present moment … tapping into wellbeing hormones such as our bodies’ antidepressant, serotonin, which is activated when we reminisce.” The Millers hope to be out by 3 January, which is Rebecca’s 50th birthday. But for now it’s home, the roast, and experimenting with food and drink without any flavour. Sangria is on the menu. “Because it’s got lots of texture in it, with the fruit,” Miller said.As the James Webb space telescope hurtles away from Earth at 38,000km/h, its first communication will be with Canberra. CSIRO’s Canberra Deep Space Communication Complex is expecting to hear from the $13.6bn craft on Christmas night. Nasa says the James Webb, which replaces the Hubble space telescope, will “gaze into the epoch when the very first stars and galaxies formed, over 13.5bn years ago”. But before it enters an orbit around the sun, it will check in with Canberra. Glen Nagle, from CSIRO’s Nasa tracking station, said it will be like receiving an email. “We know where it’ll be in our skies. We will lock on to the signal with our antenna, then we’ll refine the signal,” he said. “It’ll still be relatively close, not more than a few hundred kilometres away, but it’s going straight out. We’ll track it, follow it, as it accelerates to about 38,000km/h to reach escape velocity. “It’s sending a set of demands, the digital ones and zeroes and then the space craft sends back the info we’ll have asked for, which in this chase will be its health. Has it deployed its solar panels correctly, is it generating power, are all the systems on board OK?” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The team will also make sure it’s on the right course. Then they hand over to the Spain tracking station, who in turn will pass over to the US tracking station, before Canberra picks it up again about 20 minutes after it has separated from its main rocket. Then, 1.5m kilometres away from Earth, it will unfold its mirrors, its sunshield, and then astronomers will be able to use what it sees to study the beginning of the universe, as well as planets that could harbour liquid water and other signatures of habitability. Swinburne University of Technology scientists will be among those using the telescope’s findings. Prof Karl Glazebrook, from the Centre for Astrophysics and Supercomputing, will be using its optical and infrared capabilities. It will “revolutionise the study of space”, he said. “The telescope is up to a million times more sensitive to infrared than any ground-based telescope, allowing us to see back to the beginning of time, to the first stars and galaxies after the big bang, and solve some of the greatest mysteries of the universe.” Dr Benjamin Pope, from the University of Queensland, will work with an international team to enhance images from the telescope. “We will use hardware and new software to achieve very high resolution and contrast, in order to study the process of planet and star formation,” he said. After decades of planning, the telescope’s launch was delayed by high winds this week, but is now slated to blast off at 11.20pm AEDT on Saturday.Whether you celebrate it religiously or socially, it’s hard to be distant from loved ones at Christmas. Emotional reunions at airports as people return home with the lifting of travel restrictions have been some of the most beautiful images of this year. Distance may be practical – caused by quarantine, closed borders, finances, work or inability to travel. But there’s another form of distance that many experience at these times of cultural importance. The kind of distance you can feel when sitting around the dinner table with your family or the painful chasm of being not invited at all. It’s the distance of judgment, shame and rejection based on religious, cultural or social norms that one has not conformed to. A particular message is conveyed in every scriptural story of Jesus as he grows up and then completes his ministry. He becomes a refugee. Touches the “unclean” despite the religious law demanding otherwise; the five-times divorced foreign woman he meets at the well becomes a revered figure of Christian faith and a hated heretic Samaritan is the central heroic figure in the parable Jesus tells to explain what it really means to “love your neighbour as yourself”. The heretic is the hero. The unclean are equals. The divorced, the refugee, foreigner and the migrant, the despised, the rejected, the “sinners”, the culturally and the religiously unacceptable are all invited into his story and to eat at his table. This is the essence of the Christmas narrative, the “good news” that the angels sang about to the working class shepherds on the hill – everyone you thought was excluded is embraced. Everyone you thought was distant is brought near. Everyone you hoped would be uninvited is welcome. All of those your religious upbringing, cultural prejudice or social expectations make you feel uncomfortable about should be welcome at your table. Figuratively in society, and physically in your lives and communities. The substance of the Christmas narrative could have and should have set a value system for western societies based on Christian tradition. Instead, Jesus’s radical example became fresh dogma for exclusion, control and shame. His message as recorded in Christian scripture targeted two groups – the religious people and their leaders who were doing the excluding and the people who were being excluded. His message was clear to the religious: “You are wrong. They’re all in, all welcome”; to the rejected: “You don’t need to feel the shame they’re subjecting you to.” Everyone you thought was excluded is embraced. And not embraced as lesser people who should show gratitude that the faithful, obedient or pure should deign to show them entrance and worth – but equal, elevated and venerated. All people, all welcome, with all shame and prejudice dissipated and irrelevant. When we turn a value system into rigid religious or cultural dogma it becomes hard to translate it into practice in modern society. That’s why we see church leaders preaching about the good news of Christmas at the same time as demanding a Religious Discrimination Act that explicitly allows them to exclude those in our society they believe should not be embraced, or why we see Christians talking about radical selfless love also believing that their way of life is threatened by Muslim immigration, or opposing the Black Lives Matter campaign. The narrative of Jesus’s birth paints a picture of an alternative future where no one need be uninvited to Christmas lunch or feel distant although they eat the same meal. All the excluded are embraced. Every person equal and welcomed into all of society. At a time when it was a public disgrace, the mother of God was an unwed pregnant woman. May your Christmas table, your New Years’ resolutions and our society regardless of culture or religion reflect this good news that angels sang about. As Mare of Easttown’s Deacon Mark said, “It is not our job to decide who is deserving, our job is only to love.” • Brad Chilcott is founder of Welcoming AustraliaYou’ve navigated Christmas lunch. Everyone has eaten and drunk well. Peace and harmony reign. So now it’s time to tackle the washing up. Or is it? Certainly, it’s sobering to face a Kosciuszko-sized pile of grimy plates and glassware. But if you’re still feeling a post-lunch booze glow, experts suggest you defer dealing with the dirt – at least when it comes to caring for precious stemware. The dishwasher dilemma Ashley Iredale is a whitegoods specialist at consumer advocacy group Choice and a wine fan. As part of his job, he studies how dishwashers and detergents function. So you might expect him to be pro-dishwasher, but no: not for wine glassware. “Modern dishwashers do a sterling job of washing stemware. Some models even have special glass holders. But personally, I recommend not using them,” he says. “Wine glasses are fragile and need gentle handling. If you put them in a dishwasher after a few glasses yourself, there’s potential for accidents,” he says. “You lose not only your wine glass, but you’ve got a dishwasher full of broken glass.” Repeated dishwashing has implications for the life of some stemware – glassware brand Riedel, for example, says its products can last up to 1500 washes in a Miele. Over time, the detergent itself in the dishwasher can also produce irreversible “cloudy discolouration,” adds Iredale. “This is not a film coating. It’s damage to the glass at a microscopic level.” Ian Trinkle is a former group sommelier at Brisbane’s busy Howard Smith Wharves and ex-head sommelier at shuttered fine diner Aria Brisbane. Recently, Trinkle opened a boutique wine store in the city’s inner north-east, but he’s hand-washed and polished hundreds of expensive wine glasses during his career. Unlike Iredale, he welcomes the ease a dishwasher brings to a boring chore. “I run all my glasses through the dishwasher – most are very safe these days and you don’t get any detergent build up.” “It’s much easier to break glasses when you’re doing them by hand because you have to get right inside the bowl to clean them,” he says. Avoiding washing woes Feeling confused about which method is best? That’s because there’s no one-size-fits-all answer. Many upscale glass makers now recommend using a dishwasher – even for fine-stemmed wine glasses – so if you don’t want to hand-wash, it’s worth paying attention to cleaning instructions when buying glassware in the first place. If you do use a dishwasher, Iredale suggests disregarding internet advice about ditching rinse aid and soap. Choice lab testing has shown it’s better to use both, particularly rinse aid. “Rinse aid contains surfactants which reduce the viscosity of water, which means it sheets off rather than beading, which is why it helps avoid spots.” Still, he remains firmly team hand-wash. His pro tip for successful washing after heavy, Christmas-style use? Leave it until the morning after. Before you head for a nap, Iredale suggests diluting any wine residue in glasses with water, which will make cleaning easier. Then, the next day, use hot soapy water to hand-wash, employing a clean sponge and good quality washing-up liquid, as this method prolongs your glass’s lifespan. And if your wine glasses have serious red wine staining, use denture cleaner. It’s designed to shift tannins, and it works with teacups too. After hand-washing, Iredale says, simply air dry and buff off any streaks or spots with a soft, dry cloth. Don’t buff the base and bowl at the same time when hand polishing, and never hold a wine glass by the stem. Don’t use a twisting motion either – the tension could cause the stem to snap. Another way to ease tension over the matter? Just reduce the number of glasses you use. Over the past decade, so-called all-purpose or universal glassware – medium-sized glasses which can hold all types of wine without sacrificing function – have become popular with wine cognoscenti. Trinkle now uses the same style of glass for everything from pinot noir to riesling – and even champagne. Going green But what about the environment – which washing method does the least damage here? The science is not cut and dried. Dr Simon Lockrey is an associate professor in sustainable design and innovation at Melbourne’s RMIT University. He’s studied the impact of both hand-washing and dishwashing reusable coffee cups. He says marketers and media prefer definitive answers from lifecycle studies, but he embraces the ambiguities. There are many variables to take into account – different dishwasher models and also styles of hand-washing – from what he calls “the bachelor rinse” (just 150 millilitres of water and no detergent) to a full sink of hot soapy water. “In layman’s terms it comes down to the energy source you use, how efficient that energy source is at heating the water and how efficient the method is at using water.” Human behaviour is key. If you’ve got a 20-litre sink and you’re only washing 20 items, that’s a litre per item. If you’re using a fully stacked dishwasher that’s super-efficient and reuses water, it’s likely to have less impact. Hack your dishwasher If you’ve given up on the dishwasher completely because you can’t fit tall wine glasses in your top rack, this TikTok hack is a Christmas gift to you. And if you need more tips on how to maximise your next dishwasher load, Iredale has made dishwashers do amazing things at Choice. He’s even whipped up a post-dishwashing snack, served on plates washed during the same cycle, naturally. “We wanted people to understand more about how their dishwasher works – and the boss was away,” says Iredale with a laugh. “Realistically, though, you’re not getting a Michelin star meal from this method.”From La Perouse in Sydney to Victoria’s French Island and South Australia’s Fleurieu Peninsula, hints of early French exploration dot the country’s coastline. In fact, French familiarity with our region was such that they were the first to print a near-complete chart of Australia’s coast in 1811, beating the British by three years. But for a few other historical quirks, at least part of the nation might now be Francophone. That map, contained within an extensive collection of French books held at the State Library of Victoria, was recently shown to France’s ambassador to Australia, Jean-Pierre Thébault, in a private viewing. The ambassador, a history buff and collector of rare books, was cheered by the reminder of the deep connections between his country and the land that became Australia. Unlike many official visitors, the ambassador “sparked up right away”, says Des Cowley, the principal librarian for the history of the book at the library, recalling a “witty and chatty” visit. The map was the product of the 1801-04 voyage of the explorer Nicolas Baudin, whose crew charted much of the southern coastline, helping to determine that the continent was a single island. It also includes the description of “La Terre Napoleon”, covering much of what is now Victoria and South Australia. French explorers had touched on several parts of the continent’s coast in the years before Britain established its convict colony. Louis-Antoine, Comte de Bougainville, had his ship’s westward passage blocked by the outer shoals of the Great Barrier Reef in June 1768, two years before Captain James Cook’s Endeavour passed through the same area and claimed the east coast for Britain. In March 1772 two French expeditions were at opposite ends of the continent, and in one case made an explicit claim for territory. Marc-Joseph Marion Dufresne visited Tasmania and stayed briefly with the Indigenous people, while off the far north-west coast, Francois de Saint-Alouarn was burying two bottles containing statements of proclamation on Dirk Hartog Island. Archaeologists found one bottle in 1998 – now in Western Australia'’s Maritime Museum. When the first fleet arrived at Botany Bay on 18 January 1788, it was followed a mere six days later by two vessels under the command of Jean François de Galaup, comte de Lapérouse. A young Corsican named Napoleon Bonaparte enlisted, but just missed out on joining Laperouse’s ill-fated exploration voyage – both ships were wrecked in Solomon Islands and the crew lost. But Baudin’s charting of the southern coast, including his meeting with his much better-known English counterpart Matthew Flinders at Encounter Bay (now in South Australia) is perhaps the most intriguing. By that time the Napoleonic wars were in full swing in Europe, raising fears among the British that global expeditions might threaten its young and relatively feeble colony. Danielle Clode, an associate professor in humanities at Flinders University and an authority on French exploration of the Pacific, says the received understanding by many Australians is that after 1788 “from there on in, the British owned the entire continent”. “But that wasn’t the case at the time – the English claim on Australia was very tenuous,” she says. “The French made them extremely nervous because they kept coming in exploring … and so they were always anxious that the French were going to claim part of the country.” But Clode says France was not “highly motivated to undertake colonial activities” at the time of Baudin’s expedition, having had “a revolution to deal with”. Rather, the main purpose of the voyage was to map territory, gather scientific knowledge and collect specimens of flora and fauna. Baudin himself was a product of revolutionary tumult, rising through the merchant navy in contrast to the noble pedigree of many of the officers and even the scientists serving under him. As Clode notes in her book Voyages to the South Seas, he was an adept gatherer of specimens, having collected them in 1786 and 1792 in India and China in the service of Archduke Franz-Joseph of Austria. Baudin’s legacy, though, was deliberately obscured for many decades not least because those who wrote up the accounts of the voyage, particularly the naturalist François Peron, intensely disliked Baudin and omitted even naming him in their publications. Baudin died of tuberculosis in Mauritius in 1803, at the age of 49, but many thousands of pieces of scientific interest made it back to France, some to become part of empress Josephine’s collection. These included live plants as well as kangaroos, emus and black swans that Baudin had ordered to be kept safe from hungry sailors and cooks alike. Some officers lost their cabins to the menagerie, to give them a better chance of surviving the long voyage. “Les wombats”, sadly, did not make it. Whether Baudin was expected to press French claims for territory more energetically is unclear. Doubts remain about the veracity of a comment attributed to Napoleon that “Baudin did well to die, on his return I would have hanged him” for failing to contest Britain’s claims. However, Flinders wrote in his account of his circumnavigation of the continent that one of Baudin’s officers, Henri de Freycinet, told him: “If we had not been kept so long picking up shells and catching butterflies at Van Diemen’s Land, you would not have discovered the South Coast before us.” Although Baudin, like the English, busily gave names to dozens of places along the coast without asking what the Indigenous owners called their home, he expressed doubts about taking possession of them. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In a letter to governor Philip King in Sydney, whom he had befriended, the French explorer wrote: “To my way of thinking, I have never been able to conceive that there was justice or even fairness on the part of Europeans in seizing, in the name of their governments, a land seen for the first time, when it is inhabited by men who have not always deserved the title of savages or cannibals. “[I]t would be infinitely more glorious for your nation, as for mine, to mould for society the inhabitants of its own country over whom it has rights, rather than wishing to occupy itself with the improvement of those who are very far removed from it by beginning with seizing the soil which belongs to them and which saw their birth.” Thébault says that sentiment reflects the more universalistic characteristics of the Enlightenment. For Clode, whose work has also appeared in a documentary screened on SBS, the French forays can help change the way we think about our history. “We tend to see it as an inevitable progress towards where we are now,” she says. “The interesting thing is to see what could have been, if things had been slightly different.”A man has been arrested on suspicion of burglary after 100 iPads worth £70,000 were stolen from a children’s hospital. Police were called after a report that the devices were taken from an outdoor container at Alder Hey children’s hospital in West Derby, Liverpool, on 19 November. Merseyside police, who carried out extensive CCTV and witness inquiries, established that a man sold 40 iPads to a sell and exchange store in Liverpool last month. A 54-year-old man from Halewood was arrested on Thursday and taken to a police station on Merseyside for questioning by detectives and remains in custody. DI Steven O’Neill of Merseyside police said: “These iPads were bought as gifts to give to sick children and their families at Alder Hey children’s hospital. Thanks to the hard work of our officers we have made an arrest in the run-up to Christmas. “I hope this arrest shows how seriously Merseyside police takes such offences especially at a place that is at the heart of our community and treats so many children and babies with such complex and specialist conditions. “If you have any information regarding theft or burglary please contact or speak to our officers.” • This article was amended on 26 December 2021 to update the main image of Alder Hey children’s hospital.NHS leaders have voiced alarm at a major rise in the number of hospitalisations due to Covid-19 after 1,171 people with the disease across the UK were admitted in a 24-hour period that set another record number of daily cases. The latest government figures showed 122,186 cases of coronavirus had been recorded as of 9am on Friday. Another 137 people died within 28 days of testing positive. Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation, said: “Daily hospital admissions with Covid have gone up by [34.7%] in the last week in England [from 815 to 1,098] and this is really worrying for health leaders whose teams are working flat out in the context of rising staff absences and wider pressures.” He urged the public to behave cautiously and accept invitations to get vaccinated as, despite studies showing that the new Omicron variant is less likely to leave people infected seriously unwell, “this virus presents a very real risk to daily life and to the NHS.” NHS Providers, another hospital body, warned that the number of people hospitalised in London had doubled in the space of a week. “The number of Covid-19 patients in hospital is increasing – by 4% overnight in England and 8% in London,” said Chris Hopson, its chief executive. “The overall number of Covid patients in hospital in London, the current epicentre of Omicron, is now nearly 30% of the levels we saw in the January 2021 peak, up from 15% a week ago.” The NHS is already facing a number of other pressures, including high demand for A&amp;E care, staff delivering Covid booster vaccines, major shortages of frontline personnel and growing numbers of workers off sick due to the virus, he added. Family gatherings over the festive period are likely to result in more older people becoming ill with Omicron, he cautioned. “The need to see what happens as larger numbers of older people start to be infected with the new variant. It is likely the number of older people catching Omicron will increase given the amount of inter-generational contact over the next 72 hours of Christmas.” Meanwhile, data has emerged showing Covid infection levels have reached a new record high. An estimated 1.7 million people in the UK had Covid-19 in the week ending 19 December, the highest number since comparable figures began in autumn 2020, the Office for National Statistics (ONS) said. The interim data, published on Friday, also showed that about one in 35 people in private homes in England had Covid in the week to 19 December, up from one in 45 in the seven days to 16 December. This is the highest estimate for England since the ONS began estimating community infection levels for England in May 2020, and is equivalent to about 1.5 million people. In London that rose to about one in 20 people likely to test positive for Covid-19, the highest proportion for any region in England, the ONS said. North-east England had the lowest proportion, at about one in 55. The ONS also said that Covid infections compatible with the Omicron variant had increased in all regions in England with “substantial regional variation”, again with the highest rates in London and the lowest in the north-east. Sir Ian Diamond, the UK’s national statistician, told the BBC the “sobering” figures showed “really big increases” in Covid cases, with London “clearly the epicentre of the Omicron epidemic”, with numbers going up “really steeply”. He added: “There are increases right across England, with the slight exception of the south-west, increases in Wales and Northern Ireland, and Scotland has gone up just a little bit.” There were some indications of people engaging in “safer behaviour” in response to the Omicron wave, he said, but he remained cautious. “At the moment I think it’s far too early to suggest that we will see anything other than a continued rise.” In Wales, around one in 45 people were estimated to have had Covid-19 in the week to 19 December, slightly below the record of one in 40 in October. In Northern Ireland, the latest estimate was one in 40, equalling the record from mid-August, while in Scotland the latest estimate was one in 65, below September’s peak of one in 45. The latest figures come after UK Health Security Agency chief executive, Dr Jenny Harries, said data suggesting Omicron may be less likely to lead to serious illness than the Delta variant of coronavirus offers a “glimmer of Christmas hope”. The UKHSA estimates that someone with Omicron is 31%-45% less likely to attend A&amp;E and 50%-70% less likely to be admitted to hospital than an individual with the Delta variant. But Harries said it was too early to downgrade the threat from the new strain and more information was needed, in particular about the impact it had on elderly and more vulnerable patients. There will be no statistics on coronavirus cases or vaccinations on 25 and 26 December. Daily reporting will resume on Monday 27 December. On Thursday, as of 9am, 119,789 lab-confirmed Covid-19 cases were recorded in the UK, the government said. • This article was amended on 26 December 2021. An earlier version stated in the text and subheading that daily hospital admissions for Covid had gone up by “more than 40%”; this figure is actually 34.7%.Oh, the warm, expansive joy to be had from a chilly, compact ghost story! And A Ghost Story for Christmas: The Mezzotint (BBC Two), an MR James short story adapted by aficionado Mark Gatiss into a glittering half-hour nugget, is an absolute treat. These two masters of their forms can nudge even the most committed sceptic into willingly suspending their disbelief for a tight 30 minutes, especially when the plot runs like clockwork and is as stuffed with actors as a stocking is with gifts. There is Rory Kinnear as Edward Williams, the curator of a university art museum who spends most of his days politely declining offers of unsuitable Delftware from local ladies. We are in Victorian Times so he has a Victorian Moustache and sometimes plays Victorian Golf, wearing Victorian Plus Fours. His friend Binks (John Hopkins) likewise (I assume there was a terrific two-for-one offer on in the BBC costume department). A dealer sends Williams an unremarkable mezzotint engraving of an unidentified manor house somewhere in Sussex or Essex – the label is torn. Or IS IT so unremarkable? For when Binks looks at it, he thinks the moonlight is rather well done, and a figure at the edge adds interest. Williams somehow noticed neither of these things when it arrived. Ah well. Off he goes to Essex, because in his spare time he is investigating a family mystery involving a possibly illegitimate relative and calling up parish records at churches around the county. This time, they are brought to him by Frances Barber as Mrs Ambrigail, garrulous amateur paleontologist, wife of an indisposed vicar and soon-interested party. Barber (who is a national treasure and should be in everything) takes things right up to the ham line and no further – you couldn’t get a rasher between her and it – and provides the perfect shot of energy needed to carry the whole thing through to an ending even more pleasing than a bacon bap. It is no spoiler to say that the engraving shifts. First the moonlight shines, the figure moves across the lawn, a window of the house opens, the figure disappears and reappears carrying … a child? The picture seems to tell the story of a tragedy – though when and where it is unfolding is at the heart of the mystery. If you’re not in thrall within moments, I really don’t know what to do with you. The engraving – the most static of all the arts – keeps changing! Come on! There are sharp knocks at doors, mutterings of “Impossible!” under gentlemanly breaths, stiff drinks taken by fires, men reasserting their rational selves in front of mirrors, small but punchy parts for Emma Cunniffe as a disconcerted housekeeper and Robert Bathurst as an intrigued colleague, Binks chancing across a useful guide to Essex and many of its old manor houses, and a reappearance by Mrs Ambrigail with tales of infants, poachers and local lore to tie the whole thing together. And The Mezzotint – thanks to Gatiss’s narrative interventions and the slithery physical talents of acrobat Tommaso di Vincenzo – sticks the landing. Obviously I can say no more. My only advice would be that if you are a father, be careful not to commit any sins you don’t want visiting upon your sons or any other eventual scions down the years.Passengers travelling home for Christmas have been hit with disruption worldwide after airline companies cancelled more than 2,000 flights on Friday, according to flight tracking website FlightAware. The U.S. will next week lift the travel ban imposed on several southern African nations when the Omicron variant of Covid was first detected, AFP reports. France reported a record 94,124 new daily Covid-19 infections on Friday while the number of people hospitalised for the disease reached a seven-month high at close to 16,200, according to official data. One in 35 people in England had Covid last week, new figures show, with 1.7 million people testing positive across the UK – the highest number on record so far. South Africans without Covid symptoms will no longer have to test or self-isolate if a contact tests positive, the government announced on Friday. Additionally, people in South Africa will be offered a booster dose of Johnson &amp; Johnson’s vaccine from Friday after the health regulator approved its used for the general public. France will require passengers to show negative Covid tests to travel to its overseas territories, with the new measure coming into effect on 28 December. The UK Health Security Agency’s chief has suggested the government might decide on whether further restrictions are needed in England based on Omicron’s wider impact, rather than the variant’s severity alone. The UK government’s chief scientific adviser has defended Sage against the charges that the group’s modelling was fearmongering, saying it was not their job to “spread gloom”. Dozens of officials have reportedly been punished over a virus outbreak in the locked-down city of Xi’an, China’s disciplinary body said on Friday, Agence France-Presse reports. Some further data from France. Some 16,173 people are currently hospitalised for Covid-19 in the country, with 3,254 of them in emergency care. Some 122,462 people have died of Covid-19 in France since the start of the pandemic, AFP reports/ Some 76.5 percent of the population have received two vaccine doses, and nearly 21 million people in a country of 67.4 million residents have received a booster shot. On Friday, health authority recommended that adults receive a booster jab three months after their initial vaccination. New coronavirus restrictions could be in place until late March under measures examined by UK government scientific advisers. The modelling by experts from Warwick University considered a package of measures including a ban on socialising with another household indoors and a return to the rule of six outdoors, in line with the Step 2 restrictions in place in April in England. A consensus paper published on Christmas Eve by the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling, Operational sub-group (Spi-M-O) said “rapidly enacted Step 2 measures reduce the peak of hospital pressure to about half its level under Plan B only”, PA reports. The U.S. will next week lift the travel ban imposed on several southern African nations when the Omicron variant of Covid was first detected, AFP reports. Countries around the world restricted travel from southern Africa after the variant was detected in South Africa, which reported Omicron to the World Health Organization (WHO) on November 24. WHO and the United Nations spoke out against the travel bans and officials in South Africa said they were being punished for identifying the strain and being transparent. White House assistant press secretary Kevin Munoz defended the ban on Twitter, saying, “The restrictions gave us time to understand Omicron and we know our existing vaccines work against Omicron, (especially) boosted.” He said the travel ban would be lifted on December 31. In Bethlehem, hoteliers have been disappointed. After a near-total lockdown last year, Israel has again closed its borders. Celebrations on Friday were subdued as just several hundred huddled in the city’s Manger Square to watch the Palestinian scouts and bagpipers parade past. This year, like last, midnight mass on Christmas Eve will be reserved for just a small circle of people by invitation only. “It is a bit surreal,” American student Hudson Harder told AFP. “There is a selfish part where it’s like ‘Oh I get to see this place so empty’ but on the other hand you feel for the shops, all the money they are losing, it’s really quite tragic.” The prospect of a fourth Covid booster jab in the UK is possible as immunity may subside for millions by the new year, the Telegraph newspaper reported. Protection against getting ill with the Omicron variant is as low as 35 per cent 10 weeks after a booster, according to government data. Christmas Day will start early at Sydney’s Wayside Chapel in Australia. From about 6am volunteers will be blocking off the street and “rolling out the green carpet”. “We’re going to cover Hughes Street in astroturf and lay down some picnic blankets, appropriately socially distanced spots reserved for our very important guests,” the Kings Cross charity’s chief executive, Pastor Jon Owen, says, adding: “many of whom will be waking up in the gutter that morning.” The Wayside Chapel is among many Australian organisations that will open its doors to those with nowhere else to go on Christmas Day, offering a sense of something that has been particularly hard to grasp over the past two years: togetherness. The UK government will send millions of text messages on Boxing Day urging people to get a coronavirus booster vaccine. The message, part of the Get Boosted Now campaign, is the latest attempt to reduce the impact of the Omicron variant sweeping the UK. More than 32 million booster and third doses have already been administered, PA reports. The message will read: “Get boosted now. “Every adult needs a Covid-19 booster vaccine to protect against Omicron. “Get your Covid-19 vaccine or booster. “See NHS website for details.” With all of the worrying news emerging from the fields of health and science this year, some of the incredible advances that occurred may have been overlooked. But there have been many weird and wonderful feats in the world of research. Life-saving tests, treatments and vaccines were developed and rolled-out – including those led by Australian doctors – and a world-first malaria vaccine for children was endorsed by the World Health Organization. A new species of dinosaur was discovered in south-west Queensland, adding to our understanding about how they evolved. We learned from Nasa that the much-feared asteroid, Apophis, won’t hit Earth for at least 100 years, so that’s a relief. Rebecca Miller is cooking up a Christmas Day feast – even though she can’t taste a thing. Both Miller and her partner Steven have Covid. They’ve cancelled their plans to go to Tasmania – where they were due to be celebrating her 50th birthday for 3 January, and his delayed 50th from last year. Instead they will spend Christmas at home in Adelaide instead, video-calling family and friends. “Even though I’ve lost my sense of taste and smell, I’m still cooking up a full vego roast, a big stuffed butternut pumpkin with roast veggies,” Miller said. In response to figures showing today’s 1,171 Covid hospitalisations in the UK, Matthew Taylor, chief executive of the NHS Confederation, said the sharp rise was “really worrying” for the NHS. “Daily hospital admissions with Covid have gone up by over 40% in the last week [815 on 14/12; 1098 on 21/22 - England only] and this is really worrying for health leaders whose teams are working flat out in the context of rising staff absences and wider pressures”, he said. “While the preliminary findings suggest that omicron may be less likely to cause serious illness than other strains, positive cases are increasing and so, we must remember this virus presents a very real risk to daily life and to the NHS. The NHS will continue to be there for everyone who needs it but the best thing the public can is to continue to behave in ways that can keep themselves and others safe from illness. “This includes ventilating indoor areas, testing before social gatherings and if eligible, taking up that vital offer of a vaccine or booster.” Chris Hopson, chief executive of NHS Providers, said: “This rise, and today’s record of daily cases of infections, shows that we must keep watching these hospital numbers very closely. In particular, we need to see what happens as larger numbers of older people start to be infected with the new variant. It is likely the number of older people catching omicron will increase given the amount of inter-generational contact over the next 72 hours of Christmas” France reported a record 94,124 new daily Covid-19 infections on Friday while the number of people hospitalised for the disease reached a seven-month high at close to 16,200, according to official data. The seven-day moving average of new cases, which evens out weekly data reporting irregularities, also reached a new record of 66,417, a total that has tripled in just one month, Reuters reports. Italy reported a second successive record daily tally of Covid-19 cases on Friday, with new cases hitting 50,599 compared to 44,595 a day earlier, the health ministry said. The number of coronavirus-related deaths fell to 141 from 168 on Thursday, Reuters reports. Italy has registered 136,386 deaths linked to Covid-19, the second-highest toll in Europe after Britain and the ninth-highest in the world. The country has reported 5.57 million cases to date. Hospital admissions due to Covid have nearly doubled week-on-week in London, the latest figures show. New data from NHS England shows that 386 Covid-19 admissions were recorded by hospitals in London on December 22, up 92% week-on-week and the highest number for a single day since February 1. Across England, 1,246 admissions were recorded on December 22, up 55% week-on-week and the highest number for a single day since February 16. But this is still well below the second wave peak of 4,134 admissions reported on January 12, PA reports. Global airline carriers cancelled more than 3,000 flights over the Christmas weekend, the FlightAware website said, as a spike in Covid-19 cases due to the Omicron variant piled on misery for travellers. The website showed that 2,175 flights around the world had been scrapped on Friday, which is Christmas Eve and a typically heavy day for travel. Around a quarter of those flights were in the U.S.. Another 1,259 Christmas Day flights were called off globally, the website said amid a surge in Covid-19 infections driven by Omicron, Reuters reports. Ministers could meet as soon as Monday to determine whether new restrictions are needed in England over the new year amid growing concerns that soaring Covid cases could hit public services. They will be expected to assess new modelling from the University of Warwick, given to the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) in documents published on Thursday. Scientists have looked at the effects of a potential return to step 2 restrictions from 28 December or 1 January, lasting either two weeks, four weeks or three months until 28 March. No 10 said the data had not yet been considered by ministers. Protesters in Guadeloupe are occupying the local legislature in the French Caribbean overseas territory, in a new standoff with Paris sparked by Covid rules. There have been tensions in Guadeloupe and the neighbouring island French territory of Martinique during the last weeks over rules including obligatory Covid vaccinations for health workers, which have fed into long-standing local grievances. Protesters first entered the debating chamber of the regional council while it was meeting on Thursday with several staying the night and deciding to continue their action into Friday. Councillors were able to leave peacefully. They want to negotiate with Paris over the crisis, but officials have so far indicated that there can be no talks as long as such actions are carried out, AFP reports. The protesters notably want all sanctions halted against health workers who have refused the Covid jab. There were 1,171 Covid-19 hospital admissions in the UK on 20 December, government figures show. This is up 30% week-on-week and the highest number since 19 February. During the second wave of coronavirus, UK admissions peaked at 4,583 on 12 January, PA reports. Passengers travelling home for Christmas have been hit with disruption worldwide after airline companies cancelled more than 2,000 flights on Friday, according to a flight tracking website FlightAware. One in 35 people in England had Covid last week, new figures show, with 1.7 million people testing positive across the UK – the highest number on record so far. South Africans without Covid symptoms will no longer have to test or self-isolate if a contact tests positive, the government announced on Friday. Additionally, people in South Africa will be offered a booster dose of Johnson &amp; Johnson’s vaccine from Friday after the health regulator approved its used for the general public. France will require passengers to show negative Covid tests to travel to its overseas territories, with the new measure coming into effect on 28 December. The UK Health Security Agency’s chief has suggested the government might decide on whether further restrictions are needed in England based on Omicron’s wider impact, rather than the variant’s severity alone. The UK government’s chief scientific adviser has defended Sage against the charges that the group’s modelling was fearmongering, saying it was not their job to “spread gloom”. Dozens of officials have reportedly been punished over a virus outbreak in the locked-down city of Xi’an, China’s disciplinary body said on Friday, Agence France-Presse reports. That’s all from me for today – thanks for reading along and happy Christmas. I’m handing over to my colleague Nadeem Badshah who will be here shortly to take you through the next few hours. Mark, 44, will be self-isolating on Christmas Day and plans to spend it relaxing. “I’ve got my two cats with me, a pile of books, and probably catching up on a few things on Netflix in bed as well,” the Church of England priest based in Manchester said. Meanwhile, Lauren, 31, from London, stressed that she would try to remember that tomorrow was just a day and that there were better days ahead. My colleague Aamna Mohdin spoke to people who will be stuck in their flats and bedrooms tomorrow about how they’re keeping their spirits up: A quick line from Reuters about the situation in France, which is dealing with a record number of cases: Emmanuel Macron will hold a Covid-19 meeting on Monday, the presidential palace has announced. The meeting, scheduled at 1500 GMT, will be followed immediately after by a cabinet meeting. The number of Christmas Eve shoppers in British city centres has slumped as people stay in to avoid the risk of being infected with the Omicron coronavirus variant, data suggests. Central London was hardest hit, with footfall down 30% compared with Friday last week, and 48% compared with Christmas Eve in 2019, according to data covering morning trading from Springboard. Footfall also fell by 10% week on week in other cities. The government has so far held off on imposing new restrictions on England. However, shopper numbers have fallen dramatically as people avoid crowds to ensure they are able to see family at Christmas. Footfall was lower than Christmas Eve 2019 across high streets, retail parks and shopping centres – although all categories were also stronger than Christmas Eve 2020, when large parts of England were placed in a surprise lockdown and other parts of the UK put restrictions in place. Read the full report, by the Guardian’s financial reporter Jasper Jolly, here: The number of Omicron cases in Scotland has more than doubled, Scottish government figures show, as nearly has the number of people in hospital confirmed to have the new strain, from 24 on Thursday to 42 on Friday. As of 5pm on Thursday, 3,832 confirmed cases were reported, taking the total number of cases of the new variant to 6,154. According to the figures, the increase was caused by a backlog of genotyping results being received by Public Health Scotland that were undertaken in mid-December, PA reports. In total, the number of cases of Covid-19 increased by 7,076 since Thursday. 10 new deaths were also logged, taking Scotland’s overall number of people who died after having first tested positive for the virus within the previous 28 days to 9,822. There were 536 people in hospital with recently confirmed Covid-19 on Wednesday, down four on the day before, and 34 people were in intensive care, down four. So far 4,378,172 people have received their first dose of a Covid-19 vaccination, 4,006,076 have received their second dose, and 2,841,703 have received a third dose or booster. On Friday, national clinical director Jason Leitch urged Scots preparing to meet loved ones for Christmas to be cautious: The Omicron variant is coming, but behaviour and vaccines are keeping it at bay a little. But tomorrow is crucial for that, because if we suddenly throw caution to the wind, then it will find a way to infect individuals who gather. Try and [meet] carefully, test before you meet other people and get yourself vaccinated. A total of 605,561 booster and third doses of Covid-19 vaccine were recorded in the UK on Thursday, the lowest daily figure since 13 December. Nearly 32.3m booster and third doses have now been delivered in the UK, with more than 5.9m in the past seven days. The figures have been published by the UK’s four health agencies. New data from the Office for National Statistics (ONS) suggests that people from Pakistani, Caribbean and African backgrounds have the lowest rates for receiving a booster or third dose of Covid-19 vaccine in England. Figures suggest the lowest take-up of third doses and booster jabs among people aged 50 and over in England was in the Pakistani (42.2%), black Caribbean (44.4%) and black African (45.4%) groups. More than a quarter of people of black Caribbean ethnicity are estimated to not have received a first Covid vaccine dose up to 12 December – the highest proportion of all ethnic groups, the ONS said. Dr Chaand Nagpaul, council chair at the British Medical Association, told BBC Radio 4’s World at One: This is deeply worrying because in many ways I fear a repetition of what happened in the first wave, where ... we saw this rather alarming and disturbing disparity in illness and deaths amongst ethnic minorities from Covid. What we know now of course is that the patients, people who are becoming seriously ill, who are being hospitalised, are those who have not been vaccinated and those who have not had their boosters. Eighty percent of patients in some ICUs are those who have not been vaccinated. The ONS also said that take-up was lower among people with disabilities, people living in more deprived areas, those who have never worked or are long-term unemployed, those without qualifications and those who do not own their own home, compared to more advantaged groups. Hello, I’m Jedidajah Otte and I’ll be taking over for the next hour while my colleague Clea Skopeliti has a break. Don’t hesitate to get in touch if you have anything to flag you think we should be covering. I’m on Twitter @JedySays or you can email me. In the UK, the chief of the Office for National Statistics has said there are “some indications” of people engaging in “safer behaviour” in response to the Omicron wave. However, Sir Ian Diamond told BBC Radio 4’s World At One programme: “At the moment I think it’s far too early to suggest that we will see anything other than a a continued rise.” Diamond denied being “shaken” by the speed of the rise in cases, saying: “I think we were gearing ourselves up for them”. “But at the same time, clearly they are really big increases, and that’s why it was incredibly important, we felt, to get them out into the public domain as soon as possible.” His comments come after figures showed that 1.7 million people in the UK had Covid last week, including one in 20 people in London. Airlines’ social media feeds have been filled with frustrated passengers asking for assistance after a spate of cancellations on Christmas Eve due to the rapidly spreading Omicron variant. More than 2,000 flights were cancelled globally on Friday as the Omicron variant took a toll on airline carriers’ staff. “@Delta really?! You cancel my Christmas Eve flight at 12:30am?? I got up at 2am to get to the airport with my baby and husband and don’t see the cancellation till I’m at the airport to get my bags checked,” one passenger tweeted at the airline on Friday – one of several similar messages directed at carriers that have had to call off flights. There have been 458 cancelled flights within, into, or out of the United States, where Omicron now makes up more than 70% of new Covid cases. Passengers travelling home for Christmas have been hit with disruption worldwide after airline companies cancelled more than 2,000 flights on Friday, according to a flight tracking website. The surge of Christmas Eve cancellations comes as the rapidly spreading Omicron variant means carriers are unable to staff their flights. The bulk of the cancellations came from five firms, with China Eastern cancelling 474 journeys, while Air China scrapped 188. United has cancelled 180 flights, Air India 160 and Delta has called off 127, figures from FlightAware show. At time of writing, the the flight tracking firm said the current number of Christmas Eve flights cancelled globally is 2,031. The figure includes 448 cancelled in the United States, where Omicron now accounts for more than 70% of new cases. “The nationwide spike in Omicron cases this week has had a direct impact on our flight crews and the people who run our operation. As a result, we’ve unfortunately had to cancel some flights and are notifying impacted customers in advance of them coming to the airport,” United said on Thursday. Meanwhile, Delta said it has “exhausted all options and resources – including rerouting and substitutions of aircraft and crews to cover scheduled flying – before cancelling around 90 flights for Friday.” The airline attributed the impact of the Omicron variant and weather conditions for the cancellations. In response to the pre-holiday chaos, airlines have called for the relaxation of quarantine rules for vaccinated staff. Delta’s chief executive, Ed Bastian, asked the head of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) to cut the self-isolation period for vaccinated people experiencing breakthrough infections from 10 to five days. Airlines for America and JetBlue have seconded the request. The request comes amid a relaxation of self-isolation rules in England, allowing people to end quarantine after seven days if they test negative on two tests 24 hours apart. Similarly, the CDC in the US cut the isolation period to seven days for asymptomatic people who test negative, but only for health workers. Officials in the north-western Chinese city of Xian are facing punishment after a Covid-19 outbreak led to the lockdown of its 13 million residents. All domestic flights out of Xian and most trains from the city scheduled for Friday were cancelled, while the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection said that 26 people were being held accountable for the failure to control the outbreak. Unvaccinated people in the UK should be offered a free taxi ride to their local clinic, the Liberal Democrats have said, adding that hospitals are “largely [filling] with people who are unvaccinated”. The party called for the creation of a “vaccine tracing” service to identify unvaccinated people and offer them an appointment slot, with help to get there if needed. Those who are unable to afford or access public transport should be ferried in a taxi, they said. A similar policy is already in place some parts of the country, including in Manchester. Lib Dem health spokeswoman Daisy Cooper said: “The booster programme is critical to protecting us all against Omicron. But the Ggvernment needs to also step up efforts to persuade and support the unvaccinated to get their jabs, to protect themselves and the NHS in the longer term.” She accused the government of targeting the unvaccinated in a “blame game”, which she said “risks being counterproductive and alienating communities whose trust in this government is already low”. One in 35 people in England had Covid last week, new figures show, with 1.7 million people testing positive across the UK – the highest number on record so far. The figure rises to one in 20 people for London, which has seen the highest number of Omicron cases detected, according to Office for National Statistics (ONS) data. In Wales, around one in 45 people had Covid that week, while Scotland’s rate was one in 65 and Northern Ireland’s was one in 40. The data includes people who tested positive outside of hospital or a care setting in the week ending 19 December. Russia has reported 24,703 new coronavirus cases in the past 24 horus, Reuters reports. The country has also registered 998 deaths in the same period of time. Unions have raised safety concerns about changes to ambulance staffing as an extra 90 military personnel are drafted in to support Scottish health boards. The contingency plan, first reported by the Courier, would see more ambulances staffed by only one trained medic and a driver, potentially a military one, with breaks also be cut. The Scottish ambulance service insisted the changes would only happen in “times of extremis only”, but GMB Scotland said staff and the public should be worried. The military personnel will help NHS Ayrshire and Arran, NHS Grampian and NHS Lanarkshire from January. Kieran Whitford, a paramedic working in Aberdeen, wrote on Twitter that the changes made staff “feel like we are worth nothing”. People at risk of becoming seriously ill from coronavirus will have their options for treatment expanded from January after the US Food and Drug Administration approved the first two antiviral pills against Covid. Full report by Eric Berger: South Africans without Covid symptoms will no longer have to test or self-isolate if a contact tests positive, the government announced on Friday. The move is part of a shift from containment to mitigation measures, with the health ministry changing the rules to require asymptomatic individuals to monitor their symptoms for five to seven days and avoid attending large gatherings after contact with a positive case. Only those who develop symptoms must get tested, the statement continued, adding that those with mild symptoms should isolate for eight days and severe cases for 10 days. The shift also sees the end of quarantine in facilities other than the home. Contact tracing will also be scrapped except in cases like cluster outbreaks. The ministry attributed the change in policy to the following factors: the emergence of highly infectious variants like Omicron; estimates that at least 60% of the population have some protection from vaccination or infection; and new information including on the high level of asymptomatic cases and small number of actual cases diagnosed. France will require passengers to show negative Covid tests to travel to its overseas territories. The new measure will come into effect on 28 December and affect travellers both from mainland France and abroad, the health ministry said. It comes after the country recorded a daily record of 91,608 Covid cases on Thursday (23 December), with Omicron spreading rapidly across the country. Bhutan has begun administering booster vaccine doses to older citizens and priority groups in a bid to fight the spread of the Omicron variant, health ministry officials have said. People aged 65 and above, overseas travellers, health workers, chronically ill people, and all adults living in “high risk” areas were eligible, the officials said. With a vaccine stock exceeding 250,000 doses, Bhutan plans to inoculate more than 228,000 people in a week, according to the Kuensel newspaper. “As we did for the second dose, mix and match is recommended even for the booster, given its higher efficacy,” Sonam Wangchuk, an official of the Royal Centre for Disease Control, told the newspaper. More than 93% of over-12s have been vaccinated with two doses in the nation of some 750,000 people. The kingdom has recorded just three Covid deaths since the pandemic began, while government data shows its tally of infections to stand at 2,659. The Office for National Statistics has the latest figures on take-up of booster doses in England by occupation. Around a third of sports players in England (34.1%) are estimated to have received a booster or third dose of Covid-19 vaccine as of 12 December. Other specific occupations with low take-up of extra doses include plasterers (33.3%), waiters and waitresses (33.4%), chefs (35.0%), bar staff (36.6%), fork-lift truck drivers (37.6%) and vehicle technicians and mechanics (38.2%). The figures may reflect the order in which people became eligible for a booster or third dose of vaccine, with jabs initially prioritised for older and vulnerable people before being extended to younger age groups. Austria should offer a fourth vaccine dose to some healthcare staff and other key workers, the National Vaccination Board has said in the wake of the rapidly spreading Omicron variant. However, there was not enough evidence to recommend it for the general public, the board said. “In view of an imminent Omicron wave, (a fourth vaccination) can be offered in high-risk areas (eg exposed healthcare personnel) and in systemically critical areas from six months after the third vaccination,” the board said. It comes after Austria on Wednesday announced it would bolster restrictions once more from 27 December to deal with the rising tide of Omicron cases. Several hundred have been identified so far in the country, which had its fourth lockdown in November. Updating its guidelines, the board said that fourth shots could be given “off label” to some groups of key workers following medical consultation. “There is still no evidence that this additional vaccination can prevent infections. However, it can be it can be assumed that serious illnesses can be prevented,” it said. The UK Health Security Agency’s chief has suggested the government might decide on whether further restrictions are needed in England based on Omicron’s wider impact, rather than the variant’s severity alone. The risk of hospitalisation is up to 70% less for people with Omicron compared to those infected with Delta, according to the first UK government study of its kind. Monday is expected to be the first day the government could consider any further restrictions after Boris Johnson said no further measures would be brought in before Christmas. Asked whether the government will have the information on Monday to make key decisions, Dr Jenny Harries told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “Ministers will look at all of the data that we have available - and that isn’t simply what the epidemiology is saying, it’s how it’s impacting society. “So, for example, we have very high rates of individuals off sick - we know that particularly in London, around one in 35 have currently got Omicron. “Now that’s having an impact on the workforce. So these are not simply about hospitalisation rates.” She added that ministers are being kept updated on a daily basis and that will continue throughout the Christmas period. “I don’t think we do know yet that this is going to be a significantly less serious disease for the population – the older population – that we are normally most concerned about in relation to serious disease and death.” NHS staff are struggling with a “very, very depleted workforce”, the head of the Royal College of Nursing has warned, saying that staff want a course of action that allows them to care for patients safely. Pat Cullen told BBC Breakfast that nurses and other healthcare workers are “quite ill from the spin-off with Covid”. “[They] continue to be simply because their internal and personal resources are low going into this because of the number of hours that they’re working and the shifts they’ve been working on a very, very depleted workforce working in a fragile service leading up to this current wave,” she said. Cullen said staff want leaders to act to “support the health service” in order to allow them to “care for their patients safely … If that means tighter measures, that’s for political leaders to decide based on the scientific evidence.” People in South Africa will be offered a booster dose of Johnson &amp; Johnson’s vaccine from Friday after the health regulator approved its used for the general public. While both J&amp;J and Pfizer’s vaccines had been approved for use as boosters, they had previously only been offered to health workers. “From 24 December 2021 the National Vaccination Programme will provide J&amp;J booster vaccinations to anyone who received their last dose at least 2 months prior,” the health department’s statement said, adding ideally it would also be within six months of their initial shot. Meanwhile, people who had their second Pfizer dose at least six months ago will be able to get a booster dose of the vaccine from 28 December. According to figures from earlier this month, 44% of South African adults have received at least one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine – a figure well shy of the country’s target. While Mongolia’s vaccine take-up was excellent for the first two doses, the country’s booster drive has lagged behind. More than 90% of adults in the sparsely-populated nation of three million took up their initial vaccine doses, but only half of this figure have had the booster so far, due to a combination of online misinformation and the difficulties of reaching remote populations, according to AFP. About one-third of the country is nomadic. In order to bring up the country’s booster coverage, health workers are travelling to remote areas to offer herders a third vaccine dose. “During the first wave, people were queuing outside (for vaccines) and I was working until 9pm,” said nurse Sodkhuu Galbadrakh. “There were days I didn’t go home. Now, only five to six people come to get the booster shot per day.” He said he calls herders daily to try and arrange the third shot but often can’t get through, especially with poor phone reception in pastureland. However, Batbayar Ochirbat, the official leading the vaccination programme, told AFP that confidence in the booster is slowly growing after a fall in cases. After daily cases reached more than 3,000 in September, figures have fallen to an average of 200 daily cases, which he attributes partly to boosters. “People started to build trust after they saw vaccinated people have booster shots, develop no symptoms, and not get sick,” he said. The UK government’s chief scientific adviser has defended Sage against the charges that the group’s modelling was fearmongering, saying it was not their job to “spread gloom”. Sir Patrick Vallance said it was not the responsibility of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) “to take a particular policy stance or to either spread gloom or give Panglossian optimism”. The remarks followed criticism of epidemiological modellers’ response to the Omicron outbreak. In a piece for the Times, Vallance said those participating in the debate “need to consider all the data in the round, not only those parts that fit an argument while ignoring the rest”. “That is not science, even though it might sometimes make an entertaining read,” he said. Instead, he wrote, science must be “self-correcting”. It comes after a statement from the SPI-M-O, a group of scientists who report to Sage, warned last week that hospitalisations could peak at between 3,000 and 10,000 a day and deaths at between 600 and 6,000 if no new restrictions were introduced. Two people have died in a fire in the the intensive care unit of a Russian Covid-19 hospital in the southern city of Astrakhan, according to the Tass news agency. Russia’s emergencies ministry said in a statement that there were casualties, but gave no further details. Investigators said they have launched an investigation into the case. A number of Russian hospitals have dealt with accidental fires since the onset of the pandemic, chiefly due to ageing infrastructure and low safety standards, AFP reports. In August, nine coronavirus patients died after an oxygen pipe ruptured at a hospital in Vladikavkaz. Hello, I’m Clea Skopeliti and I’ll be bringing you the latest developments in the coronavirus pandemic for the next few hours. If you’d like to get in touch with any suggestions for coverage, my Twitter is @cleaskopeliti, or you can send me an email. Thanks in advance. Dozens of officials have reportedly been punished over a virus outbreak in the locked-down city of Xi’an, China’s disciplinary body said on Friday, Agence France-Presse reports. China is on high alert for new infections as it prepares to hold the Winter Olympics in February in the capital Beijing and is continuing to pursue a strict zero-Covid approach. Xi’an recently plunged into a strict lockdown where its 13 million residents have been told to stay home from Thursday, shuttering businesses and launching several rounds of mass testing. The Central Commission for Discipline Inspection said on Friday that 26 Communist party officials had been punished for “insufficient rigour in preventing and controlling the outbreak”. Chinese officials who are deemed to have failed at controlling the virus in their region are regularly sacked or reprimanded. The statement said inspections had revealed there had been a lax approach to testing and an uncoordinated response that hindered contact tracing in Xi’an. Authorities would clamp down on “bureaucratic issues in disease control work such as shirking responsibility, not taking action, passing the buck and dealing with things in a negative way”, a party discipline official said. Thailand has reported its first domestic cluster of coronavirus infections from the Omicron variant in Kalasin province in northeastern Thailand, officials said on Friday, Reuters news agency reports. “From the Kalasin cluster, there are 21 new infections,” said the country’s Covid-19 taskforce spokeswoman, Apisamai Srirangsan. The infections stem from a couple who travelled from Belgium through the country’s Test &amp; Go scheme that waived quarantine for vaccinated arrivals, she said. Both had tested negative for infections before travelling and after arrival in Thailand in early December. By 15 December, they started having symptoms and tested positive and were later confirmed to have the Omicron variant, she said. The announcement comes as Thailand’s capital city Bangkok cancelled government-sponsored New Year activity, including midnight prayers. Fireworks and countdown events organised by malls were still going forward and would require proof of vaccination and antigen test results. If you’ve just joined us welcome to our live Covid blog covering all the latest coronavirus developments. Here’s a brief snapshot of how Covid is unfolding around the world ahead of the holiday season. Boris Johnson has invoked the teaching of Jesus Christ to urge the public to get a Covid booster jab. In a recent video, he celebrated members of the public for “getting jabbed not just for themselves, for ourselves, but for friends and family and everyone we meet … That, after all, is the teaching of Jesus Christ, whose birth is at the heart of this enormous festival – that we should love our neighbours as we love ourselves.” NHS England has said there are 200,000 vaccination appointments available on Christmas Eve, Christmas Day and Boxing Day and urged anybody due a booster to consider coming forward “to get the gift of a jab”. In England around 1.2 million people were infected with Covid last week, or one in 45 of the population – a pandemic record. London estimated one in 30 people were infected last week. Airlines in the US and Australia have announced cancellations to hundreds of flights ahead of Christmas. Australia cuts the Covid booster interval to four months after their second dose, then the wait will be shortened again. Ecuador has declared Covid vaccination will be mandatory after a marked rise of infections. New York City will scale back New Year’s Eve celebrations after mayor Bill de Blasio announced new restrictions for the city’s planned event in Times Square. An Oxford University lab study on AstraZeneca’s vaccine, Vaxzevria, showed that after a three-dose course of the vaccine, neutralising levels against Omicron were broadly similar to those against the Delta variant after two doses. Italy is planning to tighten restrictions including making mask wearing mandatory outdoors. The country has also banned public New Year’s Eve celebrations. The Spanish region of Catalonia will introduce a night curfew on Thursday. Nightclubs in Scotland are to close from 27 December for three weeks. Denmark will require foreigners entering the country to provide a negative Covid-19 test from 27 December, regardless of vaccination status NHS England has said there are 200,000 vaccination appointments available on Christmas Eve, Christmas Day and Boxing Day and urged anybody due a booster to consider coming forward “to get the gift of a jab”. Staff and volunteers will continue to deliver jabs in some locations on 25 and 26 December, as the NHS tries to meet Boris Johnson’s target of giving everybody eligible a booster by the end of the year amid a surge in the number of Covid cases. Vaccination centres that were open “over the festive period” included Redbridge town hall in north-east London from 10am to 5.50pm and Grim’s Dyke golf club in Pinner, Middlesex, the NHS said. Walk-in appointments can be obtained in Eastbourne, Dewsbury and Hartlepool. Dr Emily Lawson, the head of the NHS Covid vaccination programme, praised those willing to work over the Christmas weekend and argued that people should consider getting a booster as a last-minute present to family members. Hello, it’s Samantha Lock with you on the blog this Christmas Eve. I hope everyone is well. I’ll be bringing you all the latest Covid developments from across the world. In some disappointing news for those wanting to visit family and friends over the holidays, airlines in the US and Australia have announced cancellations to hundreds of flights ahead of Christmas. United Airlines and Delta Air Lines say they have been forced to cancel dozens of Christmas Eve flights due to Covid’s toll on its flight crews and other workers. United cancelled 120 flights for Friday, while Atlanta-based Delta said it has cancelled about 90 flights, Reuters reports. Meanwhile, thousands of Australians have also had their domestic flights cancelled in the hours leading up to Christmas, as frontline staff were ordered to test and isolate amid a rise in Covid cases. There were 117 domestic services cancelled on Friday between Sydney and Melbourne. An Oxford University lab study on AstraZeneca’s vaccine, Vaxzevria, showed that after a three-dose course of the vaccine, neutralising levels against Omicron were broadly similar to those against the Delta variant after two doses. “As we better understand Omicron, we believe we will find that T-cell response provides durable protection against severe disease and hospitalisations,” Mene Pangalos, the head of AstraZeneca’s biopharmaceuticals R&amp;D said, referring to a critical component of the immune system that respond to fight infection. Here’s a story that echoes the cancellation of flights happening over the US. Thousands of Australians have had their domestic flights cancelled in the hours leading up to Christmas, as frontline staff were ordered to test and isolate amid a rise in Covid cases. There were 117 domestic services cancelled on Friday between Sydney and Melbourne. A Sydney airport spokesperson told Guardian Australia that 80 of the 500 domestic services scheduled to arrive and depart Sydney on Friday had been cancelled. Many flights cancelled on Friday are Jetstar services, with the airline unable to staff all of its planned services because employees were sidelined due to Covid testing and isolation requirements. Read the full story here. Vietnam aims to vaccinate all of its adult population with a coronavirus booster shot by the end of the first quarter of next year, the health ministry said on Friday. The south-east Asian country has seen a surge in daily infections since it lifted most of its movement restrictions in October, but has not reported any cases of the Omicron variant. “The Covid-19 situation has been evolving in a complicated manner recently, with a rising trend in new infections,” the ministry said in a statement. The country reported 16,377 infections on Thursday, raising its overall caseload to 1.6 million, with 30,500 deaths. More than 62% of its population of 98 million have received at least two vaccine shots. Australians will soon be able to access Covid-19 vaccine booster shots four months after their second dose, then the wait will be shortened again. The government has said the minimum interval will be cut from five to four months on 4 January, and reduced to three months on 31 January. The move, announced on Friday, follows calls from state premiers to speed up the shots to better protect against the more infectious Omicron variant. The Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation said maximising booster coverage – if combined with “enhanced public health and social measures” – may prevent a large surge in case numbers, hospitalisations and deaths. Read the full story here. South Korea has just released its daily Covid report. The east Asian nation reported another 6,233 confirmed coronavirus cases in the past 24 hours, according to data released by the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency. The figure is a slight drop on the 6,919 cases reported the day before. A further 56 deaths were also recorded – a significant drop on yesterdays record high of 109 deaths. A record number of 1,084 people have been admitted to hospital with serious symptoms and in critical condition. A controversial New Zealand scheme that offers visas to wealthy foreign investors has resumed operating after a year’s hiatus due to the pandemic, prompting concern from overseas New Zealanders who fear it will place additional strain on the country’s overburdened managed isolation and quarantine (MIQ) system. Martin Newell, a spokesperson for the advocacy group Grounded Kiwis, said the scheme’s resumption would prompt “disbelief” among New Zealanders overseas, who may lose out on MIQ spots to the investors. “The government is abandoning the needs of its citizens in favour of those who have enough money to be able to buy their way into the country.” Read the full story from our reporter Pete McKenzie in Wellington here. United Airlines and Delta Air Lines say they have been forced to cancel dozens of Christmas Eve flights due to Covid’s toll on its flight crews and other workers. United cancelled 120 flights for Friday, while Atlanta-based Delta said it has cancelled about 90 flights, Reuters reports. Both said they were working to contact passengers so they would not be stranded at airports. United said: The nationwide spike in Omicron cases this week has had a direct impact on our flight crews and the people who run our operation. As a result, we’ve unfortunately had to cancel some flights and are notifying impacted customers in advance of them coming to the airport.” Delta said it has “exhausted all options and resources - including rerouting and substitutions of aircraft and crews to cover scheduled flying - before cancelling around 90 flights for Friday. Delta cited potential inclement weather and the impact of the Omicron variant for the cancellations. On Tuesday, Delta Chief Executive Ed Bastian asked the head of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) to shrink quarantine guidelines for fully vaccinated individuals who experience breakthrough Covid-19 infections, citing the impact on the carrier’s workforce. Bastian asked that the isolation period be cut to five days from the current 10. That request was echoed both by Airlines for America, a trade group representing major cargo and passenger carriers, which wrote to the CDC on Thursday, and by JetBlue on Wednesday. China is reporting 87 new confirmed coronavirus cases for Thursday, 23 December. The figure is a slight decrease from 100 reported a day earlier, its health authority said on Friday. Of the new infections, 55 were locally transmitted, including 49 in the northern city of Xi’an currently under lockdown, according to a statement by the National Health Commission, compared with 71 from a day earlier. China reported 26 new asymptomatic cases, which it classifies separately from confirmed cases, up from 19 a day earlier. There were no new deaths, leaving the death toll at 4,636. Mainland China had 100,731 confirmed cases as of 23 December. Ecuador has declared Covid vaccination will be mandatory after a marked rise of infections and the arrival of new variants of the disease. The government said Thursday that only Ecuadorians with a medical condition that could be complicated by vaccination will be exempt. Those people must provide documentation. Officials say the order comes because of an increase in coronavirus infections and the circulation of new variants such as omicron. Ecuador says it has enough vaccines to immunise the entire population. As of Tuesday, about 77% of Ecuador’s 17.3 million people had been vaccinated. About 33,600 people in Ecuador have died from Covid. Earlier this week, the body overseeing health policies to combat the pandemic decreed that vaccination certificates must be shown to enter restaurants, cinemas and other public areas. New York mayor Bill de Blasio has announced new restrictions for the city’s planned New Year’s Eve event in Times Square. Viewing areas that normally accommodate about 58,000 people will be limited to about 15,000 to allow for more distancing, and everyone in attendance must show proof of vaccination and wear a mask. “There is a lot to celebrate and these additional safety measures will keep the fully vaccinated crowd safe and healthy as we ring in the New Year,” de Blasio said. On Wednesday, the city set another record with 22,808 new Covid cases, though a true comparison is difficult due to discrepancies in tests available. Hello it’s Samantha Lock back with you on the blog this Christmas Eve. I’ll be bringing you all the latest Covid developments from across the world. Let’s start with the news that New Year’s Eve plans in New York will be scaled back amid fears of a surge in Covid cases. The annual celebration will still go ahead as planned although the number of attendees has been slashed. Several countries including Greece, Italy and Malta have also scrapped planned New Year’s Eve events. An Oxford University lab study on AstraZeneca’s vaccine, Vaxzevria, showed that after a three-dose course of the vaccine, neutralising levels against Omicron were broadly similar to those against the Delta variant after two doses. “As we better understand Omicron, we believe we will find that T-cell response provides durable protection against severe disease and hospitalisations,” Mene Pangalos, the head of AstraZeneca’s biopharmaceuticals R&amp;D said, referring to a critical component of the immune system that respond to fight infection. Here’s a run-down of all the Covid news you may have missed: Europe In England around 1.2 million people were infected with Covid last week, or 1 in 45 of the population - a pandemic record. London estimated 1 in 30 people were infected last week. UK health secretary Sajid Javid says there will be no further announcements on Covid restrictions in England before Christmas. Germany’s health minister said he expects a surge in coronavirus cases around new year and people will probably need a fourth vaccine shot. Germany also confirmed the country’s first death due to the Omicron variant. Greece banned public Christmas and New Year’s Eve festivities and mandated mask-wearing in open spaces. The measures will come into effect on Friday morning. Italy is planning to tighten restrictions including making mask wearing mandatory outdoors. The country has also banned public New Year’s Eve celebrations. Malta will ban all events where attendees are standing not seated, except weddings and funerals, from 27 December. Nightclubs in Scotland are to close from 27 December for three weeks. Denmark will require foreigners entering the country to provide a negative Covid-19 test from 27 December, regardless of vaccination status. Montenegro’s president, Milo Djukanović, tested positive for Covid-19 after being in contact with an infected person. The Spanish region of Catalonia will introduce a night curfew on Thursday. United States Emergency Covid testing sites are being set up in hard-hit areas across the US. The US Supreme court will hold a special session on Biden’s nationwide vaccine-or-testing Covid mandate for large businesses and a separate vaccine requirement for healthcare workers. The US Food and Drug Administration authorised Merck’s antiviral pill, molnupiravir, for Covid-19, after giving the go-ahead to a similar treatment from Pfizer a day earlier. Asia China locks down 13 million people in Xi’an after detecting 127 Covid cases. All residents are barred from leaving their houses except to buy living necessities every other day or for emergencies. Organisers of the Beijing Winter Olympics said they expect a “certain number” of Covid-19 cases in China due to foreigners arriving for the Games. South Korea set a new record for Covid deaths on Thursday. Australia reintroduced Covid curbs such as mandated mask wearing indoors, capacity limits and QR code check-ins to cover most of the population on Thursday as daily infections hit a fresh record. Australia will also shorten the interval for people to receive their booster shots to four months from five from 4 January. South America: Ecuador is making vaccination against the coronavirus mandatory. Middle East Covid infections are rising again across the six Gulf Arab states after months of low or falling figures.