Thanks for reading along this Friday evening. Here’s some of what we covered: The new Covid variant Omicron may have picked up genetic material from the virus that causes the common cold during one of its mutations, a new study shows. The study is not yet peer-reviewed and more research is needed to better under the strain. Former Trump ally Jeffrey Clark claimed a medical condition is making him unable to testify before the House select committee investigating the 6 Jan Capitol attack. Omicron has now been documented in 11 US states. The strain spreads quickly but health officials say Delta is still the top concern going into the winter holiday season. See you next time! Uncertainty about the fast-spreading Omicron variant showed up on Wall Street today, and the major indexes closed lower as a result, Reuters reports. Following the Labor Department report that showed promising job growth and a drop in the unemployment rate, the CBOE Market Volatility index — which is looked at for indications of investor jitters — was the highest it’s been since late January. The new Covid virus strain also caused the International monetary Fund to consider lowering its global economic growth estimates. “A new variant that may spread very rapidly can dent confidence, and in that sense, we are likely to see some downgrades of our October projections for global growth,” IMF Managing Director Kristalina Georgieva said at the Reuters Next conference on Friday. The new Covid variant — which some scientists say spread twice as fast as Delta — has now been reported in 11 states. New cases were also confirmed in New Jersey, Missouri, Utah, Nebraska, Maryland, and Pennsylvania on Friday. The new strain had already been detected in California, Colorado, Hawaii, Minnesota and New York. “The Omicron variant is among us and we need to take steps to stop its spread,” New Jersey governor Phil Murphy said in a statement Friday confirming the state’s first case — reportedly a fully-vaccinated woman who recently traveled to South Africa. “It is vital that residents remain as vigilant as possible as we await more information about the variant,” he added urging residents to get vaccinated and continue wearing masks in public. New Jersey has seen a spike in cases recently, reaching the highest number of daily infections in the last eight months. The Delta variant still accounts for almost all of the cases in the country and health officials said that that version of the virus is still the top concern. Omicron has been spreading quickly in South Africa, where it was first discovered by scientists, offering a glimpse into how it might travel through populations around the world, the Associated Press reports. South African scientists also found that it has greater potential to reinfect people who have already gotten Covid than previous strains. The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack announced that former Trump justice department official Jeffrey Clark would not testify on Saturday, after he claimed a medical condition precluded him from appearing at a deposition. The move by Clark comes days after the select committee granted him a last minute reprieve and held off recommending him for criminal prosecution for ignoring a subpoena in exchange for testifying before House investigators. But the night before his scheduled deposition date, Clark informed the select committee that he could not appear after all. “Through his attorney, Mr Clark has informed the select committee of a medical condition that precludes his participation in tomorrow’s meeting,” Tim Mulvey, a spokesman for the select committee said in a statement. “He has provided ample evidence of his claim.” The select committee said Clark’s deposition would be postponed until 16 December. The extensively mutated Omicron variant possibly picked up some genetic material from the virus that causes the common cold during one of its mutations, according to a new study that has yet to be peer-reviewed. There are competing scientific theories about the mutations and more research is needed to better understand the new variant, but Reuters reports that researchers of this study believe the mutation could have come from an individual infected with both viruses and it could help the virus evade immune system attacks. The genetic sequence found in this version of the virus – but not in previous ones – also appears in the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and the human genome. Health officials have been alarmed by the number of mutations observed in the Omicron variant, which has far more than its predecessors. Questions still remain about how easily the new version of the virus will spread and how severe the symptoms caused by it will be. But the new research suggests it might move more quickly but do less damage. This post was updated to provide additional context about the study. Hello! I am Gabrielle Canon checking in from the west coast to take you through the rest of the evening’s news. Even with the latest discovery of the Omicron variant – which has been documented in eight states across the US as of Friday – health officials still consider Delta to be the top concern going into the winter holidays. Today Missouri, Nebraska, Maryland, and Pennsylvania each reported cases of the new strain, Reuters reports, joining California, New York, Minnesota, and Hawaii. Omicron is believed to be more contagious but initial reports indicate it may be less severe than previous variants of Covid. More from Reuters: Nebraska had six confirmed cases, the state’s health department said. Only one of the six people was vaccinated and none have needed to be hospitalized with Covid-19, the department added. Maryland Governor Larry Hogan announced the first three cases of the Omicron variant in his state, adding that none of the three individuals were hospitalized. And in Pennsylvania, a Philadelphia man in his 30s tested positive for Omicron, city health officials said. Walensky and other health experts said the best way to fight the spread of Covid-19, regardless of the strain, remains to get vaccinated.” It was a slow close do the work week in Washington. Here’s where things stand so far this afternoon. Biden signed into law a bill that will fund the government through February, averting a government shutdown – at least for now. Biden’s doctor said the president’s raspy voice was the result of a “frog in one’s throat”. In a memo, Dr Kevin O’Connor, affirmed that Biden was tested three times for Covid-19 and each result was negative. Psaki said the White House was preparing a range of options to deter Russian aggression as tension escalate at the border with Ukraine. She said a call between Biden and Putin was under consideration. Biden is scheduled to depart for Camp David on Friday evening and return on Sunday to attend the Kennedy Center Honors ceremony. And here’s a video of Biden cheekily blaming his affectionate baby grandson for giving him a cold. Democrats and abortion rights advocates are promising a showdown over the issue in next year’s midterms as the Supreme Court appears poised to undermine – and possibly overturn – longstanding legal precedent enshrining a constitutional right to the procedure. Already, vulnerable Democrats running in competitive races next year are highlighting the issue as strategists point to polling that strong majorities want Roe, the 1973 supreme court ruling, to remain the law of the land. For Democrats, it’s something of a political silver lining in an otherwise nightmare scenario. But a decision weakening or overruling Roe could also be a galvanizing force in next year’s midterm elections, as Democrats promise to defend abortion rights against Republican-led efforts to eliminate them. “It’s earth-shattering,” said Jenny Lawson, vice-president of organizing and engagement campaigns for Planned Parenthood Action Fund. “The court’s actions are going to change the way people think about reproductive freedom and how essential it is. It will be a driving force of the election, undoubtedly.” Joe Biden reassures reporters that his raspy voice is ‘just a cold’: Former Trump lawyer John Eastman, who was connected to efforts to stop the certification of Joe Biden’s presidential election win on 6 January, will plead the fifth amendment protection against self-incrimination before the House select committee investigating the Capitol attack, writes Hugo Lowell. The move by Eastman, communicated in a letter to the select committee by his attorney, is an extraordinary step and appears to suggest a growing fear among some of Trump’s closest advisers that their testimony may implicate them in potential criminality. “Dr Eastman has a more than reasonable fear that any statements he makes pursuant to this subpoena will be used in an attempt to mount a criminal investigation against him,” Eastman’s lawyer, Charles Burnham, told the select committee in a letter on Wednesday. The select committee issued a subpoena to Eastman last month as they sought to uncover the extent of his role in Trump’s scheme to prevent Biden from being certified as president and return himself to office for a second term despite losing the 2020 election. House investigators also took an interest in Eastman after it emerged that he played an integral part in a 4 January Oval Office meeting where he presented a memo advising then vice-president Mike Pence about ways to stop and delay Biden’s certification from taking place. The iPhones of 11 US state department officials were hacked using technology from the NSO Group spyware, according to a report in the Associated Press, which built on a report from Reuters. The employees were all located in Uganda and included some foreign service officers, a person familiar with the matter, who was not authorized to speak publicly about an ongoing investigation told the AP. Guardian reporter Stephanie Kirchgaessner, who has reported doggedly on the NSO Group, says the reports raise “serious questions about the use of Israeli surveillance tools against US government officials around the world.” The claim, which was reported by Reuters, comes just weeks after the Biden administration placed NSO on a US blacklist and said the surveillance company acted “contrary to the foreign policy and national security interests of the US”. In a hearing related to the defamation lawsuit against Donald Trump, lawyers for the former president argued that the US government should “take his place as the defendant” in the case brought by writer E Jean Carroll, who has accused him of rape. According to his lawyers, Trump isn’t trying to skirt responsibility, hardly. Instead, his interest lies in protecting future presidents. The former president’s attorneys told the judges he isn’t trying to dodge personal liability in the lawsuit by Carroll, who has spoken publicly about her allegations. He just wants to keep future presidents from being burdened by legal claims, they said. This is not political. This is not about being a Democrat or a Republican. It is solely to protect the presidency as an institution,” attorney Alina Habba said. Asked about a Reuters report that the phones of several state department employees were hacked by the Israel-based NSO Group, Psaki said the White House was aware. “We have been acutely concerned that commercial spyware like NSO group software poses a serious counterintelligence and security risk to US personnel,” Psaki said. She was also asked about Biden’s efforts on gun control in light of a deadly school shooting in Michigan, that left four students dead. Psaki said it remained a “core issue for the president” but didn’t offer a strategy for passing legislation stalled in Congress. Psaki demurred on questions about the filibuster, which Biden has expressed an openness to reforming but does not support eliminating. In light of the supreme court hearing earlier this week, in which the conservative justices expressed support for undermining Roe, activists have called on the administration to abolish the filibuster to codify abortion rights in federal law. Psaki restated Biden’s support for the Women’s Health Protection Act, which passed the House in September but faces daunting odds in the Senate. The filibuster is also a barrier to passing a voting rights legislation which is stalled in the Senate. Psaki also clarified Biden’s remarks from earlier today when he said he was tested for Covid every day. She said the protocol has not changed, meaning he is not tested daily. The president is proceeding with his schedule despite the cold, she said. To treat the symptoms, he is taking over-the-counter cold medication and “probably some cough drops and some tea.” Psaki was asked about rising tensions at the border between Russia and Ukraine. Earlier Biden had said his national security team was preparing a “meaningful set of initiatives” to address the escalating situation. “We want to make sure that we are prepared,” Psaki said. “We know what president Putin has done in the past. we see that he is putting in place the capacity to take action in short order and should he decide to invade that is why we want to be prepared.” She said the administration has a “range of tools at our disposal” for pressuring Russia to lower the temperatures, including additional economic sanctions. She said the US would work with allies on a response. The White House has been “engaged in the possibility of a call” with the Russian leader, Psaki said. The call, she added, would be an “opportunity to discuss our serious concerns about the bellicose rhetoric about the military build up that we’re seeing at the border with Ukraine.” Asked about Russia’s desire for assurances that Ukraine will not be allowed to join Nato, Psaki said it was not up to Russia to decide who is and isn’t a part of the alliance. “It’s important to remember where the provocative action is coming from at this time,” she said. “It’s not the United States. It’s not Ukraine.” We’re now tuning into the press briefing, where Jen Psaki has taken to the podium. She began by highlighting the president’s jobs record, and noted that unemployment had fallen in the last month. She also announced that the Biden’s will return from Camp David on Sunday to host the Kennedy Center honorees reception and will then attend the 44th Kennedy Center honors, restoring a presidential tradition that Trump ignored. Psaki also said Biden would deliver remarks on Monday about how the Build Back Better Act, currently pending before the Senate, would lower the cost of prescription drug prices. Biden officially signed into law the “Further Extending Government Funding Act,” which includes a short-term continuing resolution that funds federal agencies through 18 February. The bill includes supplemental funding for support of Afghanistan evacuees and extends several expiring authorizations. In a press release, the White House again thanked Congressional leaders and a bipartisan group of Senators for reaching a deal and averting a shutdown at midnight. “Thank you to Speaker Nancy Pelosi, Majority Leader Chuck Schumer, Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, Chairman Patrick Leahy, Vice Chairman Richard Shelby, and Chair Rosa DeLauro,” the White House said. Biden’s physician, Dr Kevin O’Connor, said the president is experiencing increased nasal congestion, known colloquially as a “frog in ones throat.” According to a memo released by the White House and signed by O’Connor, Biden was tested three times for Covid this week and separately tested for respiratory pathogens such as flu &amp; strep. All came back negative. Treatment for his cold will include “common, over the counter medications” for symptoms. Biden was asked earlier if he was “ok”. He laughed off the question, and said he believes he contracted the cold from his grandson. Lawyer and associate of Donald Trump John Eastman as indicated he is asserting his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination in the investigation by the special House committee investigating events surrounding the insurrection at the US Capitol on January 6 by extremist Trump supporters. “Dr. Eastman hereby asserts his Fifth Amendment right not to be a witness against himself in response to your subpoena,” attorney Charles Burnham wrote earlier this week in a letter on behalf of Eastman and sent to the chair of that bipartisan committee, Mississippi Democratic congressman Bennie Thompson. Eastman was subpoenaed by the committee last month. House investigators are taking a special interest in Eastman after it emerged that he outlined scenarios for overturning the election in a memo for a 4 January White House meeting that included Trump, the former vice-president Mike Pence and Trump’s chief of staff, Mark Meadows, Hugo Lowell previously reported for Guardian US. Burnham’s letter continues: “Members of this very Committee have openly spoken of making criminal referrals to the Department of Justice and described the Committee’s work in terms of determining “guilt or innocence... “Dr. Eastman has a more than reasonable fear that any statements he makes pursuant to this subpoena will be used in an attempt to mount a criminal investigation against him.” Politico further reports today: Eastman’s decision is an extraordinary assertion by someone who worked closely with Trump to attempt to overturn the 2020 election results. He met with Trump and pushed state legislative leaders to reject Biden’s victory in a handful of swing states and appoint alternate electors to the Electoral College, effectively denying Biden’s victory. The former Chapman University law professor also pressured Pence, who is constitutionally required to preside over the Electoral College certification on Jan. 6, to unilterally refuse to count some of Biden’s electors and send the election to the full House for a vote — or delay long enough to give states a chance to submit new electors. Eastman also spoke at Trump’s Jan. 6 rally alongside Rudy Giuliani. Most of Burnham’s letter makes procedural objections to the structure of the Jan. 6 committee... ...Eastman, who’s also a senior fellow at the Claremont Institute, would be the second known Jan. 6 committee witness to plead the Fifth to avoid self-incrimination. The other, former DOJ official Jeffrey Clark, revealed his decision to the Jan. 6 panel on the same day Burnham sent his letter. After Clark’s last-minute decision, the committee scheduled a Saturday deposition to permit him to formally assert his Fifth Amendment rights and to discuss whether they accept it as a legitimate invocation. Eastman may face similar questions. The busy Friday in US politics continues but here’s where things stand so far. House minority leader Kevin McCarthy said the Islamophobic remarks by Republican congresswoman Laura Boebert and Majorie Taylor Greene hurt the party as it tries to keep the focus on discontent over the economy and other problems facing the Biden administration. Joe Biden said that to successfully confront the new Omicron coronavirus variant and curb the pandemic in the US, it was necessary to combat it around the world. “In order to beat Covid, we have to shut it down worldwide,” the US president said. The US president will soon sign into law the short-term government funding bill before the midnight deadline, averting a government shutdown. The US economy added 210,000 jobs in November, less than half the jobs growth that economists had expected. McCarthy opened his weekly press conference on an optimistic note, gloating over the number of House Democrats who have announced their retirement. He was especially gleeful about the retirement of congressman Peter DeFazio of Oregon, the chairman of the transportation and infrastructure committee, who said this week that he will not seek re-election after more than three decades in Congress. “It’s different when a committee chair announces retirement,” McCarthy said. “Can’t blame ’em for announcing retirement, but he is now the 19th Democrat to announce retirement.” He said it was a clear sign that Democrats know “they’re not going to be in the majority the next time”. Democrats face daunting odds as they try to keep control of their congressional majorities, weighed down by Biden’s low approval ratings, economic discontent, Republican gerrymandering and the historical pattern of the president’s party losing ground in the midterm elections. House minority leader Kevin McCarthy said the Islamophobic remarks by Republican congresswoman Laura Boebert and Majorie Taylor Greene hurt the party as it tries to keep the focus on discontent over the economy and other problems facing the Biden administration. He called the comments by the lawmakers “things we would not want to deal with”. But McCarthy has so far chosen not to take action against his own members, leaving it to Democrats to respond. House Democrats stripped Greene of her committee assignments earlier this year over violent and bigoted comments she made before being elected, and last month censured Arizona congressman Paul Gosar for sharing an anime video that depicted him killing congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. He was also stripped of his committee assignments. Nearly all Republicans opposed the sanction. But McCarthy acknowledged their rhetoric could cause political problems for the party. “Things that the American people want to focus on – stopping inflation, gas prices and others – anything that deviates that causes problems,” he said. He said Boebert’s apology to congresswoman Ilhan Omar should be sufficient, after the Colorado congresswoman made a joke about terrorism when sharing an elevator with Omar, who is Muslim. Boebert apologized to “anyone in the Muslim community” in a post on Twitter and then called Omar to apologize personally, McCarthy said. But Omar said the call was “unproductive” and implored McCarthy to “actually hold his party accountable”. Asked how the situation involving Boebert differs from the one involving former congressman Steve King, who was removed by the Republican leader from his committee assignments in 2019 after making comments supportive of white nationalism, McCarthy again insisted that Boebert’s apology was the right course of action. For more on this discussion, listen to this week’s episode of Politics Weekly, where the Guardian’s Jonathan Freedland speaks to Dr Abdul El-Sayed about Islamophobia in American politics After their remarks, the members of the taskforce took a handful of questions from reporters. Fauci was asked when scientists will have a better understanding of the risks posed by the Omicron variant. He said they would have a clearer picture in the “next few weeks”. But he said it could take longer to understand the impact of Omicron and whether it will overtake Delta as the dominant strain in the US. “We really don’t know what’s going to happen – how well it is going to compete or not compete with Delta,” he said, explaining that the CDC has the capacity to determine this. We will now shift to cover the coronavirus taskforce briefing, where public health officials are giving an update on the Omicron variant. The CDC director, Dr Rochelle Walensky, begins by reminding Americans that while much of the coverage is focused on the Omicron variant, nearly all new cases in the United States were caused by the Delta variant. Dr Anthony Fauci, the chief medical adviser to the president, implored Americans to get vaccinated. While more information is needed to better understand the transmissibility and severity of the variant, Fauci said there was strong evidence to suggest vaccines would provide a degree of protection against it, citing in vitro studies that indicate the boosters increase “antibody titers against a wide range of variants.” “There’s every reason to believe that if you get vaccinated and boosted you would have at least some degree of cross protection, very likely against severe disease, even against the Omicron variant,” he said. “The Omicron variant is a cause for concern, not panic,” said Jeff Zients, the president’s Covid-19 response coordinator, adding that vaccines “clearly remain our most important tool.” He said the US was making progress: 2.2m shots were administered on Thursday, the highest single day total since May. Vivek Murthy, the surgeon general, outlined the administration’s efforts to educate Americans about the importance of vaccines and combat the misinformation circulating online and on social media. He said the administration was committed to trying all forms of communications – email, phone banking, texts, podcasts, letters, social media, news paper ads – “everything short of carrier pigeons”, he said. The information will also be published in several languages, including Spanish, Mandarin, Korean, Haitian Creole, Arabic and Russian. “The goal is really to leave no stone unturned as we seek to reach people with live saving information,” he said. He also urged parents to vaccinate their children, as he did with his five-year-old son. He said his son was nervous about getting the shot, but was “all smiles after.” Biden is now answering questions from the press. The first up is a question from Fox News’ Peter Doocy who noted the president’s raspy voice. “Are you OK?” Chuckling, Biden said he was. He said he was tested every day for Covid and was certain he had not contracted the virus. “What I have is a 1-and-a-half year old grandson who had a cold who likes to kiss his pop,” Biden said. “It’s just a cold.” To successfully confront the virus in the US, Biden said it was necessary to combat it around the world. “It’s going to take time worldwide,” he said. “In order to beat Covid, we have to shut it down worldwide ... We’re doing everything that needs to be done to take care of the American people within our borders. But look what’s happened. We’re starting to make some real progress and you find out there’s another strain. And the idea that you can build a wall around America to keep any Covid from around the world out is not there.” Asked whether he was considering imposing vaccine requirements for domestic travel, Biden said not at this point. He believes the protocols in place are sufficient for international travel. In response to the rising tensions between Russia and Ukraine, Biden said his national security team was preparing a “meaningful set of initiatives” to make it more difficult for Vladimir Putin to “go ahead and do what people are worried he may do.” Addressing the November job’s report, Biden begins with the good news first, pointing to the unemployment rate falling to 4.2% and the 6m jobs created since he took office. He credited his administration’s coronavirus stimulus plan for helping rush relief to American families hurt by the coronavirus pandemic. “Even after accounting for rising prices, the typical American family has more money in their pockets than they did last year,” he said. But he acknowledged that more help was needed. “It’s not enough to know that we’re making progress,” he continued. “You need to see it and feel it in your own lives.” Biden said controlling the pandemic was critical to the nation’s economic recovery. He urged Americans to get vaccinated if they not yet done so and for adults who have been fully vaccinated to get their booster shot and take their eligible children to get inoculated. Biden also touted actions by his administration to ease supply chain shortages and lower gas prices. “In the meantime, I’ve used every tool available to address price increases and it’s beginning to work,” he said. He then made the case for his social policy package, arguing that it would relieve economic pressures on American families by bringing down health care costs and making childcare, senior care and education more affordable. After a slight delay, Biden is speaking now on the November jobs report. He opened his remarks by saying he would soon sign into law the short-term government funding bill before the midnight deadline, averting a government shutdown. “Funding the government isn’t a great achievement,” Biden said with a wry chuckle. “it’s the bare minimum of what we need to get done. BUT in these times bipartisan cooperation is worth recognition.” He thanked House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, and Senate leaders Chuck Schumer and Mitch McConnell for reaching a deal and the Senate for a bipartisan vote to fund federal agencies. An updated White House advisory announced that the White House Covid-19 response taskforce would hold a press conference at 11am, as cases of the Omicron variant continue are identified across the US and scientists caution that much is still unknown about its severity and transmissibility. The guidance also advised that the president would delay by three hours his departure from the White House to Camp David, where he will spend the weekend. The president was due to speak at 10.15am, but the White House has pushed back the remarks, according to a White House pool reporter. Arizona senator Kyrsten Sinema, a centrist Democratic holdout on Biden’s agenda, declined to say whether she would support the president’s sprawling social policy package in an interview with CNN on Thursday. Asked if she was prepared to vote “yes” when the legislation is brought to the Senate floor, perhaps as early as this month, the senator demurred. “I am always prepared to vote and to vote for what’s right for the interests of Arizona,” she said. Sinema, along with West Virginia senator Joe Manchin, has emerged as a key player in negotiations over the bill, which has been trimmed and tailored to meet their policy demands. Biden needs the support of all 50 Democrats or the legislation will not pass the Senate. In the interview, Sinema also responds to a number of other questions about her reputation as a political “enigma” and her sinking approval among Democratic voters in Arizona. Asked about the criticism from progressives that she is not forthcoming about her policy views. Far from inscrutable, Sinema effectively called herself a “straight-shooter”. The issue, in her view, was not one of frankness but of understanding. “I think I’m very direct. I am very upfront when I talk to folks about what I believe in, what I can support and what I can’t support. I think there are some people who just don’t like what they’re hearing and maybe they use other terms to describe it,” she said. Responding to her Democratic critics in Arizona, Sinema said she was legislating the way she promised she would during her campaign, when she ran to be senator of a swing state that hadn’t elected a Democrat to the Senate in decades: as a moderate willing to work with Republicans. Voting rights advocates are increasingly alarmed by the White House’s apparent lack of strategy to abolish the filibuster and pass critical legislation protecting and expanding access to the ballot box. The Guardian’s Sam Levine reports that advocates came away from a November 15 meeting between the White House and the leaders of hundreds of voting rights organization, and included a brief appearance by the vice president Kamala Harris, without any clear indication of how the president and his team planned to move the stalled elections bills through the Senate. The vice-president, who is leading the White House’s voting rights effort, arrived midway through the meeting and read just over six minutes of prepared remarks and then left without taking any questions, according to people who attended. White House staffers stayed on the call and answered three questions from participants. “They did not lay out a strategy for getting this done,” said one person who attended, who requested anonymity to discuss a private meeting. Cliff Albright, a co-founder of Black Voters Matter, also attended the meeting and said it felt like a “check-the-box kind of a call”. “Nothing substantive came out of it,” he said. “It was very frustrating.” A third participant was also critical of the way the White House handled the meeting. “She said her five-minute remarks, which were the ‘same-old, same old’, and then she left”, said the person, who also requested that their name not be disclosed. Advocates were sympathetic to the delicate position Harris was in, leading the White House’s efforts on an issue that Democrats have said is a priority but currently has no clear legislative path forward. “The worst situation to be in is to have responsibility without authority. And right now that is the definition of her [Harris’] voting rights portfolio. She’s got responsibility, but she does not have the authority to deal with the elephant in the room, the filibuster,” Albright told Sam. “She cannot go any farther out on the issue than her boss, Potus, is willing to go. And he has not yet demonstrated that he’s willing to go as far as he needs to.” The US economy added 210,000 jobs in November, less than half the jobs growth that economists had expected, the Guardian’s Dominic Rushe reports. The data was compiled before the discovery of the Omicron coronavirus variant that now threatens to derail the economic recovery from the pandemic. The unemployment rate dropped to 4.2% as employers added jobs in business services, transportation, warehousing and construction. The overall gain was less than half the 500,000 plus jobs that economists had expected to be added over the month. November’s jobs report comes after the US added 531,000 in October, a sharp increase after a slowdown in hiring triggered by the spread of the Delta coronavirus variant over the summer. It remains to be seen whether the Omicron variant will have a similar damping effect on the jobs market. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) thinktank warned this week that Omicron and rising inflation could prove significant threats to the global economy. Last month’s jobs report provided Biden with a much-needed, and unexpected, bout of good news. In remarks then, he championed his agenda as the engine behind the US’ strong economic recovery. Now, under attack from Republicans over the rising cost of gas and other consumer goods, and with the impact of the Omicron variant still unknown, Biden must make the case to skeptical Democrats in the Senate that it’s wise to spend nearly $2tn more on his social policy package amid the continued economic uncertainty. Good morning and welcome to our live coverage of all things politics. Hot off the presses this morning: the November jobs report that shows the economy added 210,000 jobs, far fewer than expected. We’ll have more in the next hour, when Joe Biden gives remarks on the report. Members of Congress left Washington last night after accomplishing the most basic task of governance: keeping the federal government running. It wasn’t assured and some Republicans were threatening to force a shutdown over opposition to the administration’s private-sector vaccine mandates. But a deal was struck, a vote was held, and one looming crisis was averted, at least until February. Throughout the day, we’re keeping on eye on the aforementioned presidential remarks on the economy at 10.15am. Jen Psaki will brief reporters at 1.30pm.Allegations of abuse and accusations of widespread sexism. Bullying and harassment particularly of women. A cabinet minister stood aside pending an investigation into claims by a former staffer that their relationship was at times “abusive”. Even by the low standards of the Australian parliament, it was a week of horror in Canberra. The final sitting week of parliament for the year began with a long-awaited report on sexual harassment and cultural issues within the parliament, which found one in three parliamentary staffers “have experienced some form of sexual harassment while working there”. The report itself had been ordered after a former staffer alleged she had been raped by a colleague inside a minister’s office – now the subject of a criminal trial. It included anonymous testimony from staffers, mostly women, about the abuse they had been subjected to while doing their jobs. “The MP sitting beside me leaned over. Also thinking he wanted to tell me something, I leaned in. He grabbed me and stuck his tongue down my throat. The others all laughed. It was revolting and humiliating,” one staffer reported. “I have female colleagues who take fake binders … to committee meetings so a male MP won’t try to kiss them.” The prime minister, Scott Morrison, in accepting the report, said he wasn’t overly surprised by the findings. “Like anyone who works in this building, I find the statistics that are presented, they’re of course, appalling and disturbing,” he said. “I wish I found them more surprising. But I find them just as appalling.” The review put together by the sex discrimination commissioner, Kate Jenkins, painted the parliament as a boys’ club with no consequences. But just hours after the prime minister pledged to make the parliament a more respectful and safe working environment, politicians were caught making sexualised and gendered slurs. A male government senator was accused of making dog noises while a female senator spoke in the chamber. He apologised for the interjections, but denied he had made animal sounds, claiming his face mask may have muffled his words. The tone did not improve. The following day, senator Lidia Thorpe apologised for yelling “at least I keep my legs shut” at another senator in the chamber. Over in the lower house, opposition MPs heckled government MPs to “get a room” in response to a friendly question between a female backbencher and male minister. While parliamentarians slugged it out over who was worse on issues of respect, Rachelle Miller, a former press secretary to cabinet minister Alan Tudge, came forward on Thursday with allegations of emotional, and in one case physical, abuse she said she experienced while in a 2017 relationship with the then-married minister. Tudge categorically rejected the allegations in a statement later that day. Miller had gone public with the relationship in late 2020, as she called for cultural change, alleging her career ended when the relationship soured, while she watched Tudge be promoted. It was the release of the review into parliamentary culture, along with the public activism of former and current staffers and female MPs, that prompted her to talk, saying her previous attempts at “reaching out” to the prime minister and others had been ignored. “I’m fully aware that a year ago I said that my relationship with minister Alan Tudge was a consensual relationship but it’s much more complicated than that,” she said. “I was so ashamed, so humiliated, so scared. I was exhausted. I told a small part of the story I was able to manage. It took a long time to face the truth about what happened but the memories are clearly etched in my brain. This relationship was defined by significant power imbalance. It was emotionally, and on one occasion, physically abusive relationship.” Miller accused the minister of physically kicking her after her phone woke him early one morning. “He continued to kick me until I fell off the side of the bed and ended up on the floor. I searched around in the dark for my clothes,” she said. “He was yelling at me that my phone had woken him up. He needed to get some more sleep. He told me to get the fuck out of his room and make sure that no one saw me.” Tudge has “completely and utterly” rejected Miller’s claims. He had previously admitted to the relationship but this week strongly refuted any allegation of abuse, or that Miller’s career suffered as a result. “I have accepted responsibility for a consensual affair that should not have happened many years ago. But Ms Miller’s allegations are wrong, did not happen and are contradicted by her own written words to me,” he said in a statement, referring to text messages Miller had pre-emptively suggested in her own statement may be used against her. “I regret having to say these things. I do not wish Ms Miller ill but I have to defend myself in light of these allegations, which I reject.” After almost a year of criticism over his lacklustre response to the allegations rocking the parliament, an under-siege prime minister announced Tudge would stand aside from his ministerial duties while an independent investigation into Miller’s claims was carried out. The happenings in federal parliament were almost seen as depressingly normal, in a year when women marching for justice were told by the prime minister it was a “triumph of democracy” they weren’t greeted with bullets. Morrison is still to announce his government’s response to the review of parliamentary culture, which recommended more focus on gender parity, independent complaints processes and entire systemic change from the top down, ensuring the issue will follow him into what is shaping up as a difficult election year. Greens senator Larissa Waters said there needed to be clarity the sex discrimination’s recommendations would be fully implemented “and the culture of our toxic parliament will change”. “This has been the year that the veil was drawn back on the extent of predatory sexism and abuse of power in our nation’s parliament,” she said. “Because of the bravery of survivors, there is now no hiding from it.” For those fleeing the nation’s capital on Friday after parliament rose, the only concern was putting as much space as they could between themselves and the scenes inside Parliament House. “It was a fucked week to be a woman in that building,” one MP said. “And given this year, that’s saying something.”Tropical cyclones and flooding are set to pummel Australia over summer, national cabinet documents reveal. The Bureau of Meteorology briefed the meeting of premiers, chief ministers and the prime minister on 5 November about the high-risk weather facing the nation until April. National cabinet documents are usually kept secret, but South Australian senator Rex Patrick obtained these under freedom-of-information laws. Last week Patrick, the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, and One Nation’s Malcolm Roberts all launched attacks on the prime minister’s department for its secrecy. There is a broader legal question about whether national cabinet is entitled to the cabinet-in-confidence protection, with critics saying that merely calling it a cabinet does not actually make it one. Emergency Management Australia’s director general, Joe Buffone, presented the 2021-22 High Risk Weather Season briefing. The PowerPoint presentation shows there are increased chances of widespread flooding, coastal flooding and erosion, tropical cyclones and marine heatwaves, compared with average summers and early autumns. There is a lower chance of drought and dust. The overall risk of severe storms is on par with other years, while parts of Queensland and NSW have an increased risk of bushfire, and there is a higher chance of heatwaves than usual. Warm waters mean slightly above average tropical cyclone numbers – the average is 11 per season. La Niña means the weather is likely to be cooler, wetter and stormier. Areas that had above-average rainfall during spring, and therefore more grass, could lead to a heightened grassfire risk, while parts of the east coast will have a lower risk – because the 2019-20 fires reduced fuel loads. Te bureau’s presentation was prepared with publicly available information. Patrick said the prime minister, Scott Morrison, should have released the documents when he released a media statement about the national cabinet meeting. That statement focused almost entirely on Covid, with a single line about the briefing. That line prompted Patrick to make the FOI request to the Department of Home Affairs. “These documents foreshadow risks to the Australian public over the coming months,” he said. “They were before national cabinet. Scott Morrison therefore has tried to keep them secret when the Australian public were entitled to know.” In his FOI request, Patrick pointed to an August ruling in the administrative appeals tribunal that found cabinet confidentiality did not extend to national cabinet. Justice Richard White said national cabinet was not a subcommittee of the federal cabinet, as Morrison has claimed. That decision could have paved the way for more documents to be released, but the government has rejected that finding as having no force. “I specifically pointed them to Justice White’s ruling,” Patrick said. He wrote that because of that ruling: “There is no requirement for the decision maker to consult with the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet (PM&amp;C) about the release of the requested documents.” Home Affairs released the documents. Patrick accused Morrison of being “addicted to secrecy”. “The analysis is derived from publicly funded organisations,” he said. “It is about risks to the Australian public.” Guardian Australia has contacted the prime minister’s office for a response.Gambians are heading to the polls on Saturday for the first time since the former president Yahya Jammeh was forced into exile after 22 years in power. Jammeh, whose rule was marred by allegations of torture, extrajudicial killings and rape, fled to Equatorial Guinea in 2017 when United Nations-backed regional coalition forces staged a military intervention after his refusal to concede electoral defeat. Now some fear the man who beat him in the 2016 election, Adama Barrow, a former property developer, is tightening his own grip on power. The 56-year-old one-time security guard promised sweeping democratic reforms and launched a truth, reconciliation and reparations commission to investigate human rights violations under Jammeh’s rule. But he has since broken a key election promise to serve only three years as a transitional leader, opting instead to serve out a full five-year term and run for re-election. That led to widespread protests in late 2019 and early 2020, which security forces dispersed with teargas and rubber bullets. Police closed down two radio stations that reported on the demonstrations. “Yes, human rights have improved since Jammeh left, but there has been a slip,” said Pa Louis Sambou, a lawyer and founding fellow at the rule-of-law advocacy group Democracy Watch Gambia. In September Barrow struck a deal with Jammeh’s former Alliance for Patriotic Reorientation and Construction (APRC) party, to the horror of those who suffered under that party’s brutal regime. “He put politics, and his interest in winning this election, ahead of the nation’s interests,” said Fatou Baldeh, a grassroots organiser who works with survivors of sexual violence under Jammeh’s regime. “He is so desperate to maintain power that he doesn’t care how that impacts his citizens.” After repeated delays, the truth commission’s final report was tabled late last week, but it has not yet been made public. Seedy Njie, a deputy spokesperson for Barrow’s party, could not be reached for comment. At a rally for Barrow’s National People’s party on Tuesday night, supporters of the president said they were not bothered by his new alliance or his refusal to step down early. “He did break his promise, but there’s a reason – he wants to continue the work that he is doing,” said Fanta Sisay, an 18-year-old recent graduate. “Three years is not enough for the work … Five years is also not enough.” Supporters pointed to tangible actions they believe Barrow has taken, such as building roads and improving sewage infrastructure. Jammeh has rejected his former party’s alliance with Barrow. Instead he has thrown his support behind an anti-Barrow coalition led by the opposition candidate Mama Kandeh. Jammeh has been dialling in from exile to speak at Kandeh’s rallies. Kandeh, however, is not expected to have a real shot at winning. Instead, the president’s main opponent is a man who was once his mentor. Ousainou Darboe, of the United Democratic party (UDP), was Jammeh’s chief rival in the 1996, 2001 and 2006 elections, but was imprisoned in 2016 and prevented from running that year. Barrow, who had never before held office, stood for the UDP in his place. After winning, he appointed Darboe to his cabinet and they worked together until 2019, when the president formed his own breakaway party. “[Darboe] empowers youth like me,” said Fatima Jammeh, a 25-year-old UDP volunteer. “I believe that when the party wins, we the youth are going to get what we deserve.” Others say Darboe, at 73, is too old to lead. He was absent from some rallies during the final days of campaigning and mostly spoke via video link. “If he was a younger man I would vote for Darboe,” said Abdoulaye Habib, a 29-year-old hotel supervisor, who said he was leaning towards Barrow despite not particularly liking the president. Sambou, from Democracy Watch Gambia, said Saturday’s election would be a “very important moment”, not because of who wins but because of its significance for the country’s democratic transition. “It is the first presidential election post-Jammeh, so obviously it is important that people have confidence in the process,” he said. “During the Jammeh era, that confidence was not there.” Additional reporting by Pa Modou Cham • This article was amended on 4 December 2021 to clarify details about Darboe’s appearances during the final days of campaigning.Until a few weeks ago, no one had given much thought to the car park outside sector 37 police station in Gurgaon, a satellite city to India’s capital, Delhi. But for the last few Fridays the dusty, litter-strewn patch of concrete has become a religious battlefield. This week as a Hindu nationalist mob assembled in their usual saffron, roars of their signature slogans “Jai Shri Ram” (Hail Lord Ram) and “hail the motherland” filled the air. Then a cry rang out: “The Muslims are here.” And the mob began to charge. For more than a decade, this car park has been one of hundreds of sites that the Muslims of Gurgaon have been using as a makeshift prayer ground on Fridays, their designated day of congregational prayer, for jumma namaz. Usually such prayers are held in mosques but Gurgaon, a city that rose in the 1990s from the brushland on the outskirts of Delhi to serve India’s new middle class, has a severe shortage, with around 13 to cater for a city of more than 1.5 million people. Attempts to build more mosques in the area, even on Muslim-owned land, have been met with resistance and hostility. Instead, the thousands of Muslim labourers who have flocked to this expanding metropolis for construction work on Gurgaon’s corporate skyscrapers and luxury high-rise apartments found another option. Unable to travel for miles to a mosque to offer namaz, they began praying on empty patches of land. They even sought permission from the administration and by 2018 the Muslim community had been granted permission for outdoor prayers in 108 places across the district. “People are forced to pray out in the open because we have no other choice,” said Altaf Ahmad, a co-founder of the Gurgaon Muslim council. But in 2018, rumblings of discontent began, as Hindu vigilante groups realised that Muslims were praying on public land. They began to hold protests, sometimes with more than 100 people, disrupting dozens of Friday prayers and fracturing the modern metropolis along an age-old schism. In response, the Gurgaon administration reduced the number of namaz sites from 108 to 37, to the dismay of the Muslim leaders who felt the administration was bowing to the demands of fanatics. “They told us it was temporary and just to cool the situation down,” said Ahmad. But this year, after a lull due to Covid, the objections came back with a vengeance. Every Friday for months, members of Hindu vigilante groups alongside local residents have been gathering, occasionally armed with axes and wooden rods, at the sites of namaz to try to stop them happening. Slogans including “shoot the traitors” have been shouted and Hindu prayers and songs read out to try to drown out Qur’an readings. Cow dung has been placed at the sites and police have regularly had to hold back the mob so namaz could continue. Last month an umbrella organistion of Hindu groups called the Sanyukt Hindu Sangharsh Samiti told police that they were ready to use weapons and go to jail if the namaz was not stopped. At the forefront of the fight is Dinesh Thakur, who goes by the name Dinesh Bharti, a nod to his devotion to Bharat, meaning mother India. Thakur, who has set up his own one-man Hindu nationalist army called Bharat Mata Vahini, has been detained more than 10 times and arrested and charged three times for his communal actions. On Friday Thakur sprinted towards Shehzad Khan, the Muslim leader who was there to lead the prayer, and began confronting him, getting within inches of his face shouting “no namaz here”, until he was dragged away by five police officers. As the Muslims filed silently into the area for namaz, heads down and clutching their prayer mats, a line of armed police held back the Hindu nationalist mob. Seven were detained by police. “Conducting namaz in the open is land jihad,” Thakur said before being arrested. “It’s an international conspiracy. They do namaz outside, then they build a shrine, then they build a mosque and then inside the mosque they are harbouring terrorists and weapons and they are a threat to the nation. I will not stop my fight until this becomes illegal.” Residents have joined the protests, including Ravinder Kumar, 45, a software engineer and joint secretary of Gurgaon’s sector 47 residents’ welfare association. “So many unknown people were coming here for namaz, and it created an environment of fear,” said Kumar. “Afterwards they wander into our park, and we are worried they could be here for theft. A few days ago an AK47 rifle was seized from a Muslim in Gurgaon by police. We don’t want such things in our area.” Kumar conceded that so far no incidents of crime had been committed by anyone coming for Friday prayer. For the Muslim community, praying in the few public sites they have left has become a statement about their rights in society. The number of public places where Muslims are allowed to pray in Gurgaon has recently been reduced again, to 20, and owing to the continuing protests it is likely to shrink further. Mufti Mohammad Saleem Qasmi, the president of the Muslim organisation Jamiat Ulama-i-Hind, said they would continue to hold Friday prayer in these spaces as it was a matter of justice. On Friday as the cries of “Jai Shri Ram” rang out and the police held back the protesters with batons, about 50 Muslims sat side by side in the direction of Mecca and bowed their heads to the ground. Khan then led a prayer for Hindu-Muslim harmony. “Muslims are as much citizens of India as Hindus. Our forefathers have also sacrificed for this country,” he said. “Guide us, Hindu and Muslim brothers, to remain united in a bond of brotherhood.” Washi Ahmer, 25, was among those who came to pray. “We are not scared but it’s not right what is happening,” he said. “We have been praying here for 10 to 12 years but all this protest is new. They want to divide the nation. They have a problem with our existence.” The developments in Gurgaon reflect divisions between Hindus and Muslims that have opened up across India since the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata party won power in 2014. The BJP has been accused of fanning the flames of communal tensions and enabling a persecution of Muslims – a charge it denies. “When this first happened in 2018, it hurt me very badly,” said Ahmad. “But there’s been so much pressure on Muslims since then that now I have become numb. I don’t feel that pain any more.” To improve communal harmony, last Friday the Sikh community stepped in and offered its five gurdwaras in Gurgaon as spaces for namaz. But this inflamed the problem even more. Several people picketed a gurdwara with placards and handed out booklets questioning how Sikhs could let Muslims inside their place of worship when their ninth Sikh guru was killed by the Mughals. In the end, in the name of safety, no Muslims prayed in the gurdwara. Daya Singh, 72, a member of the Gurudwara Shri Guru Singh Sabha committee, said: “We know this is not really about namaz, it’s all part of the plan to alienate Muslims.” The Gurgaon administration says it has resolved the issue. “We are committed to preserving communal harmony and law and order in the area,” said Gurgaon’s deputy commissioner Dr Yash Garg. “Namaz is now being offered peacefully. This issue is caused only by the fringe elements from both sides. This is a free country for all religions, the Muslim community can build another mosque if they want.” Additional reporting by Vandana KThe Omicron variant has been detected in at least 38 countries but no deaths have yet been reported, the World Health Organization has said, amid warnings that it could damage the global economic recovery. The United States and Australia became the latest countries to confirm locally transmitted cases of the variant, as Omicron infections pushed South Africa’s total cases past 3 million. The WHO has warned it could take weeks to determine how infectious the variant is, whether it causes more severe illness and how effective treatments and vaccines are against it. “We’re going to get the answers that everybody out there needs,” the WHO emergencies director, Michael Ryan, said. The WHO said on Friday it had still not seen any reports of deaths related to Omicron, but the new variant’s spread has led to warnings that it could cause more than half of Europe’s Covid cases in the next few months. The new variant could also slow global economic recovery, just as the Delta strain did, the International Monetary Fund chief, Kristalina Georgieva, said on Friday. “Even before the arrival of this new variant, we were concerned that the recovery, while it continues, is losing somewhat momentum,” she said. “A new variant that may spread very rapidly can dent confidence.” A preliminary study by researchers in South Africa, where the variant was first reported on 24 November, suggests it is three times more likely to cause reinfections compared with the Delta or Beta strains. The emergence of Omicron was the “ultimate evidence” of the danger of unequal global vaccination rates, the Red Cross head, Francesco Rocca, said. “The scientific community has warned … on several occasions about the risks of very new variants in places where there is a very low rate of vaccinations,” he said. “It’s unbelievable that we are still not realising how much we are interconnected. This is why I call the Omicron variant the ultimate evidence.” Uğur Şahin, the CEO of BioNTech, which makes the Covid vaccine with Pfizer, said the company should be able to adapt the shots relatively quickly. He said current vaccines should continue to provide protection against severe disease, despite mutations. “I believe in principle at a certain timepoint we will need a new vaccine against this new variant. The question is how urgent it needs to be available,” Şahin said. In the US, six more states confirmed infections of the Omicron variant on Friday. New Jersey, Maryland, Missouri, Nebraska, Pennsylvania and Utah each reported their first cases of Omicron. It has also been found in California, Colorado, Hawaii, Minnesota, and New York. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said it was investigating possible cases of the Omicron variant in other states. Two cases involved residents with no recent international travel history – showing Omicron is already circulating inside the country. Australia on Friday reported three students in Sydney had tested positive for the variant, despite a ban on non-citizens entering the country and restrictions on flights from southern Africa. Canada has discovered a total of 15 cases of the new Omicron variant. On Friday the chief public health officer, Theresa Tam, announced 11 Omicron cases, all involving people who had recently travelled abroad. Hours after she spoke, the city of York said a child under 12 had been diagnosed with Omicron. The child had recently traveled to southern Africa. Toronto then reported its first three cases of Omicron late on Friday, with two of those individuals having recently returned from Nigeria, while another individual had returned from Switzerland. In Norway, officials said at least 13 people who contracted Covid-19 after an office Christmas party in Oslo last week had the Omicron variant – though so far they have only had mild symptoms. But the government ushered in restrictions in greater Oslo after fears of the cluster surfaced. South Korea again broke its daily records for coronavirus infections and deaths and confirmed three more cases of the new Omicron variant. The 5,352 new cases marked the third time this week the daily tally exceeded 5,000. The country’s death toll was at 3,809 after a record 70 virus patients died in the past 24 hours, while the 752 patients in serious or critical conditions were also an all-time high. The country’s Omicron caseload is now at nine after three more cases were confirmed, connected to a couple who had arrived from Nigeria on 24 November. Officials say the number of Omicron cases could rise as some of the patients had attended a church gathering involving hundreds of people on 28 November. On Friday, Malaysia also reported a first Omicron infection in a foreign student arriving from South Africa on 19 November. Sri Lanka also announced its first case, a citizen returning from South Africa. Rising Delta cases had already forced European governments to reintroduce mandatory mask-wearing, social distancing, curfews or lockdowns, leaving businesses fearing another grim Christmas. Belgian authorities said on Friday that primary schools would close a week early for the Christmas holidays. Germany’s regional leaders agreed new measures including a ban on fireworks at new year parties to discourage large gatherings. Ireland said it will close nightclubs and reintroduce social distancing in some settings over Christmas and the New Year. Meanwhile in Brazil, a supreme court justice has ordered that the president, Jair Bolsonaro, be investigated for comments linking Covid-19 vaccines to Aids – an assertion rejected by doctors and scientists. Alexandre de Moraes instructed the country’s top prosecutor, Augusto Aras, to look into the accusation raised by a pandemic inquiry conducted by Brazil’s Senate. Bolsonaro said in a video in October that “official reports from the UK government suggest that fully vaccinated people … are developing acquired immunodeficiency syndrome much faster than anticipated”. Facebook and Instagram took down that video days later. The Brazilian president, who remains unvaccinated and has frequently pushed against vaccine mandates, argued he was merely quoting an article in the magazine Exame and not making assertions. Moraes said in his ruling that Bolsonaro “used the modus operandi of mass dissemination schemes in social networks”, which requires further investigation. Aras, however, rarely goes against the president and has not opened an investigation into Bolsonaro’s handling of the pandemic despite calls to do so by the Senate committee. With Agence France-Presse, Reuters and Associated PressLockdown should not be used as a reason for Solihull council and other child safeguarding agencies to be “let off the hook” over the murder of Arthur Labinjo-Hughes, according to one influential Conservative MP, as Boris Johnson said ministers will leave “absolutely no stone unturned” to establish what went wrong in the case. Robert Halfon, the MP for Harlow and chair of the education select committee, said that while the pandemic lockdowns and school closures had led to an increase in safeguarding concerns and domestic abuse, the abuse of the six-year-old at the hands of his stepmother and father required a forensic investigation into the council’s responsibilities. “You can’t just blame this on lockdown because it seems to me there has been a dramatic failure by children’s services and the relevant authorities. That is the elephant in the room, and they have to be held to account, and there will be an inquiry into what on earth has gone on,” Halfon said. “While I absolutely believe that lockdowns destroyed people’s mental health and wellbeing, and that children have been affected by safeguarding hazards and domestic abuse, as well as joining county lines gangs, that shouldn’t let social services off the hook.” Arthur’s stepmother, Emma Tustin, was sentenced on Friday to 29 years in prison for his murder, while his father, Thomas Hughes, was given 21 years in prison for manslaughter. Speaking during a byelection campaign visit in north Shropshire, Johnson said it was essential that lessons were learned from what happened. “I just want to say, on the tragic and appalling case of Arthur Labinjo-Hughes, like many people I find it hard to read it, let alone to understand how people could behave like that to a defenceless little child,” the prime minister said. “It is early days, but I can tell you this, we will leave absolutely no stone unturned to find out exactly what went wrong in that appalling case.” The Conservative former children’s minister Tim Loughton told the Sun: “We all have a duty to make sure other vulnerable children are not let down by social care in the same way as Arthur … Funding for children’s social care has lagged behind and social workers are overstretched and undervalued, when in truth they should be revered as our fourth emergency service. “Early interventions to stop the causes of safeguarding problems have been diluted to late interventions to firefight symptoms. This is a false economy where in this case a child paid with his life. We all have an interest in putting this right urgently and a duty to make sure it is.” A serious case review is under way into the circumstances around Arthur’s death after it emerged that social workers had visited the house two months before he died and concluded there were “no safeguarding concerns”. West Midlands police are also being investigated for their actions after being forwarded photographs showing Arthur’s bruises. Halfon said: “Every single one of them has to be held accountable, from the local council chief executive to the director of children’s services, to the people who came around to the house – every single person should answer for what decisions were made.” Asked if the Solihull case was the tip of an iceberg of post-lockdown abuse, Halfon said: “God forbid that there are other cases as bad as this one, but there has definitely been a massive impact on safeguarding, of children at home vulnerable to domestic abuse, children facing pressure where parents have lost jobs, joining county lines gangs, and virtually vanishing from school rolls. This is a wider issue.” Sir Alan Wood, the former head of children’s services for the London borough of Hackney, told the BBC that the tragedy could lead to the consideration of dedicated children’s protection officers taking over some local authority responsibilities in an independent review of children’s social care being conducted by Josh MacAlister. “I think there’s no doubt that there is a need for significant additional investment into [children’s] services. But I don’t think one can simply say that the cause of the event is down to the lack of resources,” Wood said, citing difficulties in attracting staff and barriers between different agencies involved. A Solihull council spokesperson said: “This terrible tragedy has had a shocking impact on Arthur’s family and across the whole community. We send our heartfelt condolences to everyone affected. The circumstances around his death will now be subject to an independent review – the local child safeguarding practice review – and clearly it would be inappropriate for the council to comment ahead of the findings of that review.” Dame Rachel de Souza, the children’s commissioner for England, said she felt “shock and revulsion” at the sustained abuse inflicted on Arthur. “However, we can’t just ask ourselves ‘why did they do it?’ but ‘how were they able to?’,” she said. “We need systems that hear the voice of a child, a child clearly able to articulate the abuse they were suffering, and to be actually heard. We need repeated concerns raised by families to be taken seriously. “The hard truth is there are no simple solutions to prevention, but Arthur deserves me as children’s commissioner and the rest of the system to be asking the difficult questions and confronting the hard changes that may need to be made to protect any child that might be at risk of such malevolent adults, adults he had every right to expect to love and care for him.” Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary, said he would address parliament on Monday on further measures. “We are determined to protect children from harm and where concerns are raised we will not hesitate to take urgent and robust action. We will not rest until we have the answers we need.” Charlotte Ramsden, the Association of Children’s Services president, said: “Over the course of the pandemic, local authorities and partners have continued to support all children and families, especially those with the most acute needs. The social restrictions introduced to protect wider public health unfortunately added a layer of extra complexity to what is already an incredibly complex and challenging area of work. Sadly, it is not possible to eliminate all risk. Amanda Spielman, the head of Ofsted, is expected to address the case early next week when the inspectorate publishes its latest annual report. Last December Spielman said: “Teachers are often the eyes that spot signs of abuse and the ears that hear stories of neglect. Closing schools didn’t just leave the children who – unbeknown to others – suffer at home without respite, it also took them out of sight of those who could help.” Ofsted rated Solihull’s children’s services as requiring improvement in its last full inspection report, published in January 2020, with inspectors noting: “For some children, plans are not progressed quickly enough, and in a few cases there is drift and delay.” But Ofsted also praised Solihull for strengthening its children’s services workforce and reducing its use of agency staff, suggesting that resources were less of an issue than in some regions. “There is an appropriate level of support for newly qualified staff. The local authority has ensured that staff overall have manageable caseloads. Staff are happy to work in Solihull, feel well supported and valued,” Ofsted’s inspectors said.Going Out: Cinema Encounter Out now Well-regarded British director Michael Pearce (Beast) directs the always likable Riz Ahmed in a close encounter of the traumatic kind, as a military veteran with issues attempts to save his kids from a big ol’ bug invasion, in a drama harking back to cold war paranoia era of 1950s sci-fi. C’mon C’mon Out now There are plenty of films about the father-son relationships, but here’s one about the less-explored dynamic of nephew-uncle bonding. Starring Joaquin Phoenix and shot in black and white by celebrated cinematographer Robbie Ryan, C’mon C’mon is the latest from talented indie darling Mike Mills. Blue Bayou Out now The latest chapter in the fascinating and varied career of actor-director Justin Chon, who played high-school sidekick Eric in the Twilight franchise and is in a K-pop parody band called Boys Generally Asian. Here he stars in and directs a drama about the invidious practice of deporting of immigrant adoptees in the US. Resident Evil: Welcome to Raccoon City Out now It’s 25 years since Capcom debuted the first Resident Evil game on consoles around the world, and the mutated game/film horror franchise has since proven as indestructible as any of the misbegotten creatures conceived in the Umbrella Corporation labs. Here comes another slice – this time, a reboot starring Kaya Scodelario. Catherine Bray * * * Going Out: Gigs Tkay Maidza Electrowerkz, London, 9 December DayGlo Australian rapper Madiza has been busy reintroducing herself after a dalliance with a major label went awry. Expect this brief UK jaunt, including shows supporting fellow agit-pop practitioner Ashnikko (7 &amp; 8 Dec), to showcase her career-stabilising Last Year Was Weird EP series. Michael Cragg Unknown T 6 to 9 December; tour starts London Having broken through in 2018 with UK drill anthem Homerton B, east London rapper Unknown T has spent the last three years building on that success. Earlier this year, his second mixtape, Adolescence, reached the UK Top 10, boosted by collaborations with the likes of AJ Tracey and M Huncho. MC Ian Shaw Colchester Arts Centre, Sun 5 December; Cambridge Modern Jazz, Fri 10 December Like such jazz vocal legends as the late Mark Murphy and Betty Carter, and the very active Kurt Elling, Welsh singer/pianist Ian Shaw brings the quirks and character tics of everyday living into poignant, ironic, and often euphoric focus. Shaw tours his smart and soulful one-man show during December. John Fordham Christmas Oratorio Royal Festival Hall, London, 4 December Not Bach’s seasonal favourite, but James MacMillan’s Christmas Oratorio, receiving its UK premiere courtesy of the London PO and its Choir, conducted by Mark Elder. The texts for the 100-minute work come from the Christian liturgy for the choruses, and poems by Southwell, Donne and Milton for the arias. Andrew Clements * * * Going Out: Art Kehinde Wiley National Gallery, London, 10 December to 18 April The painter and conceptual artist who created Barack Obama’s official portrait turns his eyes on the National Gallery collection. In particular he has been contemplating its grand European landscapes, from Claude’s sunny Med to the stormier worlds of JMW Turner, offering his own pointed remakes in this eagerly awaited exhibition. Louis Wain Bethlem Museum of the Mind, Beckenham, 4 December to 14 April The cat cartoons of Louis Wain were popular in his lifetime and still are – but in later life he became ill. As a resident of “Bedlam” he went on painting cats. This show at Bethlem Royal Hospital’s excellent museum shows how his animal art may have helped him and other patients. Salvador Dalí to Jenny Saville Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art (Modern One), Edinburgh This showcase of recent aquisitions by the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art is a Greatest Hits of the 20th and 21st centuries. Among the delights are an armchair with a tail by the surrealist Dorothea Tanning, a ghostly all-white version of Dalís Lobster Telephone, and an exquisite Bridget Riley. Journeys Saatchi Gallery, London, to 13 January Brian Eno is among the artists exploring the healing power of beauty. Art has been used in hospitals since the middle ages when Rogier van der Weyden and Matthias Grünewald helped heal and console the sick. See how Eno and friends continue their work at Chelsea and Westminster Hospital. Jonathan Jones * * * Going Out: Stage Ania Magliano 2Northdown, London, 8 December She’s only 23, but Ania Magliano already has the cool, calm and collected stage presence of a standup veteran; her permanently amused style, however, has Gen Z written all over it. Catch the Footlights alum at her wryly titled evening of new material, Absolutely No Worries If Not. Rachel Aroesti Hex National theatre: Olivier, London, 4 December to 22 January Husband-and-wife team Rufus Norris and Tanya Ronder have created a new musical based on Sleeping Beauty that focuses on the fairy tasked with putting the princess to sleep. Starring Rosalie Craig, whose voice could fill the Olivier theatre 10 times over. A Chorus Line Curve, Leicester, to 31 December Michael Bennett’s musical sees 18 actors put through their paces during auditions for a Broadway musical – and is worth it just to hear What I Did for Love one more time. It is directed by Nikolai Foster and stars Adam Cooper and Carly Mercedes Dyer. Miriam Gillinson Curious Vogue Ball Dance City, Newcastle upon Tyne, 4 &amp; 5 December A celebration of north-east LGBTQ+ culture and voguing. Expect fierce and fabulous fashions and a party atmosphere. Everyone’s welcome and on Sunday there’s even a family ball for all ages. Lyndsey Winship * * * Staying In: Streaming And Just Like That … 9 December, 9pm, Sky Comedy Prepare for 00s nostalgia overload: 17 years after Sex and the City’s TV incarnation hung up its Manolos, Carrie and co are back and brunching again. They may now be in their 50s – and a trio (no Samantha) – but they’re still navigating complicated New York lives, often in complicated clothes. You Don’t Know Me 5 December, 9pm, BBC One An apparently cut-and-dried murder trial is almost over – until Hero, the accused, decides to make a closing speech. This compulsive four-parter, adapted from criminal defence barrister Imran Mahmood’s 2017 novel, combines courtroom mechanics with a twisty love story. Superman &amp; Lois 4 December, 5.40pm, BBC One; full series on iPlayer Considering the comic book’s unearthly grip on pop culture shows no sign of abating, it was only a matter of time before we got a domestic drama about the tribulations of bringing up children in the DC Universe: this one amusingly juxtaposes superhero duties with run-of-the-mill family minutiae. Voir 6 Dec, Netflix When it comes to the screen-based arts, cinema is no longer automatically top of the tree. Director David Fincher’s new series aims to rectify the slight dip in movie-going’s magic with a series of video essays, in which critics and writers explain how specific films changed their lives. RA * * * Staying In: Games Halo Infinite Out 8 December This series of science-fiction shooters has been a reliable source of alien-destroying fun since 2001, even if it does take itself a bit seriously from time to time. White Shadows Out 7 December A black-and-white platform game that takes aesthetic cues from silent cinema and cyberpunk, in which you must escape the towering machinery of an oppressive, dystopian city. Keza MacDonald * * * Staying In: Albums Polo G – Hall of Fame 2.0 Out now Released in June, rapper Polo G’s third album, Hall of Fame, followed single Rapstar to the top of the US charts. To help cement the 22-year-old’s stellar 2021 he’s released a victory lap in the shape of this deluxe edition, which adds 14 new songs to the original’s 20 tracks. Arca – Kick series Out now Last year’s Kick i, the fourth album from Venezuela’s avant-pop experimentalist, is joined this week by a flurry of followups. Kick ii features the hollowed out, Sia-assisted ballad Born Yesterday, while in Kick iiii Shirley Manson and Planningtorock are drawn into Arca’s unique musical world. Khalid – Scenic Drive Out now Designed as a stopgap ahead of next year’s third album proper, the Scenic Drive mixtape shows the 23-year-old, six-time Grammy-nominated Texan returning to his roots. Billed as a companion piece to 2018’s Suncity, lead single Present channels that EP’s laid-back, old school R&amp;B feel. LP – Churches Out now New York’s Laura Pergolizzi, AKA LP, returns with her sixth album of emotive pop. A songwriter for hire for the likes of Rihanna, Cher and Céline Dion, Pergolizzi saves her biggest, most heartfelt moments for herself, as showcased by Churches’ pulsating early single The One That You Love. MC * * * Staying In: Brain food The Rescue Out now, Disney+ The 2018 rescue of a Thai football team from a flooded cave is soon to be given the Hollywood treatment from director Ron Howard – until then, this documentary chronicles the high-stakes mission, with testimony from the rescuers. Music on a Clear Möbius Strip YouTube Maths YouTube channel Numberphile recruits Oxford professor Marcus Du Sautoy for this head-spinning lecture on the intrinsic mathematics of music – as illustrated by works of Bach that can be played both forwards and backwards. Eye of the Duck Podcast Taking its title from David Lynch’s theory that each film has a scene that encapsulates the mood of its whole, hosts Dom Nero and Adam Volerich present this fascinating podcast, analysing everything from Goodfellas to School of Rock. Ammar KaliaAdriana on Streisand What were you hoping for? A good night, some delish food and to meet someone fun and exciting. First impressions? Polite, smart and good-looking, if a little flustered. What did you talk about? Work, family, life ambitions, French music and his food preferences. Any awkward moments? He didn’t like the tasting menu, so that was kind of awkward. The waiter noticed and apologised and offered him some cauliflower tempura instead. Good table manners? I’m sure they are great but I didn’t really get to see them because he didn’t eat much. He was very polite to the waiter. Best thing about Streisand? His musical tastes: he likes reggaeton. He also seemed very kind, hardworking and family-orientated. Would you introduce him to your friends? I think he might find us all a bit much. Describe Streisand in three words? Opinionated, driven, serious. What do you think he made of you? I have no idea, he was hard to read. Did you go on somewhere? We walked to the tube. If it weren’t for physical distancing, would you have kissed? It wasn’t the vibe. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be? It might have been a more enjoyable night for him if he could have left without needing to stop for a takeaway on the way home! Marks out of 10? 7 Would you meet again? Maybe as friends. Streisand on Adriana What were you hoping for? To meet a new friend, and that it might lead to romance further down the line. First impressions? Nice eyes, easy going, good energy. What did you talk about? Politics, family, our upbringings, work, how intense bachata dancing is. Any awkward moments? She is a reporter for a red-top … Good table manners? Very good. Best thing about Adriana? Her keenness to listen and debate with people who have different opinions. Would you introduce her to your friends? My friends would embrace her with open arms. Describe Adriana in three words? Thoughtful, adventurous, and a good listener. What do you think she made of you? Someone who struggles to eat food that he has never tried before. Did you go on somewhere? Nah. It was getting late and we both had to get up early in the morning. If it weren’t for physical distancing, would you have kissed? Well, I did give her two kisses on the cheek as we said goodbye. If you could change one thing about the evening what would it be? The food. I’d have liked to feel fuller. Marks out of 10? 7 Would you meet again? I gave her my number but haven’t heard back. Adriana and Streisand ate at Turnips Borough Market, London SE1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.comOn 14 March 2020, I left my home in the Orkney Islands to drive to Edinburgh international airport. I was due to travel to Germany for a research trip. Full of nervous anticipation, and making frantic last-minute preparations, I hadn’t paid as much attention to the coronavirus crisis as I might have, but events were developing so quickly across Europe, it was dawning on me that international travel might not be an option for much longer. By 5am, as I boarded the ferry, the radio bulletins seemed apocalyptic. On board, passengers sat separately, in their own private islands of paranoia. I wore a mask over my nose and mouth, and cleaned my armrests with a baby wipe soaked in Dettol. In the toilets, the ship pitching beneath my feet, I scrubbed my hands for 60 seconds and examined my own reflection. Grey, I thought. Anxious. Four hours later, I stopped in at my parents’ place near Inverness, where I ate some lunch and checked emails on my phone. I had a lot of them. “Don’t come,” one of my German contacts said, simply. Another had cancelled our meeting due to childcare problems; all schools had suddenly closed. A hotel regretfully informed me that it would not be able to honour my booking. My flight, however, was still scheduled to depart on time. Far above, thousands of planes were still pinballing around Europe, Asia, Africa, the Americas. They crowded the airspace over London and Amsterdam and Paris, converging from all directions before spiralling down. They were launching over oceans with a cannonball momentum; weaving cleanly between each other in a mannered, balletic dance. Normally, planes are in constant motion, massing with the daylight but never truly ceasing, moving in predictable patterns like currents over the Earth – the invisible infrastructure of the world. Regular routes – these passageways and corridors and elevated motorways through the sky – have grown more crowded and important as air travel has increased in popularity over recent decades, more tightly stitched into the fabric of our lives and the global economy. Back in 2004, 2 billion passengers boarded flights over the course of a year. By 2019 that figure had more than doubled, to 4.5 billion. On an average day, 100,000 flights or more might take off; on 25 July 2019 – the busiest recorded day in aviation – there were 230,000. In 2020, passenger numbers were expected to rise yet again – until the Covid-19 pandemic brought the aviation industry to its knees. Suddenly, all around the world, people were watching the news, clutching their tickets, checking for updates and wondering what to do. Very soon, flights would be grounded on a scale never before seen. A year without flying – for many of us – forced major changes in the way we ran our business, family life, leisure time, and how we looked at the world. *** As I uncertainly considered my flight to Germany, 9,100 miles away, in Perth, Australia, Daria Kuznetsova and Andrew Rodger were making their own calculations. For an international couple, “home” is a complicated proposition. They’d been in Australia for nearly a month, introducing baby Alexander to Andrew’s family, and they had tickets booked to travel back to the UK, where they had both lived since they were students. Their tickets were valid, but something was holding them back. The Australian prime minister had just called on his countryfolk everywhere to come home. For Andrew, an Australian citizen, it felt difficult to disobey. And wouldn’t they, by returning to Europe, be flying into the eye of the storm? What about Daria’s family – her parents in Washington DC, her sister in Turkey, her brother in Moscow? What would they do? Who did they have? They debated for a few days. In Australia they felt safe. But when they thought about their cosy London flat, the mural on the living room wall, their baby’s cot, their books, they knew that was home. They decided to go. The airport was almost deserted, and felt unnerving. But the plane itself was packed. There wasn’t a spare seat; they had unwittingly booked themselves, months before, on to what would be one of the last flights out of Australia. The atmosphere was strained, Daria remembers. “There was a feeling that we had no idea what we were flying into. And it could be really bad.” It was a long flight: about 17 hours, direct. In the darkened cabin, Daria held Alexander over her shoulder and paced the aisles, jogging him to sleep. As she walked, she moved in and out of earshot of other passengers’ conversations. There were raised voices, determined plan-making, black humour. A few were genuinely panicked. Daria wasn’t frightened, not exactly, but it was certainly unsettling. She didn’t know at the time that it would be the last flight she would take for many months, that she would miss her sister’s wedding, would need to counsel her family through hard times over Zoom. She didn’t think to wonder how long it would be until they saw their families again. *** The final weeks of March 2020 saw a last mad scramble for flights before the departure boards went dark. For those working in the aviation industry, it was all hands on deck, as 1.3 million British nationals returned to the UK via commercial air routes. Those who didn’t, or couldn’t, or hadn’t appreciated the urgency, soon found themselves fighting over the remaining seats. Timetables were torn up as governments chartered planes to repatriate stranded citizens. According to the Foreign Office, 38,000 Britons were flown back on 186 flights, from 57 different countries and territories, a crisis response with “no postwar precedent in terms of scale, complexity and duration”. The Ministry of Defence was drafted in to help hundreds more in particularly far-flung locations, repatriating 90 scientists, support staff and construction workers from the British Antarctic Survey, among others. But after the panic, an eerie silence. Airports were slowing to a near halt. Most airlines cut capacity by 80 or 90%, parking their jets on off-ramps, taxiways, even runways. Satellite images from around the world showed their cruciform shapes bristling from every corner, or arranged in neat, herringbone designs, wingtip to wingtip, nose to tail. Others were offloaded into hibernation in remote desert “boneyards”, their engines filled with a preservative oil and bags of desiccant distributed through the empty cabins to guard against rust and mould. At one point, two-thirds of all the world’s planes were grounded. One British Airways pilot I spoke to – let’s call him John – suddenly found his schedule was bare. “Every month, we would get our roster as normal – all the flights we were expected to do – and steadily, as the month went on, every single one would be cancelled.” From 28 March onwards, he had 100 days without any flights. By the start of May, more than 80 countries had suspended flights in and out. Increasingly, there was nowhere left to fly. Pilots’ pay is tightly coupled to their workload; without payments for flight time and stopovers, John’s income was tumbling. Then he and his colleagues accepted a cut to basic pay, as part of efforts to stem job losses – though he had been at the company long enough to escape the axe himself, under BA’s last-in, first-out policy. Others in the industry were less fortunate. Some airlines, already under financial stress, buckled almost immediately in the chaos. Flybe collapsed overnight in early March after a Covid-related fall in bookings; Italian national airline Alitalia ceased operations in October. Overall, passenger numbers on international flights fell by 75.6% in 2020, compared with the previous 12 months, making it the worst year on record for the aviation industry. Those carriers that did survive had to think outside the box. Some retired older, trouble-ridden aircraft early, rather than fork out for their storage. Some, such as Icelandair, converted passenger jets into cargo planes by stripping out seats; Emirates chief Tim Clark said it had converted into “a mini UPS” to get by. Finnair left business class seats in place, with only a thin curtain separating them from where packages were piled high in place of the economy section. Many airlines slashed staff – across Europe, about 18,000 pilots’ jobs are thought to have been lost or are under threat, along with many tens of thousands of ground staff, cabin crew and airport workers. You can find those pilots online, posting wistful footage from past flights. One former Flybe pilot, posting to Twitter under the handle @pilot_ems, has pinned a video of her final landing as a sort of calling card for future employers (“a manually flown steep approach on a raw data ILS … I’m available immediately”). In the meantime, she sells flight-themed T-shirts and calendars online. It has been a major setback for new pilots, who have racked up tens of thousands of pounds of debt while training. Without regular flight or simulator time, these expensive credentials lapse within months. Regaining a “type rating” – which qualifies you to fly a particular aircraft, a Boeing 737 or an Airbus A320, say – might cost an out-of-work pilot £30,000 or more. Meanwhile, John thanked his lucky stars for being at the right company for the right amount of time, and for flying the right kind of aircraft. He refreshed his roster and waited. Every few weeks he returned to the simulator to fly virtual flights over virtual worlds, as he waited for the real world to change. *** Frankie Ward knows all about virtual worlds. The esports host presents arena events where gaming championships unfold live in front of 10-12,000 fans. She estimates that in 2019 she spent seven cumulative months away from home, “ping-ponging around the world”, never staying anywhere longer than a week. Berlin! Rio! Shanghai! Miami! Sydney! Her career was taking off, and travel was part of the package. Her line of work involves long hours – sometimes 16-hour days, on stage and in front of the camera. It’s a high-adrenaline, emotional experience, she tells me. “At the end of it all, you travel home, and you can’t really talk for a couple of days. It’s like being hit by a truck.” She was hosting the Intel Extreme Masters event in Katowice, Poland, when the bottom fell out – the 2020 final was played on 1 March in an empty 11,500-seat arena, after Polish authorities pulled its mass-event licence. (More than a million tuned in online.) After that, overnight, her work diary went blank. Though the esports industry should have been well placed to adapt to an online world, there were difficulties. Normally, in-person tournaments take place using a single local server. Domestic internet connections aren’t nearly as fast or as stable; at the top levels, a fraction of a second delay might be the deciding factor in the fight for a seven-figure prize pot. It is also, it turns out, much easier to cheat when all the players are working from home. But with tech-friendly organisers and an existing culture of watching gameplay in real time, thanks to the streaming platform Twitch, it took only a few months to get the show back on the road. Soon, international championships had returned, audiences boosted by an influx of traditional sports fans looking for a new fix. Frankie’s work schedule filled up again, but her world closed in around her – she went from travelling to five continents in a month to long days filming alone in a room in her house. She became proficient with green screens – nodding encouragingly into empty space, watching herself superimposed on to faraway rooms, with faraway people. She soon realised that it’s one thing to shrug off jet lag while flooded with adrenaline on a stage, and quite another to be working long days, in other timezones, from your spare room. She stayed awake until 5 or 6am, adapting her body clock to American or Asian schedules. It was hard. She missed sunlight. She missed her partner. “I’d made up a bed in a different room, because I didn’t want to wake him up.” In the end, she gave up the overnight events. On the internet, many things can be truly global. But, in the end, your body – your life – cannot. Finance is another sector that traditionally requires its workers to undertake a lot of international travel. I spoke to one senior executive at an investment company – a Briton, based in New York – who said that in her globetrotting line of work, she would travel long haul a minimum of twice a month, and often twice a week or more. Not long before the global shutdown, she travelled to Mexico City, São Paulo, San Francisco, Toronto and New York in the space of eight days. “One good thing was that I was travelling a lot to Europe, so I could tag on trips home to London,” she says. “I felt like I was having it all: being able to live in a different country but go home frequently, and not at my own expense.” Now, living abroad feels different. She can no longer drop in on her old life. She misses her parents, her sister, her friends. Work, too, is more difficult and less enjoyable. “For the first year of Covid, I was mainly seeing through deals that had started pre-Covid. So I had done a lot of the relationship building, and we could go seamlessly into the virtual version. Where it gets really tough is when you’re starting something new. It’s almost impossible to build a good relationship on a call. And because you don’t have that trust and familiarity, you’re probably more cautious and more indecisive than you would be in person.” Cultural factors play a role here, too: Brazilians, for example, like to do everything face to face. When we speak, she has just come off a four-hour conference call to Rio, for a deal in which the language and cultural barriers were exacerbated by being unable to interact with the other parties in person. Now that the hotel rooms, the starlit nights in São Paulo and the business-class lounge have been replaced by back-to-back video calls from 8am until 8pm, it’s a lot less fun. And it’s harder to find a few undisturbed hours for thinking, reading, strategising. It’s the same job, she says, but it doesn’t feel the same. *** For scientists conducting international research, the grounding of flights caused major problems. Crucial fieldwork in the world’s most remote places had to be indefinitely postponed, including long-running climatological studies that will suffer from an unprecedented year-long gap in the data at a point when the real-time study of changes to permafrost, ice sheets and tropical forests has never been more crucial. On one high-profile polar expedition, the $155m Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the Study of Arctic Climate (Mosaic), about 90 scientists, technicians and crew members were stranded on board an icebreaker in the Arctic Ocean for two months, after Norwegian travel restrictions halted their planned resupply flights. In the end, they had to suspend data gathering for several weeks to sail south to meet ships in ice-free international waters. Restrictions to nonessential air travel also forced a year-long hiatus at the EastGRIP project in Greenland, an international facility where ice-core drilling offers vital insight into the Earth’s climatological history. Researchers there are looking for answers to increasingly urgent questions, as the Greenland ice sheet shrinks by an estimated 270bn tonnes a year. Planes themselves are also valuable sources of data: commercial airliners are major contributors of meteorological observations – constantly feeding temperature, humidity, pressure and wind speed information to the World Meteorological Organisation as they cruise. Normally, planes from 43 different airlines provide about 800,000 observations a day – but this stream sputtered and nearly ran dry. Lufthansa’s contributions fell from 14,000 a month to just over 2,000; easyJet, which normally provides 16,000, sent none. (The UK was buffered from the worst of the impact, thanks to the Met Office’s network of automated weather stations.) For some, however, the shutdown in air transport has offered an opportunity for study. With populations in lockdown, transport restricted and industrial activity slowed, it has been a chance for climatologists and atmospheric scientists to check the accuracy of their models; they have been able to measure the impact of the unprecedented sudden change in carbon emissions, and in aerosols produced by the burning of fossil fuels, and see if it lines up with the effects they might have predicted. As one researcher said: “I don’t think we could have designed a better experiment for our atmosphere.” Perhaps counterintuitively, researchers found that lockdown had a slight warming effect in spring 2020: as air pollution dropped, so did the aerosols – particles in the atmosphere that reflect sunlight away from the planet. The impact was temporary – and tiny, an estimated 0.03C. It was, however, larger than the impact of lockdown-related drops in CO2 emissions, underlining how extraordinarily complex the task of climatological modelling is. Of course, when it comes to air travel and our carbon footprints, climatologists are as hopelessly conflicted as any of us. Indeed, one 2020 study found that climate scientists – especially professors – tended to fly more often than other researchers, mainly due to remote fieldwork and the number of overseas conferences discussing international responses to the climate crisis. One study calculated that a single gathering of the American Geophysical Union, attended by 28,000 scientists, clocked up 177m air miles. This averages at three tonnes of CO2 a scientist, about the weekly emissions of the city of Edinburgh. Recent estimates suggest the Cop26 summit in Glasgow was responsible for the release of about 102,500 tons of CO2, roughly equal to the annual emissions of more than 8,000 UK residents – with international flights thought to contribute 60% of the total. Time and again, people told me that the global grounding of flights had challenged their industry to rethink how their work might continue to function without expensive, time-consuming, carbon-emitting air travel. One humanitarian worker – separated from his wife and infant children for six months due to a combination of flight cancellations, border closures and visa problems – says air travel restrictions upended the normal power structure of the development sector, forcing organisations to give more agency to nationals of the country receiving the aid. The “constant turnover” of international staff slowed, too, allowing for stronger relationships and greater consistency. In corporate sectors, greater oversight of work-related travel has been introduced. Staff are asked to consider whether it’s completely necessary, marking a culture change in industries in which jumping on a plane used to be second nature. This could have a serious environmental impact, given that frequent-flying “super emitters” representing just 1% of the world’s population are responsible for half of aviation’s carbon footprint. Before Covid, demand for air travel had been increasing by just short of 6% a year since 2010; studies estimated that by 2050, aviation would account for about a quarter of all global carbon emissions. But since the pandemic, demand has been deeply affected, resulting in a 40% fall in related CO2 emissions, which are not expected to return to pre-pandemic levels until 2025. Overall, Covid has thrown the challenge we face into sharp relief: in 2020, as travel bans and stay-at-home orders flickered in and out, during industrial slowdowns and the effective closure of business districts, global carbon emissions fell by an estimated 5.8%. This represents the largest decline since the second world war, but nevertheless falls short of the 7.6% cut believed necessary to prevent the planet from warming more than 1.5C above pre-industrial levels. And already we are returning to our carbon-guzzling ways. With jets roaring back into action, the hushed days of lockdowns feel like a distant dream for those living under busy flight paths. Harriet Grace, a careers coach and creative writing tutor, lives directly under Heathrow flight path 27R. It’s a lovely, leafy area, with Kew Gardens an easy stroll away, the Thames to the north, Richmond Park, with its herds of wild deer, just to the south. But the planes, she says, “are a blight”. They start flying over her house at three or four in the morning. It’s like living directly below a motorway – one that gets busier and busier as the summer heats up, just as you want to spend time outside. She remembers those early days of lockdown with a perverse fondness. At Heathrow, which normally sees about 600 landings a day, incoming flights fell to 60 or fewer. Though it was a frightening period – the struggle over food deliveries, not knowing whether to go out – she still recalls it as a sunlit time. No planes overhead. The roar of the South Circular road, too, had been muffled. It was, she says, “extraordinary, ethereal”. The sky emptied completely. And more than that: they knew it wasn’t going to start up again in just a moment’s time. They could, in other words, fully relax, for what felt like the first time in years. Outside – in the world, on the television, on the radio – all hell was breaking loose. But in the garden she found an uncharacteristic peace. She breathed in. Listened. She heard the birdsong, the wind through the trees. *** Recently, I took my first flight south since the pandemic. Lifting off from the archipelago where I live, I watched the sunlight glimmer off the sea with a pewter sheen. The frilled edges of the coastline spooled by below. Seeing all this, a whole country spread out below me, seemed to add a dimension to the way I understood the land and my place in it. As my gaze zoomed out, I felt my comprehension expand, too – my sense of being part, not only of the town I live in, but the country as a whole, even the world. A world that, for the first time in a long time, seemed accessible and therefore more real. Later, when we made our descent, I saw all London set out below me. The arch of Wembley and the cross-hatched streets, the meandering river. The plane spiralled down east over the city. I saw the nub of the Albert Hall, the sparkling cut-sapphire of a pond. There were train tracks striating the ground, long and thin like musculature, and the ribbing of the streets. Something fired inside me that I hadn’t felt in some time. I realised how my world had shrunk these past few months, how my identity had shifted. At the start of the first lockdown, many of us had that haunting sense that somehow we deserved all this. That we had been riding for a fall. That we had been too busy, too globe-trotting, too carefree, for too long. It’s hard to remember that sense of moral reckoning, now that many of us have spent so much time craving international travel, many for far more crucial and heartrending reasons than my own. The plane made what felt like a handbrake turn and swooped over Hammersmith Bridge, the whole city laid out just for me, and I thought: what a privilege it is to see the world from this perspective. I remembered John, the way he said he’d felt the first time he’d returned to the cockpit after so long: his job, he said, was really a treat. He’d missed it. Many of us, forced to make changes during the shutdown in global travel, adapted our lives. Research has shown that people felt they had rediscovered the value of family, of their local area, even the joys of sharing life at a distance, through virtual means. There have been silver linings to committing to being in one place. Frankie, the esports host, found time to renovate her house with her new husband, and is pregnant with their first child. She won’t be flying much for a while. The New York investment executive moved in with her partner; they bought a house together upstate. She’s not sure how her old globe-trotting habits could fit in with this new settled way of being. For many, being forcibly grounded has brought a sense of groundedness, too. The plane banks and turns into a low haze. Below me, I picture baby Alexander – now a toddler, taking his first steps. Harriet in her garden, hearing the roar of the engine. And a hundred thousand other people outside in the streets, who might look up at any moment and see my descent. • This article was amended on 4 December 2021 to remove some personal information.Britain and France have a long and intertwined history, encompassing great friendship and solidarity as well as war and rivalry. This was evident most recently following terrorist attacks in our respective countries. It’s a relationship that can still be characterised as “sweet enemies”, as Philip Sidney put it in a sonnet in 1591. We are twin countries, with more or less the same population, similar economies, and the same status on the world stage, as permanent members of the United Nations security council, and nuclear countries with military projection capability. As members of the same international organisations, we have often held the same positions, and coordinated closely. This respect and cooperative spirit have been particularly strong among diplomats from our two nations. Any prejudices and mockery have remained mostly friendly, or been delivered with a touch of humour – as in 2012, when both Boris Johnson and David Cameron riled François Hollande’s government by saying they would “roll out the red carpet” for French businessmen who were being highly taxed in France. The then French Minister of Labour, Michel Sapin, rejoindered: “Frankly, I don’t understand how you can unfurl a red carpet across the Channel. It could get quite wet.” Sadly, I feel Brexit has changed all this – and rivalries that were once largely convivial have turned sour and unfriendly. France has been repeatedly accused of wanting to punish the UK for Brexit. The French position is simply that the decision to leave the European Union has made the UK a ““third country” – not a punishment but a term defined in EU treaties, with many legal and regulatory consequences. The French government and public opinion alike are irritated by what seems like Johnson’s determination to have his cake and eat it. The implementation of the Northern Ireland protocol is at the heart of the tension. Becoming a third country requires land or sea borders: the aim is to protect the European internal market. The French may be more vocal on this subject, but their position is one shared by EU institutions and all its members – and even by the Americans. We can’t understand how an agreement negotiated, signed and proclaimed as fantastic is not then respected by the very people at the heart of it. It has created a real loss of trust in the British government. The fishing dispute is also seen in Paris as emerging from a British violation of an agreement with the EU – this allowed European fishermen to continue operating in British waters, provided they were already doing so before 2016. It is seen as an act of hostility towards France, as other countries have successfully obtained licenses, whereas dozens of French boats have had their applications rejected. They tend to be small vessels without GPS systems who have spent all their lives fishing in these waters, and their livelihoods are at stake. This explains their despair and anger – and some harsh actions. The question of refugees is the most difficult one. Mary Tudor once said that “you shall find Calais lying in my heart”, and it remains a place of dispute between France and Britain. Some Brits say that France should take back “its migrants” and accuse the French police of incompetence, suggesting Britain withdraw its financial contributions. This has provoked outrage in France: these payments have not been made out of generosity, but because French police are effectively guarding the border for the British. The hostility has become so bad that some candidates for next year’s presidential elections have suggested the Le Touquet treaty on border controls should be scrapped, saying that if the UK really wants to “take back control” of its borders, it can do so on its own soil. France has more than twice as many asylum seekers than the UK. Those who arrive in Calais are often desperate to go on to Britain for several reasons: because they speak English and can find work more easily, because they have relatives there, and because of the lack of safe legal routes to get across. Whatever new enhanced security measures are introduced in the future, asylum seekers will continue to come, and it is impossible to control 150 km of coast once the tunnel and the port have been sealed. Paris is finding that it is impossible to work seriously with Johnson’s government. Even the manner in which the issue of refugees has been addressed has annoyed them: Johnson’s letter to Emmanuel Macron was tweeted to the world in a very Trumpian fashion, drawing the comment: “I am surprised when methods are not serious. One does not communicate on those issues, from one leader to another, via tweets or by a letter made public. We are not whistleblowers. Come on now.” Meanwhile, France’s interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, has criticised the “double talk” of the British: constructive in bilateral talks behind closed doors, then, a day later, the opposite publicly, for domestic political reasons. Our nations’ two leaders have very different visions and personalities. In other times they might have got along, and the very serious and very European French president might even have been amused by a man who once said he would not sacrifice a good joke to the truth. But right now the stakes are too high. The British government seems obsessed by its largest and closest neighbour: France is an easy scapegoat in a difficult period. It will unfortunately take time before a new entente cordiale is formed. Sylvie Bermann was French ambassador to the UK from 2014 to 2017If you are partial to “purple one” caramels, fruitless rummaging among the orange cremes and toffee fingers can make you wonder if somene got to the Quality Street first? Which? has saved you from another family argument this Christmas by analysing the contents of the most popular Christmas chocolate tubs, with one key finding: there are fewer of the most-prized sweets to start with. The consumer group’s research answers key questions, such as the ratio of caramel swirls to green triangles in Nestlé’s Quality Street (it is two to one). Also, why are there so many Milky Ways yet I can’t get my hands on a Galaxy Caramel, and this box of Celebrations hasn’t been out of my sight? Well, the short answer is there is very rarely an even spread of sweets in the traditional tubs of Quality Street, Roses, Celebrations and Heroes sold in huge quantities at Christmas. If your household is in the Mars camp, you need to know there are twice as many Milky Ways and Snickers as Galaxy and Galaxy Caramel sweets, according to Which? experts. If you are team Cadbury, tubs of Heroes contain an average of nine eclairs and Fudges but only five Twirls or Wispas. Meanwhile, the Roses selection is biased towards Dairy Milk, with nine per tub, but only four fudges and truffles. The researchers found Quality Street had the “most variety in its tub overall”, with 11 different types of chocolate, but it was not a level playing field. They found an average of nine fudge sweets, eight caramel swirls but a paltry five purple ones. Green triangles are practically gold dust, with only four to get your hands on. The snapshot was based on the contents of three 600g–650g tubs of each brand. Its researchers counted each type of sweet and then calculated the average amount per tub. Based on the price per gram, Which? recommends shoppers buy a 600g or 650g tub as they offer the best value for money this year. While fans of green triangles might be feeling aggrieved, Nestlé explained that despite appearances, the three different types of sweets that make up the selection – chocolate-based, fruit cremes and toffees – are there in roughly the same quantities. “Each of those different sweet types is produced on a different line in the factory,” a spokesman said. “Because there are more varieties of chocolate-based sweets the amount of time each individual sweet is being manufactured is lower but the distribution of chocolates versus toffees versus cremes remains broadly steady.”Meteorologists stick to precise language when describing the weather, assigning particular meaning to previously vague expressions such as “wintry showers”. This preserves strict accuracy, but misses out on some of the more vividly descriptive terms traditionally used to describe winter conditions. “Foxy” weather is misleading, and is applied when the day looks sunny and warm but is actually bitterly cold. “Gleamy” is more optimistic, noting occasional intervals of sunshine amid the gloom. “Hunch-weather” is wind and rain that makes you hunch over. Scots provide many colourful terms for bad weather. To “flench”, for example, means to give a deceitful promise of improvement, which mornings sometimes seem to do to at this time of year. The Scots word “jellit” means freezing, which sounds like archaic English word “gelid” but sharper. “Snell” is a Scots term for weather so cold it bites down to the bone, believed to come from the old English word for quick, which came to include acute or sharp. Not everything wintry is unpleasant. Scots also give us “Watergaw”, a small section of a rainbow rather than a full sky-spanning bow, appearing when there is a chink of sunlight between clouds. And one English word describes a particular winter joy: “apricity”, the pleasant feeling of the sun’s warmth on a cold day.After our first gig in months, the members of the band I’m in walk off the stage and regroup outside the dressing room. “How was that for you?” says the guitar player. “Good?” “Are you kidding?” I say. “I’ve never made so many mistakes.” Often when I say something like this, someone else will say, “Yeah, I cocked up quite a few things myself” or “We were all a bit rusty; tomorrow night will be better.” That doesn’t happen this time. This time the other band members take turns enumerating all the mistakes I made – wrong notes, missed cues, howling absences – and laughing. So they noticed, I think. The truth is my first mistake – an ill-chosen chord, played with idiotic confidence – set off a chain reaction of panic that led to all the others. The rest of the songs in the set came at me like bottles on a conveyor belt, half of them smashing to the ground. After most of the audience has filed out I go into the auditorium to find my wife standing in the aisle. “It sounded fine to me,” she says. “But then I never notice anything.” “Take my word for it,” I say. “I was terrible.” The guitar player comes up behind me. “Oh dear,” she says. “Are you going to be fired?” “Nobody gets left behind,” the guitar player says. “It’s the code.” Until that moment I hadn’t realised we’d reached a point where that particular clause of the code needed to be invoked. Considering the sudden and wholesale retreat from competence I just displayed, I sleep better than I should – an hour and a quarter of mounting panic in front of a paying crowd is, if nothing else, reliably exhausting. After briefly staring into the blackness in mute horror, I slip into unconsciousness. In the morning I make a pact with myself: what happened in Frome stays in Frome. Twenty-four hours later my wife rings me while I’m in the car. “Where are you?” she says. “On the M4, standing still,” I say. “Bad luck,” she says. “How was Honiton?” “There were no mistakes,” I say. “Actually, I made one catastrophic error, but I didn’t let it get to me.” “Well done,” she says. “The thing is, you practise so you don’t make mistakes,” I say, “but you only learn to cope with the mistakes you do make by getting out there.” “I wasn’t trying to encourage this sort of conversation, to be honest,” she says. “I just wanted to know if you’d be back for lunch.” “Not at this rate,” I say. By the time I get home a granular dusk is already softening the edges of the afternoon, and the cat is having its first lesson in going outside. With the middle one holding the back door open, the cat peers into the garden with suspicion. “He’s not interested,” the middle one says. The cat places a single paw on the damp back step, and then withdraws it. “Think of it as one big litter box,” I say. “All for you.” Eventually the cat creeps down the step to the edge of the grass, curiosity overriding fear. Then it chases a yellow leaf around the lawn while we watch from the window. “Keep an eye out for eagles,” I say, sitting down at the table in front of my laptop. Another band member has emailed me a short video from the previous night, filmed on a phone by an audience member. The sequence takes place directly after my catastrophic mistake, which has been excised. Shorn of it, the whole thing looks remarkably professional. When I next look up, the kitchen is empty and the garden dark. I go out to look for the kitten, but my search turns up nothing. I call to it in a whisper – I find myself quite unable to shout the name Giles in an outdoor setting – with no result. “Did you bring the cat in?” I say to my wife, who is working at her desk. “No,” she says. “Did you?” “Well, it’s nowhere,” I say. “Don’t panic,” she says. “Why do you always panic?” “It was nice having a cat, however briefly.” “I’ll be there in a minute,” she says. “Remain calm.” I return to the garden door and stare into the blackness beyond. When I look down, I see the kitten sitting on the step looking up at me. “You need to hide,” I say.Superman &amp; Lois 5.40pm, BBC One Within the first five minutes of this 15-part reboot, Clark Kent (Tyler Hoechlin) recalls everything that’s happened between crash-landing in Smallville and raising two teenage sons with his “most famous journalist in the world” wife Lois Lane (Elizabeth Tulloch). From here, we follow the Kents as they return to Superman’s home town and navigate what should be a more low-key way of life. But it isn’t long before the suit is brought back out for some heavy CGI action. Hollie Richardson Strictly Come Dancing 6.40pm, BBC One We have reached the quarter-finals (a reminder that Christmas is just around the corner). With so many 10s being awarded across the scoreboard, it’s getting harder to call who will walk away with the Glitterball trophy. HR 48 Hours to Victory 7.40pm, Channel 4 Dermot O’Leary, ex-soldier Arthur Williams and battlefield guide Lucy Betteridge-Dyson team up to analyse the most decisive two days of notable historical conflicts. The Somme and Waterloo will feature later in the series, but we begin in 1940 at Dunkirk amid frantic attempts to stymie a devastating German triumph. Graeme Virtue The Chase: Celebrity Special 8.15pm, ITV You know the format: a team of minor celebrities answer questions to avoid being caught by the Chaser. Tonight, singer Lance Ellington, Olympian Beth Tweddle, jockey Bob Champion and actor Sally Lindsay step up. HR Phil Lynott: Songs for While I’m Away 10pm, BBC Two A published poet as well as a rock’n’roll wild man, Phil Lynott packed plenty into his tragically curtailed life. As a Black man growing up in 1950s Dublin, Lynott stood out. His band Thin Lizzy saw him embrace outsider status, resulting in hits including The Boys Are Back in Town and Jailbreak. It’s a fascinating story of a complete one-off. Phil Harrison The Jonathan Ross Show 10.20pm, ITV Elton John steals the limelight tonight, joining Ross via video call to promote his latest album The Lockdown Sessions. Rob Brydon and Judi Love are in the studio, while Craig David and MNEK provide some live Saturday night music. HR Film choice First Love, 11.15pm, Film4 The output of indecently prolific Japanese director Takashi Miike (100 films and counting) will always be hit-and-miss. This 2019 effort is most definitely a hit, a frenetic yakuza comedy thriller with a surprisingly tender meet-cute at its heart. Tokyo boxer Leo (Masataka Kubota) is caught up in a criminal double-cross when he saves enslaved, drug-addicted sex worker Monica (Sakurako Konishi) from a corrupt cop. The long night that ensues includes hallucinations in Y-fronts, a fight in a DIY store and even a spot of animation, as the couple flee competing gangs. Simon Wardell Live sport Premier League Football: West Ham v Chelsea 11.30am, BT Sport 1.Live action from the derby match at the London Stadium. Snooker: UK Championship 1pm, BBC Two. The opening semi-final, followed by the second semi-final at 7.30pm. The final airs on Sunday from 1pm. Premiership Rugby Union: Exeter Chiefs v Saracens 2.30pm, BT Sport 2.A league game from Sandy Park. Premier League Football: Watford v Man City 5pm, Sky Sports Main Event.From Vicarage Road.Citrus fruit keeps at room temperature for only a couple of days before it starts to deteriorate, which may explain why, according to the government waste scheme Wrap, 720,000 oranges are wasted in UK homes every day. To prevent unnecessary waste, put only a day or two’s worth in the fruit bowl, and keep the bulk of your supply in the fridge. An abundance of citrus can be juiced, or sliced and frozen, or used up in all manner of cakes or savoury dishes. Being so close to Christmas, one great use for an abundance of oranges is to turn them into pomander balls: stud the fruit with cloves in a neat pattern, then roll in spices and hang out as a Christmas decoration; later, use the clove-studded dried oranges to spice mulled wine. Claudia Roden’s orange and almond cake is a legendary zero-waste recipe that incorporates the whole orange, skin and all, into the batter. This is my vegan take on it made with leftover aquafaba. Vegan whole orange and almond cake This cake has a wonderful, aromatic intensity thanks to its use of the whole orange, including the zest, bitter pith and essential oils. It’s a firm favourite in our household, and is deliciously moist, flavourful and gluten-free. Save aquafaba (or chickpea water) in the fridge for up to five days; otherwise, freeze and defrost as needed. Psyllium husks are an essential ingredient in vegan cooking, and help bind dishes together. Find them in wholefood shops, some supermarkets and, if all else fails, online. 250g oranges 6 tsp psyllium husks 160ml aquafaba 200g unrefined sugar 300g ground almonds 2 tsp baking powder Put the oranges (and/or satsumas and clementines) in a pressure cooker, cover with water and bring to a boil. Turn the heat down low, cook for 20 minutes, then turn off the heat and leave to cool, still sealed, for an hour. Alternatively, boil the fruit in a saucepan with plenty of water for an hour and a half, and leave to cool. Lift out the cooked and cooled oranges, cut them in half (remove and compost any pips), put in a blender with the psyllium husks, and blitz smooth. Next, in a clean, grease-free metal or ceramic bowl, whisk the aquafaba with an electric mixer on a high speed for three minutes, until it forms soft peaks. Whisk in the sugar 50g at a time, until fully incorporated, then fold in the ground almonds, baking powder and the blended citrus fruit. Pour into a greased and lined 20cm springform cake tin and bake at 190C (170C fan)/375F/gas 5 for 45 minutes.The Australian government says Covid vaccines could soon be rolled out for children as young as five as Victoria reported nine deaths and the NSW chief health officer, Kerry Chant, warned of “an uptick” in Omicron cases in metropolitan Sydney. The federal health minister, Greg Hunt, said on Saturday that the regulators – the Therapeutic Goods Administration and the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation – were set to decide on giving Pfizer to children by the end of the year. If all goes well, the doses will be rolled out from January. Hunt said the process was “heading in a positive direction”. “The TGA will provide that advice, Atagi will then provide their response and we’re hopeful that if we’ve got two green lights we would commence the children’s paediatric doses in the first part of January,” he said. Thousands of people again turned out in Melbourne on Saturday in the first mass demonstration since the Victorian government passed its new pandemic laws. The mostly mask-less crowds marched through Treasury Gardens shouting “sack Dan Andrews” and “freedom”, and were seen waving Donald Trump placards, United Australia party posters, Eureka and national flags, and signs about various conspiracy theories. The UAP leader, Craig Kelly, who has been criticised for posting misleading information about the pandemic online, addressed the crowd. He called Victoria a “fascist medical state” because, when he refused to show his Covid vaccine certificate, he was unable to hire a rental car at Melbourne airport. The crowd then moved to the front of Flinders Street Station, bringing traffic to a standstill. Counter-protesters, who said hostility to vaccines had become a “gateway to the far right”, marched in Carlton. The Victorian health minister, Martin Foley, said the protests, which have been fuelled by the pandemic laws, which give the premier and the health minister more power over public health orders, should be peaceful and “based on up-to-date facts” – suggesting some were complaining about laws that had already been changed. “What we now have is a set of legislative arrangements that allow a balance between the public health response that keeps us safe and open, with a protection mechanism for human rights and the voice of people who have any concerns.” Victoria reported nine Covid deaths on Saturday, and the state recorded 1,365 new cases. There are 288 cases in hospital and 44 in intensive care. Thirty-nine Covid cases have been linked to last month’s protests, mostly in unvaccinated people. Three people have been hospitalised and one is in intensive care. NSW reported 325 new Covid cases and one death on Saturday. Chant said there was a total of 13 Omicron cases in the state. A cluster of Covid infections at Regents Park Christian School in western Sydney stands at 13, with three already confirmed positive for Omicron. Testing results are still to come for the other 10. There has been one Omicron case detected in the ACT and one in the Northern Territory. South Australia recorded five further Covid cases on Saturday – a man in his 50s, three women in their 30s, 50s and 60s, and a child. The state’s chief public health officer, Prof Nicola Spurrier, on Saturday morning recommended to the state’s Covid-19 directions committee that borders be shut. “Clearly when you have something that is unknown, the lowest risk would be to try and keep it out for as long as possible,” she said. But instead the committee agreed to require all arrivals from NSW, Victoria and the ACT to be tested upon arrival. The SA premier, Steven Marshall, said the arrivals would need to isolate until they get a negative result and have a second test on day six. Marshall said further changes to border restrictions due to the Omicron variant were being considered. Marshall said 24 to 48 hours’ notice of any changes would be given, and that he would only close the borders if Christmas was going to be disrupted. “Now, we’ve had borders open since the 23rd. That’s been fantastic for family reunions and business activity,” he said. “They’re open at the moment but we’re putting more speed bumps in the way until we get more information. “We remain extraordinarily concerned about the Omicron threat.” SA is tackling its own outbreak of the Delta variant. There have been 35 cases since the borders opened on 23 November, many of them linked to an event former premier Jay Weatherill attended – he later tested positive. The ACT reported seven new local Covid cases on Saturday, one suspected to be Omicron. There were three local cases in Queensland and four in hotel quarantine, one of them a possible Omicron infection linked to a visitor from South Africa. From Sunday anyone who has been in Adelaide since 28 November and travels to Queensland will go into 14 days of home or hotel quarantine. At this stage Queensland is preparing to open its interstate borders on 17 December, but that could change as the Omicron variant spreads in NSW. Nationally, 87.9% of people aged 16 and over are double vaccinated. The highest rate is in Canberra , where 97.9% of those aged 12 and over are now fully vaccinated.And that brings the Saturday blog to a close – thanks for being here! A quick recap of the main stories: The vaccine rollout for children aged from five to 11 is set to begin in January. Almost 98% of people 12 and over in the ACT are now fully vaccinated. Queensland has changed its border restrictions so travellers from Adelaide will have to quarantine. South Australia has tightened its border controls out of “extraordinary” concern about the Omicron variant. Thousands of so-called “freedom” protesters have marched in Melbourne. Victoria recorded nine Covid deaths and 1,365 new cases. NSW has now recorded 13 cases of the Omicron variant, and there has been one apiece in the Northern Territory and the ACT. Oh dear. I just attempted the quiz on history’s most bungled quotes “from Marilyn to Shakespeare”. I’m not going to tell you how badly I did, but it was a hard fail. I at least got the Neil Armstrong one right – mostly because I used to work with a reporter who covered the Apollo moon landing and HE bungled the quote when he reported it. That is one memorable stuff-up! I love an end-of-year montage. Here’s a lovely one from Guardian Australia’s photographer-at-large Mike Bowers: The Age’s Rachael Dexter is reporting that the Melbourne protests have now targeted the ABC’s studio in Southbank. They want to speak to Ita Buttrose. No, I don’t know why. It turns out the anniversary of the Eureka uprising was yesterday. The ABC reported that a dawn service was “attended mostly by anarchists and union members”, which strikes me as a mild burn. An effigy of the Victorian premier, Dan Andrews, was burned – but only three people turned up to watch. They were disowned by the organisers. The story linked above has a really interesting look at the history and meaning of the uprising. Thanks, Josh Taylor! Here are some pics from the Melbourne protests, which Josh mentioned earlier. They’re now being called the “Eureka” protests, after the 1854 rebellion of goldminers at Eureka Stockade in Ballarat. And with that, I will hand you back to Tory Shepherd for the remainder of Saturday. Thousands of people are protesting in Melbourne’s CBD, in the first mass demonstration since the state government passed pandemic laws, AAP reports: The crowd marched through Treasury Gardens shouting “sack Dan Andrews” and “freedom”, with protesters carrying Eureka and national flags, as well as Donald Trump placards. They sang the Seekers’ I Am Australian before hearing speeches from ex-Liberal MP turned United Australia party leader Craig Kelly and others. Kelly said he was unable to hire a rental car after landing at Melbourne airport because he refused to show his Covid-19 vaccine certificate. “I am no longer in a great city, I am here in a fascist medical state,” the NSW-based MP yelled. The crowd then moved to the front of Flinders Street station, bringing traffic to a standstill as police watched on. Police are investigating following the discovery of a man’s body in an alleyway in central Canberra. Detectives have cordoned off Garema Place near the corner of Mort Street and City Walk in Civic, and screened off the scene. It is understood officers were called to the location following reports of the discovery around 9.45am on Saturday. Local media outlets say the man may have been the victim of a stabbing. Tropical cyclones and flooding are set to pummel Australia over summer, national cabinet documents reveal. The Bureau of Meteorology briefed the meeting of premiers, chief ministers and the prime minister on 5 November about the high-risk weather facing the nation until April. National cabinet documents are usually kept secret, but South Australian senator Rex Patrick obtained these under freedom-of-information laws. A man has drowned after he and a teenage boy were believed to have been swept off a sandbar while fishing south of Adelaide, AAP reports: Police and emergency services were called to Sugars Beach at Goolwa on Saturday morning after reports the man and 16-year-old boy were missing in the water. They were fishing on the sandbar together before entering the water. The teen was able to swim to shore but the 50-year-old man’s body was found in the water by a rescue helicopter. He could not be revived after being rescued by a surf live saver. AAP has a bit of a wrap on the NSW council elections. Well, Sydney at least: She has got four decades of public service under her belt, 17 of them as Sydney’s lord mayor, but Clover Moore says her work is far from done. That is why the independent is vying to extend her record tenure as lord mayor of Sydney on Saturday, when NSW residents head to the polls to vote in twice-delayed local council elections. “We have been able to achieve so much but we have a lot more to do,” she told AAP. She rattles off a list including achieving the council’s goal of net zero carbon emissions by 2035, growing green spaces across the city, improving access to social and affordable housing, and repairing the CBD’s economy and council’s own coffers post-Covid. “That’s just for starters,” she said. She is up against some familiar faces in an all-female field, with many of her opponents arguing it is time for a changing of the guard at town hall. Moore was first elected as lord mayor in 2004, 16 years after she joined the state parliament in 1988. She managed both responsibilities until 2012, when new legislation forced her to choose between the roles. “We need a lord mayor for Sydney’s future, not our past,” Labor’s mayoral candidate, Linda Scott, says. Scott has served as president of the Australian Local Government Association and as deputy mayor, but has twice been defeated by Moore in the mayoral race. The Liberal candidate, Shauna Jarrett, is also campaigning on a pledge to “refresh Sydney”. But Moore is not convinced her rivals really believe there is a need for a change of leadership. “Given that they agree with the work we’re doing, they have to think of something to say about me, and that’s what they’re doing,” she said. Moore claimed victory in a landslide in 2016, with almost 58% of the vote, and is encouraged she might achieve a similar feat on Saturday. “I never like to say I’m confident, I like to say I’m optimistic,” she said. “I’m really pleased to be getting such good feedback from people as I go around the polling booths.” While the pandemic forced the elections to be postponed twice, it has also seen the NSW Electoral Commission utilise online voting at a local government level for the first time. But even that has not been without disruption, with the website crashing as a result of heavy traffic, and in turn seeing lines at polling centres swell. “But generally people are really happy that the election is actually happening and that they can get out and vote,” Moore said. The race for the mayoralty of Sydney is one of more than 120 elections taking place across the state on Saturday, with polls closing at 6pm. Some more on the protests in Melbourne, via AAP: Victorian health minister Martin Foley suggested demonstrators are complaining about aspects of the pandemic laws that had already been altered. “Protests should be peaceful and they should be based on up-to-date information and facts,” he told reporters on Saturday. “What we now have is a set of legislative arrangements that allow a balance between the public health response that keeps us safe and open, with a protection mechanism for human rights and the voice of people who have any concerns.” There are currently 39 Covid-19 cases linked to mass protests in Melbourne last month, with three people hospitalised and one in intensive care. Some 92.8% of the 16-plus Australian population have had one dose of the vaccine, while 87.9% of the eligible population have had at least two doses. Queensland authorities say flood waters at Goondiwindi in the state’s south-west have nearly peaked, as communities in nearby Inglewood and Texas assess the damage already done, AAP reports: The Macintyre River at Goondiwindi is at major flood levels and has reached 10.4 metres in the biggest flood in a decade, with waters threatening to overtop levees. The river is expected to peak late Saturday morning, below the 2011 flood peak of 10.64 metres and also below the town’s 11m flood levee. Police and emergency services minister Mark Ryan has praised the efforts of residents and authorities in flood-hit regions. “It’s tough out there when you have flood waters coming through the community, but the community has done the right thing, they have stepped up and they have done an outstanding job,” he told reporters on Saturday. The State Emergency Service has so far responded to 57 calls for help, more than half of them in Goondiwindi. Three aged care residents have been voluntarily evacuated to Toowoomba, and another three hospital patients have been flown to Warwick, while emergency supplies have been delivered to Inglewood and Tara. Thousands of people are protesting outside state parliament in Melbourne, in the first mass demonstration since the state government passed pandemic laws. A counter-protest against far-right elements of the so-called “freedom protests” is also under way in nearby Carlton. There have been almost weekly demonstrations in Melbourne against vaccination mandates and pandemic laws, with concerns some protesters are members of neo-Nazi organisations or have links to far-right conspiracy groups. The Andrews government’s controversial new legislation, which passed parliament on Thursday, makes the premier and health minister responsible for declaring pandemics and making health orders. The legislation will replace the state of emergency on 16 December and makes Victoria the first state in Australia with pandemic-specific laws. The United Australia party MP Craig Kelly has been spruiking the “freedom” protests on social media, and is listed as appearing at the protest on Saturday. Here’s some more info on the Covid-19 situation in Victoria from the daily health department press release: There are 288 Covid-19 cases in hospital in Victoria – 44 active cases in ICU, with 20 of those on a ventilator. There are an additional 43 cleared cases in ICU. Of those in hospital, 61% were not fully vaccinated, and of those in ICU, 90% were not fully vaccinated. Victoria was notified of 1,365 new cases of Covid-19 yesterday. All the new cases were locally acquired except for two cases that were acquired overseas. The 11 local government areas with the highest number of new cases are Hume, Whittlesea, Moreland, Moonee Valley, Casey, Brimbank, Maribyrnong, Mornington Peninsula, Melton, Bayside and Darebin. Of the nine deaths reported today, the people were aged in their 70s, 80s, 90s and 100s. Approval of Covid-19 vaccines for five- to 11-year-olds is imminent, with a January rollout likely, AAP reports. Federal health minister Greg Hunt said the Therapeutic Goods Administration and Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation should make a call on Pfizer pediatric doses before year’s end. It is understood the first shipment is due to arrive in Australia before Christmas. The process is “heading in a positive direction”, Hunt said. “(The TGA) will provide that advice, Atagi will then provide their response and we’re hopeful that if we’ve got two green lights we would commence the children’s pediatric doses in the first part of January.” While 10 January is a possible starting date for the rollout, it could commence a week either side. Hunt said Moderna booster doses for the general population are also on the cards, with confirmation by Christmas or sooner. “I’m due to get my booster in the next 10 days, so that might be a very good option to show that message,” he said. The TGA is also making progress on the protein-based Novavax vaccine and could issue a pre-Christmas approval for doses to become available in the new year. Atagi has decided not to shorten the six-month timeframe in which people are advised to get a booster, due to earlier boosters not being proven to provide extra protection against the Omicron variant. Chief medical officer Paul Kelly said it is too early to determine whether the strain will result in increased hospitalisations or deaths, however there is evidence it is the same as, or milder than, current variants. Australia is likely to pass 500,000 booster doses on Saturday. Meanwhile, former deputy chief medical officer Nick Coatsworth has called into question Australia’s decision to shut the border to several African nations due to Omicron. He said the policy is inconsistent due to the new variant being detected in other countries Australia has open travel with. “It’s proven that Omicron isn’t just in southern African states, it’s also in Europe, it also may well have been in the Australian community,” Coatsworth told Sky News. “It may be elsewhere in the world that we have open borders to, then the consistency of the policy of shutting travel borders to certain African states starts getting called into question.” Australia banned flights from nine African nations in the wake of Omicron. Its emergence has also led to a pause on the return of international students and visa holders, while all other international travellers have to undergo quarantine measures. Labor’s been out on the hustings talking up its climate change policy. The opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, and shadow climate change and energy minister, Chris Bowen, spoke in Sydney earlier today, pretty much recapping what they said yesterday. And while it was a “doorstop” (journo speak for a press conference that is a little informal, often outside), I can’t see that any questions were asked. Here is a lovely piece from Cait Kelly: The humble budgerigar has transformed the red centre into a sea of green and gold. A massive murmuration – the phenomenon of thousands of birds flocking together – has swarmed the Northern Territory. A massive murmuration! Fabulous. And not a budgie smuggler in sight. Seven new cases in the ACT today... and a stonking 97.9% of those 12 and older fully vaccinated. Truly amazing effort. I will now hand you over to my excellent colleague Tory Shepherd for the next little while. It is NSW council elections day, in case you hadn’t voted yet. People have reported issues getting into iVote, the online voting system, but according to the NSW electoral commission’s tweets, it’s back up but just backlogged. You can always go to your nearest polling place in person, which might be faster anyhow, and if you have concerns over iVote for other reasons... Just a bit more on the NSW cases today via NSW Health: There are currently 139 Covid-19 cases admitted to hospital, with 25 people in intensive care, eight of whom require ventilation. There were 68,435 Covid-19 tests reported to 8pm last night, compared with the previous day’s total of 80,930. As previously mentioned, 13 Covid-19 cases in the state have been identified as being the Omicron variant. My colleagues Cait Kelly and Tory Shepherd have this interesting read on people in hospital with Covid-19 who didn’t get vaccinated. After a quiet morning, SA and Queensland decided to hold their press conferences at the same time, so that was a bit of juggling and a bit of a Covid lockdown flashback, but I think I picked up most of the important bits. D’Ath said the government would have “more to say” about the planned opening of the border to New South Wales and Victoria on Monday, not ruling out a further delay beyond when the state reaches the 80% double dose vaccination rate for the eligible population, in light of the Omicron variant spreading in NSW. We will have more to say on Monday. We are working with the police and the logistics of that but we will have more to say about when we think we will hit the 80% and what that transition is going to be like and hopefully getting more information. D’Ath says the government had been warning cases would arrive in Queensland as the borders opened up, but it has happened earlier than expected. We should prepare for this. This is exactly what’s going to happen when our borders open in a matter of days. We know that no later than 17 December the borders will open up to NSW, Victoria and now the Greater Adelaide, who will have to be fully vaccinated and have a negative PCR test once we get that 80% while we declare hot spots. Everyone should be prepared and we do know is, whether it’s Delta, whether it’s Omicron, the factors that vaccinations appear in all of the evidence to be safer and to certainly reduce the risk of someone ending up as seriously ill. Please, go and get vaccinated. We’re so close to those borders opening and we’re seeing it transmitting to other states now anyway. Queensland health minister Yvette D’Ath announces that anyone who has been in Greater Adelaide since 1am on 28 November and arrives in Queensland after 1am tomorrow will be required to go into 14 days of home or hotel quarantine. They are required to be fully vaccinated. Anyone arriving after 1am Monday 6 December will also need to have received a negative Covid PCR test in the previous 72 hours prior to arrival. Anyone who arrives before 1am tomorrow will need to get tested and isolate until a negative result is returned. Queensland health minister Yvette D’ath has announced Queensland has recorded seven new Covid-19 cases overnight. Two overseas acquired in hotel quarantine, two interstate acquired, and three locally acquired. Of the seven, four have been infectious in the community. A couple from the Gold Coast who tested positive have been infectious in the community for up to 13 days. One of them works in a private aged care facility, however all of the staff are vaccinated and over 90% of the residents are fully vaccinated. Everyone at the facility is being tested. There’s a case in Calabar, from someone who travelled to Adelaide for a school reunion. South Australian chief health officer Nicola Spurrier says she had to provide the range of options to the government on responding to the Omicron variant, including the most risk-averse option of a hard closure of borders, but also the options of keeping it open due to the higher vaccination rates and the shift to living with Covid. She wouldn’t say directly whether it had been her recommendation to shut the borders in South Australia. She said there will be more Covid-19 cases to report in SA, but that will be announced later today. On whether border closures had been recommended, Marshall said a range of options had been considered, and if border restrictions are put in place, people will be given between 24 and 48 hours’ notice. He says he would only close the SA borders if the Omicron variant could potentially disrupt Christmas in South Australia, and more needs to be known about the variant: Look, we would only do that if we wanted to make sure we still enjoyed a Christmas here in South Australia. This is a balancing act. We just don’t know how this Omicron variant is going to go in South Australia. We’re hopeful that the severity of the symptoms will be much lower. I’m an optimistic person but I’m also a cautious person for our state. We have the fastest growing economy in the nation. We have more people employed now than before the coronavirus raised its ugly head and we’ve got a lot to lose if we don’t get this right. Now, we’ve had borders open since the 23rd. That’s been fantastic for family reunion and business activity. They’re open at the moment but we’re putting more speed bumps in the way until we get more information. The South Australian premier, Steven Marshall, says there is no change to the borders, despite “extraordinary concern” about the spread of the Omicron variant of Covid-19. He says people coming to SA from Victoria, ACT and New South Wales will need to have a test on arrival, and isolate until it returns, and then have a further test on day six. International arrivals will need to isolate for 14 days. He said: We don’t know enough about the Omicron variant at this stage, so we are being very cautious. We have increased our requirement for quarantine for international arrivals from seven days up to 14 days and today we put two additional speed bumps in the path of the Omicron variant coming into South Australia. Firstly, we will require all people coming from NSW, Victoria and the ACT to have a test on arrival and to isolate before that result is received. Now, in South Australia, those results are being through in a matter of hours. Four to five hours at the moment is the average, and we certainly have significant capacity and availability into SA pathology and our private pathology labs in South Australia. The second speed bump for people coming in from NSW, Victoria and the ACT, they will be required, if they’re staying in South Australia, to have a further test on day six. He says it is all about concern over the Omicron variant, not the Delta variant, noting SA has had 40 new cases of Covid-19 since opening the borders to NSW, ACT and Victoria. Worth noting there has been no recorded cases of the Omicron variant in Victoria yet, but obviously Victoria’s borders are open to NSW and the ACT. Just noting we are still waiting on the SA press conference to begin. There’s a press conference with the South Australian premier, Steven Marshall, and CHO Nicola Spurrier at 9.45am SA time (so roughly half an hour from now). So just a bit more on the story we reported last night that former Liberal turned United Australia party MP Craig Kelly was appointed to the parliament’s inquiry into social media and online safety. As we reported, the makeup of the committee is that the government gets five of the eight MPs, with the remainder being made up of Labor and the crossbench. Labor had two members, and the crossbench has one. Everyone is confused as to who actually put him on there. It wasn’t the government. Labor did put his name forward, but it was just because one of the crossbench was also allow onto the committee, and his name was provided to them. I’m told Craig Kelly wanted the role and he put his hand up for it, but he wasn’t put forward by the other crossbench members. Indeed some have since expressed surprise at his appointment, too. New South Wales has reported 325 new cases of Covid-19 and one additional death. Victoria has reported nine more Covid-19 related deaths and 1,365 new infections. Residents in the town of Goondiwindi in Queensland’s south-west are anxiously awaiting their biggest flood in a decade as waters threaten levee banks, AAP reports. The Macintyre River was at 10.33m on Friday afternoon, with the Bureau of Meteorology forecasting the flood to peak at 10.7m. That’s above the 2011 record of 10.64m, but below the town’s 11m flood levee. As local business owners described an atmosphere of unease and concern within the town, mayor Lawrence Springborg said his staff were working around the clock to provide updates. “We have quite a good level of confidence that levee will again protect our town, and we’ve got council staff that ride that levy on a regular basis,” he told AAP. Residents have left their gates open for council to ride through on quad bikes and assess the levels of rising water along the Macintyre river, with all of the towns catchments at capacity. On Friday, 10 patients were airlifted from Goondiwindi Hospital ahead of Saturday’s forecast peak. The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, also confirmed on Friday that more than 70 aged care residents would be evacuated if the river level hit 10.6m. The bureau has forecast further rain in the coming week for Goondiwindi, but Springborg said if falls are not widespread the town should be safe. “From our perspective, delayed rainfall is fine. It gives us time for our rivers to start to drop and build some more capacity,” he said. “But of course we don’t have much freeboard at the moment because our rivers and streams are full. “If it’s widespread heavy rainfall, that’s what can cause further issues.” In case you missed this last night from my colleague Stephanie Convery. The Fair Work Commission has ruled a Covid-19 vaccine mandate for all workers at BHP’s Mount Arthur coalmine was unlawful because the company did not consult adequately with its workers. A man who absconded from Covid-19 quarantine in the Northern Territory has been taken into custody after less than five hours on the run, AAP reports. Police said the 36-year-old man was seen scaling a fence at the Howard Springs Centre for National Resilience about 10pm on Friday. Authorities are still searching for another man who escaped an Alice Springs quarantine facility. Jeremy MacDonald, 27, is alleged to have escaped over his room’s balcony about 1pm on Friday. He returned a negative test on Wednesday, after being ordered to quarantine four days earlier for failing to declare he had visited a hotspot before travelling to the NT. Six people have escaped quarantine facilities in the NT since 26 November. Good morning, I’m Josh Taylor and I will be bringing you all the latest news this morning. A concerning cluster of Covid-19 cases at Regents Park Christian School in western Sydney has grown to 13, with three already confirmed positive for Omicron. Testing results are still to come for the other 10. The ACT has also recorded its first case of the Omicron variant in a person who has not travel overseas. There have been 15 cases of Omicron detected in Australia, 13 of them in NSW, one in the Northern Territory and one in the ACT. A woman in her 70s from the Binjari community, just outside Katherine, has become the first person to die of Covid in the Northern Territory. Both NT and WA closed their borders to South Australia after an outbreak of Covid-19 in the state, and four new cases in the state recorded on Friday. Yesterday the prime minister, Scott Morrison, denied misleading Australians about the vaccination status of SA senator Alex Antic, after he was moved into an SA medi-hotel reserved for those with Covid-19 or those returning travellers who are unvaccinated. We are likely to hear a lot more on emissions reduction after Labor announced its 2030 target of 43% on Friday. And towns on the border of NSW and Queensland are also on alert for rising floodwaters. Let’s get into it.Militants have killed at least 31 people in central Mali when they fired upon a bus ferrying people to a local market and attacked a UN convoy in the north of the country in a region racked by a violent insurgency. The bus was attacked on Friday by unidentified gunmen as it travelled its twice-weekly route from the village of Songho to a market in Bandiagara six miles (10km) away, said Moulaye Guindo, the mayor of the nearby town of Bankass. “Armed men … shot at the vehicle, slashed the tires, and shot at the people,” Guindo said. He and another local official said at least 31 were confirmed dead, with many more wounded or missing. The villages sit in the heart of the Mopti region, an epicentre of violence in Mali fuelled by insurgents linked to al-Qaida and Islamic State. An internal security memo said first responders to the scene of the latest attack discovered 25 burned bodies in the truck. Images circulated on social media showed the smouldering frame of a passenger bus filled with bodies, still slumped over in their seats. Reuters could not independently verify the authenticity of the images. Also on Friday, unidentified armed men attacked a convoy belonging to the United Nations peacekeeping mission in Mali, killing one civilian worker and wounding another, the mission said. The convoy was travelling from the northern city of Kidal to Gao and came under fire about 62 miles north-east of the town of Bourem, the mission said. Jihadist attacks have surged across Africa’s Sahel region, killing thousands and displacing millions across Mali, Burkina Faso and Niger. On Wednesday two soldiers were killed and several more wounded in northern Benin when Islamist militants attacked a border security post. The raid in Porga region was the second in Benin this week. Islamist militants attacked an army patrol in the department of Alibori on Tuesday morning, the army chief, Col Fructueux Gbaguidi said in an internal statement on Thursday. The army killed one jihadist in Tuesday’s attack and another on Wednesday night, he said. Militant attacks are rare in Benin, but groups linked to al-Qaida and Islamic State that are active in its northern neighbours have made increasing incursions south. With ReutersGovernment officials and scientific advisers believe that the danger posed by the Omicron variant may not be clear until January, potentially allowing weeks of intense mixing while the variant spreads. Across Westminster, invitations to Christmas drinks are landing in embossed envelopes or on WhatsApp groups. Departmental staff parties are set to take place, as well as a reception for journalists with Rishi Sunak at No 11. Even Keir Starmer and Rachel Reeves are hosting a joint bash. However, minutes for the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) suggest there is deep concern about the threat from the new variant, particularly its transmissibility. Though there is a wariness about overreacting, one government scientific adviser said Downing Street was “putting all its eggs in one basket” by focusing its efforts on the booster vaccine drive. “It should be a balance between social mixing and immunity. That will affect how quickly it spreads,” the adviser said. “At the moment we are not really doing anything to reduce mixing. It’s disruptive and it’s damaging to the economy, but at the very least we could encourage people to think about their contacts.” Some senior Sage scientists have made the case privately that the additional precaution of home working should be taken in the run-up to Christmas and that the government should start to suggest that people take sensible steps to minimise social contact in the days before seeing loved ones. “Working from home is substantially less intrusive as an intervention. If you can easily do your job from home until Christmas, to me that seems a very proportionate thing to do right now,” one Sage adviser said. “We may wait till next year to see an exponential increase and then introduce plan B. And then that doesn’t work and we end up having to do more intense things. It’s undoubtedly a very difficult judgment.” That advice has so far not been taken, and ministers who have suggested that people exercise their personal judgment over Christmas party participation have been slapped down by No 10. After the work and pensions secretary, Therese Coffey, counselled caution over “snogging” under the mistletoe, the health secretary, Sajid Javid, intervened on Thursday to insist that “it’s got nothing to do with the government who you kiss”. Government sources have also firmly denied that there has been any consideration of a short “circuit break” lockdown in order to allow more mixing over Christmas. “It’s totally wrong to suggest that has been considered,” a spokesperson said. However, one senior health source said that although intensive mixing often occurrs in the run-up to Christmas, people would be expected to decrease that over Christmas itself. “The Christmas holidays may act as a form of circuit breaker – people stay at home in smaller groups, kids are off school after a period of lots of mixing. That will help,” the source said. Another Sage scientist said it would be hard to make the case in the early weeks for a crackdown on social contact because the figures would look absurdly low in relation to the daily infection rates that Britons have come to expect. “The first part of the curve looks flat and then it suddenly takes off and the exponential nature becomes more obvious. I don’t think we will reach that point before Christmas. We will reach it in the first quarter of next year.” Ministers acknowledge that the current figures for Omicron in the UK may be more than two weeks old and vastly underestimate the true picture. “We are talking about big underestimates. The sequencing is always a week or more behind. We are looking at the numbers we had a week or two ago and it’s an underestimate of that,” one official said. The rapid-response restrictions, which include additional measures for self-isolation of contacts as well as mask wearing, will be reviewed in three weeks. Some scientists said the data from South Africa would be clearer by then, but the implications for the UK would still be very uncertain. “If we see the exponential increase in cases and hospitalisations are staying flat, that would be positive, but the population [in South Africa] is much younger; much of the early circulation is the young adult population. It’s not necessarily completely reassuring if you didn’t see that increase,” one government scientist said. “Ultimately, the only thing that really tells us this, is the real-world data. It would take us a month, even with our extremely good data, to have a good understanding of what is really happening. Unfortunately we get that detail once it’s widespread.” No 10 believes the actions over the past week showed a recognition of where ministers needed to move quickly, without an overreaction when evidence of the threat is still unknown. “Because of the uncertainty, we have acted swiftly and decisively but also in a proportionate way,” one senior adviser said. “There was broad recognition on the importance of working at speed. That has been borne out by the fact we identified our first confirmed case very shortly after announcing initial border measures. “Our whole approach has been to act swiftly to buy time and then make good use of that time to get a better understanding of this variant whilst building up our defences against the potential threat. That’s why we are putting the booster programme on steroids.” Despite widespread support for extra precautions at the border and additional mask wearing, there is no big push from the public for Johnson to go further. Most adults in England are unwilling to return to full lockdown rules, according to the latest polling from YouGov, which found 68% were against closing pubs and 56% were against the return of limited numbers at gatherings. However, the polling has not moved significantly since the end of the roadmap in July, suggesting the public are sanguine or jaded about the new threat. Emerging information from South Africa could start to shift public opinion. One Sage adviser called the latest findings from South Africa “extraordinary”, with new cases appearing to have doubled within 24 hours, and the variant reinfecting people at three times the rate of previous strains. “If you have a much more transmissible strain then it’s highly likely you will get a big wave of infections, and even if the fatality rate is the same, then you will see a big increase in hospitalisations and deaths,” a government scientific adviser said. “Even reductions of 10-20% in vaccine effectiveness against severe disease could lead to very substantial problems.”• Molly Oldfield hosts Everything Under the Sun, a weekly podcast answering children’s questions, out now as a book. Does your child have a question? Submit one hereAbout 11 minutes into this week’s hearing on abortion rights at the US supreme court, the floor was taken by Sonia Sotomayor, one of the three beleaguered liberal-leaning justices left on the court after its sharp rightward shift under Donald Trump. Sotomayor began by noting that in the past 30 years no fewer than 15 justices of all political backgrounds had supported the right to an abortion up to the point of fetal viability. Only four had objected. Now after so many years of relative consensus, the legality of abortion enshrined in the landmark 1973 ruling Roe v Wade and reaffirmed in 1992 in Planned Parenthood v Casey was suddenly on the line. Politicians in Mississippi, Sotomayor remarked (while leaving it unsaid that they were rightwing Republicans), had devised new legislation to ban abortions after just 15 weeks of pregnancy. By these politicians’ own admission, their bills were targeted specifically at the three new justices on the supreme court (all appointed by Trump, though she left that unspoken too). Then she went in for the kill. She addressed the danger posed by the court’s sudden and apparently politically motivated change of heart not just to abortion rights but to the rule of law itself. If the nation’s highest court, with its newly constituted Trumpian majority, were to go along with the ploy set for it by Mississippi and throw out half a century of settled law affirming a woman’s right to choose, then what would happen to the court’s legitimacy as a place in American democracy that rises above the cut and thrust of grubby partisanship? “Will this institution survive the stench that this creates in the public perception that the constitution and its reading are just political acts?” she said. “I don’t see how it is possible.” Stench. The word ricocheted off the august walls of the courtroom like a bullet. “It was a shocking moment,” said Sherrilyn Ifill, director-counsel of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund. “An unadorned recognition of the legitimacy issues that are clearly preoccupying a number of the justices.” For Stephen Vladeck, a professor of constitutional law at the University of Texas at Austin, the takeaway of this week’s hearing was not how many justices were preoccupied with the reputational damage facing an increasingly politicised court, but how few. “To me, the single most distressing feature of Justice Sotomayor’s arguments was how little anyone else seemed to care,” he told the Guardian. Vladeck said he was dismayed by the “casualness with which so many of the justices seemed to be taking an issue that is so central to so many women. A ruling that gets rid of Roe would be enormously damaging in the eyes of millions of Americans, yet some of the conservative justices don’t seem to think that’s important.” The perception of nonchalance towards the integrity of the court among the six conservative justices now in the majority is striking. In advance of last week’s supercharged hearing, several of those same justices bent over backwards to try to convince the American people that they are neutral servants of the constitution. The three justices appointed by Trump have been especially keen to portray themselves as having not a partisan bone in their body. Neil Gorsuch, Trump’s first of the three appointments, insisted in September 2019 that it was “rubbish” to imply that the justices were “like politicians with robes”. More recently Amy Coney Barrett, another of Trump’s triumvirate of appointees, told an audience in Kentucky that the supreme court was not “comprised of a bunch of partisan hacks”. But she was speaking at the McConnell Center at the University of Louisville and was introduced at the event by the politician after whom the venue is named – Mitch McConnell, the top Republican in the US Senate. It was his shenanigans, blocking Merrick Garland’s confirmation to the court in 2016 on grounds that it was in an election year then rushing through Barrett’s confirmation much closer to election day in 2020, that gave Trump his three picks. But it is the third of Trump’s supreme court proteges, Brett Kavanaugh, whose position is perhaps most glaring. During his confirmation process in 2018 Kavanaugh went to great lengths to underline his respect for the decisions made by his predecessors on the court, and for the legal doctrine known as stare decisis, which requires justices to honor past rulings in all but exceptional cases. Kavanaugh assured senators worried about his stance on abortion that he saw Roe v Wade as “settled law”. He went even further in his conversations with Susan Collins, the relatively moderate Republican senator from Maine on whose vote Kavanaugh depended. When she announced her decision to back him for the supreme court, she revealed what he had said to her during private conversations. “There has been considerable … concern that Judge Kavanaugh would seek to overturn Roe v Wade,” she said. “Protecting this right is important to me. As Judge Kavanaugh asserted to me, a long-established precedent is not something to be trimmed, narrowed, discarded or overlooked.” But when it came round to Kavanaugh’s turn to speak in this week’s debate he read out a long list of supreme court cases in which prior precedents had been overturned. He left observers with the clear impression that he was preparing to do precisely what he promised Collins and her fellow senators that he would not do – run roughshod over a pillar of constitutional law. The pointed interventions of the Trump justices and their conservative peers in this week’s hearing have led most observers convinced that abortion rights in the US are likely to be grossly restricted or abolished outright when the court rules next June. That would be uncannily as Trump himself had predicted. In a televised debate during the 2016 presidential race, Trump was asked by the Fox News host Chris Wallace whether he wanted the court, including any justices he might appoint as president, to overturn the right to an abortion. He replied: “I am pro-life, and I will be appointing pro-life judges. I would think that that will go back to the individual states.” Trump did go on to appoint anti-abortion judges, and they are now poised to send control back to individual states, 21 of which currently have laws in place that would effectively ban abortions overnight were Roe v Wade overturned. Vladeck fears that the vast and growing disconnect between what the conservative justices say they are doing – impartially and faithfully upholding the law of the land, and what they are actually doing – playing along with the machinations of politicians in states like Mississippi, bodes very ill for the legitimacy of the court. In the long run it could also harm America’s future as a country of laws. “Public perception matters,” he said. “The more the court appears to be guided by contemporary partisan preferences as opposed to permanent legal principles, the harder it will be for millions of Americans on the wrong side of these cases to understand why they should be bound by them.”The first week of testimony in Ghislaine Maxwell’s child-sex trafficking trial has provided an extensive look into Jeffrey Epstein’s life of luxury, from jaw-dropping details on residences that rival royals’ estates, to his jet setting schedule. So curated was Epstein’s ostentation, he even demanded theater-quality audio for his workout music. The emergence of this information suggests that this trial might reveal previously unknown details about Epstein’s world, despite the disgraced financier’s suicide. At the very least, trial proceedings might contextualize how Epstein’s display of wealth so impressed people that it intimidated them. Maxwell, 59 and the daughter of the deceased British press baron Robert Maxwell, was arrested in July 2020 at a sprawling New Hampshire estate in relation to Epstein’s sexual abuse of minor girls as young as 14. Epstein, a convicted sex offender whose high-profile acquaintances included Britain’s Prince Andrew and former US presidents Bill Clinton and Donald Trump, killed himself at a New York City jail in August 2019, while he was jailed pending his own sex-trafficking trial. In a week of testimony, multiple witnesses spoke of the immense wealth that Epstein displayed and luxury that he enjoyed in properties that spanned the globe – as well as the private jet on which he traveled between them. Their testimony suggested too how that display of riches attracted the powerful social set in which he moved – as well as enabled him to prey on his victims. Epstein’s longtime pilot, Lawrence Paul Visoski Jr, gave a thorough accounting of the late financier’s expansive homes in New Mexico, Palm Beach, New York City, US Virgin Islands and Paris. Epstein’s private island, Little St James, was encircled by topaz-blue waters, and boasted unimaginable amenities: a library, a gym and a helipad, as well as multiple large swimming pools. “The house was quite unique. It was pretty much a home that was exploded out, that each building was a room of a house; that guest bedrooms were their own bungalows,” Visoski said. “So the kitchen was its own building, the living room was its own building, the master bedroom was its own building. So in order to walk from one to another, you actually walked outside.” With Epstein’s seven-story townhouse in Manhattan’s Upper East Side neighborhood, guests entered through a 15ft door. The residence featured a towering spiral staircase that ascended four floors, Visoski said. The entire second floor was “pretty much a living room”. A dumbwaiter could bring food prepared in the basement-level chef’s kitchen upstairs. Visoski said that the main house on Epstein’s 10,000-acre New Mexico property boasted a living room that was 200ft by 50ft, with an “extremely large picture window” overlooking a ravine. The dining room was converted to a movie theater . In fact all Epstein’s residences were equipped with top-notch entertainment systems. “He was an audiophile, so he liked very high-quality music,” Visoski said. Epstein’s gym on his private island “had a tremendous audio system for working out”, he said. These tony tastes also extended to Epstein’s aircraft. “It wasn’t like a typical airliner would look,” Visoski said of Epstein’s Boeing 727. “As soon as you got to the first compartment, there was like a large living room that had one, two, three – it had three couches or divans. And then it had several captain chairs inside there.” As one continued walking through the aircraft, there was a kitchen “like you would find in a home. It was a full decked-out kitchen.” In the middle of the aircraft was the “round room”, with a curved sofa. Next came the “red room”, which had Epstein’s office, as well as a desk and red couch. At the rear of Epstein’s aircraft was the “master bedroom that had a queen-sized bed” and two captain’s chairs, followed by the master lavatory. With Epstein’s flashy wealth came powerful associates. Prince Andrew and Trump were among the high-profile passengers on his plane, Visoski said. The first accuser to testify against Maxwell, “Jane”, said this social circle came up in the months before sexual abuse. “From the very beginning, there was a lot of bragging about how they were friends with essentially everyone, and they knew everyone. And they would sort of name-drop or sometimes put people on speakerphone whose voices I didn’t know and then say, ‘Oh, well, this is so-and-so and so-and-so’, and just, you know, say that they were very well-connected and affluent,” Jane said. “I guess it made me feel slightly intimidated, but it was overwhelming.” Jane, whose family was enduring financial hardship when she and her mother went for tea at Epstein’s Palm Beach home, immediately saw immense richesse. Epstein sent a chauffeur to pick them up and drive them to his house. “It was enormous,” Jane said. “It was this giant, like, beach-looking house with a big white fence around it. And these giant gates opened up, and the car pulled in. And it was just this, you know, big beautiful house … And there was a lot of like, memorabilia and pictures, and pictures with famous people and presidents,” Jane said. Maxwell’s lead attorney, Bobbi Sternheim, also discussed Epstein’s life in her opening statement. He was a man who “compartmentalized, had eccentricities, very specific requirements about his diet, his daily physical regime, he demanded perfection, he demanded solitude and silence; but he also surrounded himself with people and traveled at times with an entourage”, Sternheim said. Sternheim had her own take on Epstein’s wealth, arguing that some aspects of his largesse weren’t all that odd. “Now, you heard about the private jets … They were used as commuter jets for Epstein to travel with family and friends, guy friends, past, present and future girlfriends, and an array of other very, very interesting people, academics, politicians, scientists, musicians, celebrities, even a former astronaut who became a senator,” Sternheim said. “And there were families on the flights and children on the flights, high-style commuting. But it was a way of getting back and forth from his properties and taking others along for the ride at times, for them to go to their own homes or to other destinations that were on the way.” Despite downplaying the private planes, Sternheim also argued that Epstein’s ability to manipulate Maxwell and others stemmed, in part, from the fantasy his wealth helped project. “Now, I said before that Epstein was a manipulator. He had the money and the means to create an exceptional world: beautiful homes, beautiful surroundings, beautiful people,” Sternheim said. “But he also was a mysterious man without attachment. He had no wife, he had no children, he had no boss, yet he attracted all these rich, powerful, famous people before and after his fall from grace back in around 2008.” Information and support for anyone affected by rape or sexual abuse issues is available from the following organisations. In the US, Rainn offers support on 800-656-4673. In the UK, Rape Crisis offers support on 0808 802 9999. In Australia, support is available at 1800Respect (1800 737 732). Other international helplines can be found at ibiblio.org/rcip/internl.htmlA Lidl bit of style goes a long way. After the supermarket chain scored a surprise hit with its own-brand trainers, rivals are looking to capitalise on the “mundane” trend which has seen clothes emblazoned with the logos of everyday brands become surprise fashion icons. Aldi, McDonald’s, Ikea and Marmite have all jumped on the bandwagon with jumpers, hats and even Christmas baubles after Lidl’s trainers, decorated with the store’s garish corporate colours, became a social media sensation. Pairs of the red, yellow and blue footwear, preferably worn with Lidl logo socks, are currently being offered on eBay for more than £1,000 – a considerable uplift on their original £12.99 price tag – after they sold out in stores in September. The supermarket said it sold 84 items a minute of its “Lidl x Lidl” collection on the day it launched. Now Aldi has released a range of Christmas merchandise including a jumper, socks and men’s underpants after its first “Aldi Mania” collection, promoted on Instagram by the boxer and Love Island star Tommy Fury, sold out within days. In a bargain-basement nod to designer items from couture brands such as Louis Vuitton, the Aldi collection featured hoodies, slides sandals, joggers and pyjamas covered in the supermarket’s logo. Julie Ashfield, managing director of buying for the German discount chain, says its customers are “real fans of Aldi and want to wear their loyalty loud and proud”. Meanwhile, those looking for alternative Christmas party outfits are turning to Amazon for jumpers inspired by the logos for Poundland, Greggs and Asda, although these brands are not involved in their design and sale. Lorna Hall, director of fashion intelligence at trends agency WGSN, says they have been tracking the “mundane” trend since 2015 when it began with designers such as Anya Hindmarch, Bethany Williams and Peacebird referencing household brands in their creations. In 2017, Balenciaga caused a stir with a £1,600 tote bag which appeared to be inspired by Ikea’s famous blue and yellow Frakta carrier bags. The Ikea bucket hat, costing just a few pounds and apparently made from repurposed Fraktas, was a tearaway trend in 2020, and it can still be found across Instagram and other social media sites. . As early as 2014, Sports Direct which somehow gained enough street cred for grime MC Skepta to be seen drinking out of branded mugs in his video for It Ain’t Safe, and mixing T-shirts from the cut-price chain with his designer gear on stage. In 2019, the idea was more prevalent on the catwalk with Burberry featuring a British Rail ticket as a keyring while Vetements designs featured Vodafone and Heineken logos. Hall says: “Younger designers began playing with brands, elevating household brands into covetable streetwear. Now it has moved from interesting designers playing with everyday logos to something much wider. About a year ago supermarkets thought well why not [do it ourselves]? They realised it had got to the point where the mass market would understand the joke.” She says the merchandise gets shared on social media and helps make brands part of popular culture. “Supermarkets have been savvy. They are not putting loads of units out there and filling the aisles. It is a great brand vehicle and they are now part of the conversation.” Maureen Hinton, an analyst at retail research group GlobalData, says: “It’s a way of having some fun with the brand and really it’s about social media – this is everywhere.” Matt Clarke, co-founder of notjust clothing, said its Greggs-inspired Christmas jumper, which first went on sale in 2019, was one of its bestsellers and had proved particularly popular with workers for the bakery chain. “We didn’t initially ask but the people at Greggs have told us how much they love it,” he confessed. “The Greggs jumper is a homage to the best bakers in the country. It’s a jumper made by the people, for the people and we donate 50% of profits from every sale to charities that support mental health.”A woman who woke up to find more than three-quarters of a million pounds had been deposited in her bank account by HMRC has described how she spent a year waiting for it to realise its mistake and reclaim the money and worrying about what would happen when it did. In August 2020, Helen Peters*, a self-employed mother of a five-year-old, looked at her bank statement and found that instead of being mildly overdrawn, a £774,839.39 Bacs payment from the Revenue had sent her account very much into the black. Peters said the experience was “amazing, incredible, bizarre” but that it quickly became “a nightmare.” “It was like something out of a Hollywood film, and after I had got over the shock I just assumed that someone would realise that they had made a huge mistake, and that they would swiftly take the money back. But no one did, and the money just sat in my account,” she said. Fast-forward 15 months and Peters contacted the Guardian to ask what she should do, as she wanted to return the money. There was one problem. She had spent close to £20,000 of it, and could not afford to pay it back immediately. The money had arrived in the middle of the pandemic, just as her training work had all but dried up, forcing her, she said, to dip into her newly inflated bank balance. “I assumed that HMRC staff would notice their mistake when I paid my tax in November 2020, but nothing happened,” said Peters, from her modest south coast home. “I even tried to ring HMRC but getting hold of anyone at the time was impossible. I’d wait 30 minutes on the phone and then would have to give up as my child would need to be fed, or something. “On other calls I would be cut off before I could talk to someone. I moved £100,000 into my savings account but it has earned virtually no interest. I have never been wealthy and don’t have a car or even a dog. My income had been decimated and all the time I was very gently eating into the money. But because I could no longer pay the whole sum back I was stuck in a catch-22 position. I had a whole load of money I knew I couldn’t spend, but I was unable to do anything about it in case HMRC wanted it all back at once.” She said the few people she told about her situation had very mixed reactions. Some told her to do nothing, and to wait and see what happened. Others advised her to invest the money in shares or even property, in the hope that a request for it back, would never arrive. At one stage she even considered putting some of it into a cryptocurrency in a desperate bid to make up the money she had spent, and enable her to repay the sum in full. After the Guardian contacted HMRC it investigated and discovered that a member of its staff had made the mistake while trying to pay Peters a £23.39 parcel customs duty rebate. The money had not been destined for another person or company, and may well have never been detected had she not come forward. A personal tax expert told the Guardian that they had never come across such a case in 30 years of dealing with HMRC. Peters’s biggest fear was being aggressively pursued by HMRC. Section 24A of the Theft Act 1968 makes it an offence to knowingly keep a wrongful credit – where the recipient dishonestly failed to “take such steps as are reasonable in the circumstances to secure that the credit is cancelled”. An HMRC spokesperson has told Peters that the organisation “genuinely wants to be supportive” in her case. “We are sorry for the inconvenience caused to the individual. We are working to recover the payment that was made. For the amount that the individual spent, we will work with them to come to a payment arrangement that takes into account their financial circumstances,” he said. HMRC has said a debt management adviser will now contact her, establish exactly how much she can afford to repay each month and agree the terms. She has offered to pay back the balance over five years. Peters is not the first person to find themselves on the receiving end of an unexpected transfer. In 2019, the Guardian featured the case of Cambridge reader Peter Teich, who lost his £193,000 inheritance after he gave his solicitor the correct account number, but the wrong sort code. The bank, Barclays, told him the recipient had refused to give permission for the money to be returned, forcing Teich to mount an expensive legal battle to recover the money. After the story appeared the man who had received it, Tim Gray, handed the money back, saying he had tried to return it at the time. *Not her real nameThe questions 1 Whose exile from Florence was revoked 687 years after his death? 2 Which football teams contest the Z Cars derby? 3 Jacqueline Duhême helped which artist with their cut-outs? 4 Which ostrich was the Beano’s first cover star? 5 What has GEBCO mapped since 1903? 6 His Imperial Majesty’s Reign is which country’s national anthem? 7 Which two elements are named after continents? 8 Which toy began life as a wallpaper cleaner? What links: 9 Vesta Tilley; Ella Shields; Annie Hindle; Hetty King? 10 Black; Eastern green; Western green; Jameson’s? 11 60m; 200m hurdles; standing long jump; cross country? 12 Keneally; Carey; Pierre; Flanagan? 13 Bolivia (1904) and Ethiopia (1993)? 14 Proteus; Alabama; U-96; Vigil; Red October? 15 That’ll Be the Day; Chantilly Lace; La Bamba? The answers 1 Dante Alighieri (in 2008). 2 Everton and Watford (both use TV theme as entry music). 3 Henri Matisse. 4 Big Eggo. 5 Seas and oceans (General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans). 6 Japan. 7 Americium and Europium. 8 Play-Doh. 9 Musical hall/variety male impersonators. 10 Mamba snakes. 11 Former Olympic athletics events. 12 Australian winners of the Booker prize. 13 Countries that lost their coastline. 14 Submarines in film and TV: Fantastic Voyage; Crimson Tide; Das Boot; Vigil; The Hunt for Red October. 15 The Day the Music Died: songs by Buddy Holly, The Big Bopper and Ritchie Valens.There’s nothing worse than cocktails without nibbles, and nothing messier, either, so be kind, stock up and get cooking. Party snacks don’t have to be overly fussy, but good ones should involve a little more effort than a bowl of crisps, a few cubes of cheese or shrivelled sausages on sticks. Buy in great charcuterie, bread and cheese, by all means, but there’s definitely a charm to making some universally popular party stalwarts from scratch. From moreish spiced nuts to cheese straws with a fruity, chutney twist, these easy-peasy pleasers will keep your guests’ tongues wagging (and mouths watering). Lime leaf and togarashi spiced nuts Your family shouldn’t be the only mixed nuts at the Christmas table. These nuts, fragrant with lime leaves, make an excellent edible gift, too. Prep 15 min Cook 15 min Makes 500g Rapeseed oil, for deep-frying 40 makrut lime leaves, stalks removed (I buy them frozen from my local Asian supermarket, and much prefer them to the dried variety) 3 tsp sea salt 3 tsp togarashi The zest of 2 limes 1 egg white 15g caster sugar 500g mixed nuts – I use a mix of cashews, pecans, walnuts, almonds and macadamia nuts Heat the oil in a pan, then fry the lime leaves for 20 seconds, until crisp. Drain and dry on kitchen paper, then put in a mortar and crush with sea salt. Mix in the togarashi and lime zest. Heat the oven to 150C (130C fan)/300F/gas 2. Whisk the egg white in a large bowl until you have firm peaks, then gradually whisk in the sugar to combine. Stir in the lime leaf mix and nuts, spread on an oven tray and roast, stirring occasionally, for 15-20 minutes, until golden and fragrant. Set aside to cool, then break into pieces and serve. The spiced nuts will keep in an airtight container for a week. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Goat’s cheese and beetroot croquetas Crisp, deep-fried bechamel is always a good idea. These croquetas, oozing with goat’s cheese and dyed jewel-purple with beetroot, are the perfect festive party bite. Prep 20 min, plus chilling Freeze 1 hr Cook 10 min Makes About 15 For the filling 75g unsalted butter 100g plain flour 400ml hot milk 150g soft goat’s cheese 1 large cooked beetroot, peeled and grated Sea salt and pepper Nutmeg For the coating 125g panko breadcrumbs 2 eggs, beaten 3 tbsp flour Groundnut oil, for deep-frying In a medium pan, melt the butter, then add the flour and cook, stirring, for three minutes. Gradually pour in the milk, and cook until you have a thick, white sauce. Bubble for a minute, stirring constantly, then take off the heat and fold through the goat’s cheese and beetroot. Season with sea salt, pepper and a good grating of nutmeg, then cover and chill until firm. Once the mix is firm, shape into 3cm balls with wet hands and put on a lined baking sheet. Freeze for an hour. Lay the panko, eggs and flour in three separate shallow dishes. Carefully roll each ball in flour, then in beaten egg and then roll in panko. Heat the oil until it browns a cube of bread in 30 seconds, then fry the croquetas in batches for two minutes, until golden brown. Drain on kitchen paper and serve immediately. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Mango chutney cheese straws There are few things more pleasing at a party than a cheese straw accompanied by a cocktail. If you fancy something a little zingier, switch the mango chutney for lime pickle. Prep 25 min Chill 10 min Cook 15 min Makes About 20 Plain flour, to dust 1 x 320g sheet all-butter puff pastry 2 tbsp mango chutney – I love the one made by Tracklements (or lime pickle, if you prefer) 75g extra-mature cheddar, finely grated 1 egg yolk, beaten 1 tsp nigella seeds Line two large baking sheets with greaseproof paper. Generously flour a work surface and unroll the pastry on to it so one of the short edges is nearest you. Spread the chutney over the top half of the pastry, then sprinkle two-thirds of the cheddar over the chutney. Fold up the lower half of the pastry to enclose the filling. Roll the filled pastry to a roughly 18cm x 35cm rectangle about 3mm thick. Brush with egg yolk, then sprinkle over the remaining cheese and the nigella seeds. Slice across the width into 2cm strips and gently twist each one into a spiral. Arrange on the lined sheets and chill for 10 minutes. Heat the oven to 200C (180C)/390F/gas 6. Cook the straws for 15-20 minutes, until golden brown, then transfer to a wire rack to cool. Serve at room temperature. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoYou’ve greened your Christmas tree and planned your festive menu so that as little food as possible gets wasted. Now you just need to make sure that other festive paraphernalia doesn’t just add to landfill. Wrapping paper One oft-quoted statistic is that each Christmas, as much as 227,000 miles of wrapping paper ends up in UK rubbish bins. Another is that the amount of gift wrap thrown away over the festive period in the UK alone would stretch to the moon. But the good news is that when it comes to eco-friendly options, there is now plenty of choice. Lots of retailers, from John Lewis to Wilko, say they have made their wrapping paper recyclable. What’s the betting that Boris Johnson will be popping in to Wilko to pick up some of its Peppa Pig Christmas gift wrap (£2 for a 4 metre roll)? Online you will find specialist companies such as Re-wrapped (re-wrapped.co.uk), which says it only uses 100% recycled unbleached materials and vegan-friendly vegetable inks, and adds that all its products are biodegradable and compostable and can be recycled. The RSPB got a name-check in Country Life for its recyclable gift wrap options. The nature conservation charity’s Christmas wrapping paper is recyclable, made from Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) certified paper and, this year, from recycled paper printed with water-based inks. But before you go out and buy new paper, “make sure that all last year’s leftovers and gift bags are being reused,” says a spokesperson for the NetVoucherCodes.co.uk website. Some people will have held on to old wrapping paper or bags so that they can give them another outing later this month. Alternatively, newspaper and brown paper are easy to recycle, and natural twine is much better than sticky tape. Another option is to use fabric. During the last few years there’s been growing interest in furoshiki, traditional Japanese cloths used to wrap or transport goods. They are eye-catching and reusable, and websites such as Etsy feature stacks of different furoshiki options to suit all budgets. YouTube has video tutorials on fabric gift wrapping. Recycle Now, the national recycling campaign for England, says some councils will accept wrapping paper in household recycling collection schemes, but others won’t as it is not accepted by some recycled paper mills. So check with your local authority before you put it in the wrong bin. Wrapping paper is often dyed, laminated or contains non-paper additives such as glitter which can’t be recycled. Meanwhile, some gift wrap is very thin and doesn’t contain enough good-quality fibres for recycling, says Recycle Now. Before attempting to recycle it, remove any sticky tape and decorations. There seems to be a growing trend for wrapping paper with “biodegradable” glitter, though this is a contentious area. A study published by academics at Anglia Ruskin University in October 2020 found that biodegradable alternatives “are no better for the environment” than traditional glitter, but the company behind Bioglitter, which is used in gift wrap sold by the likes of WH Smith, hit out at the findings and said its product wasn’t used in the study. Christmas cards Arguably the greenest option is to go paperless and send e-cards to your loved ones. A number of leading charities including Friends of the Earth and Shelter, will let you pick a design, add your message, donate and send. Some of the greenest cards you can get are available from specialist players such as ecoLiving (ecoliving.co.uk) and 1 Tree Cards (1treecards.com). In both cases the firm plants a tree for every eco-friendly card sold, plus you get a pack of forget-me-not seed sticks or a flower seed token that you can plant. This week the firms’ websites were selling packs of 10 Christmas cards for £15 and £13.99 respectively. According to Recycle Now, most Christmas cards are paper-based and can be recycled, along with their envelopes, either in your household collections or at local recycling points. “Any embellishments such as ribbons or glitter cannot be recycled so should be removed first by simply tearing off that section,” it adds. But before recycling, consider whether you can get any more use out of your cards, advises charity the The Woodland Trust. For example, you could upcycle them into decorations or gift tags for next Christmas. Christmas crackers Traditionally these have been one of the most environmentally-unfriendly festive purchases, with lots of single-use plastic tat destined for landfill and – when the pulling and banging is over – a pile of paper and packaging to deal with. However, many UK retailers have stopped selling crackers containing plastic toys, ditched the glitter that can make recycling the detritus a challenge, and in some cases even switched to using recycled paper. At the budget end, Wilko is selling a pack of six crackers for children, each containing a gift, a hat, a snap and a motto, for £3. These are recyclable, with plastic-free content and packaging. Other offerings include Paperchase’s rather striking Nutcracker-themed crackers, costing £12 for a box of six. Each contains a joke, a hat and a festive trivia card. These boast no plastic contents and are FSC approved. Meanwhile, if you’d like your guests to get something they really want, whether it’s a sweet treat or something more special, Lakeland is offering a pack of six luxurious-looking “fill your own” crackers for £14.99. You pop your chosen small gift into the cracker, add one of the snaps, hats and jokes included, then fasten with the gold tie. They are made of glitter-free recyclable card. Another option that’s getting more popular is reusable fabric Christmas crackers, available from sites such as Notonthehighstreet and Etsy.A friend of mine supports Brighton, and when he found out I was going to interview Graham Potter, he texted back with a question. Well, not so much a question as a plea. “Ask him about the morons that booed on Saturday night,” he says. “Does he realise that all sensible Brighton fans think he’s doing an incredible job and are very fond of him indeed?” Last Saturday, Brighton played Leeds at the Amex Stadium. It was a 0-0 draw, and although Brighton were by far the better side there was still a smattering of boos at full-time. They are ninth in the Premier League playing bold passing football, despite a wage bill that should put them comfortably in the bottom six. Until 2011, they were playing in League One at Withdean, an athletics track where the away fans had to watch the game through a discus cage. It felt scarcely believable back then that Brighton would be getting booed off despite being a top-half Premier League side. But here we are. “Well, it’s nice to hear,” Potter says when he learns of my friend’s encouragement. “And I’m not naive: I know you can’t please everybody. But the majority of people understand where the club’s come from. There’s a lot of good things happening here. But as we know in football, if the result doesn’t go the way you want, the emotion is raw.” In many ways, managing expectations has been the theme of Potter’s career. When you have built your name on small, incremental improvement – taking Östersund from the Swedish fourth tier to the Europa League in seven years, stabilising Swansea City in the Championship, carefully establishing Brighton as a Premier League force – the bigger picture tends to get overlooked a little. By most measures, Brighton are furiously, miraculously defying gravity. But in extreme closeup, it looks an awful lot like stasis. Potter is in his third season as a Premier League manager, and his success has seen him linked with all sorts of other jobs: Everton, Tottenham, even England. But listen to him speak about the “noise” and “nonsense” of Big Football, the eternal search for work-life balance, the importance of culture and happiness, and you don’t really get the impression of a guy aching to go 12 rounds with Daniel Levy any time soon. No quick fixes, no short cuts, a fierce intellect with a strong human touch: this is the Potter Principle, and you have to say it’s working out for him so far. This much is apparent when I ask, with a certain bluntness, why Brighton didn’t just spend the Ben White money on a striker. White was sold to Arsenal for £50m in the summer and for a team consistently underperforming their xG (expected goals), which suggested an inability to put away the chances they were creating, it seemed like a no-brainer. Witness the draw with Leeds, in which first-choice forward Neal Maupay missed two golden chances. “It sounds easy,” scoffs Potter. “But even if you had that money to spend, that type of transfer fee requires a certain salary, which then affects the whole of your football club. That’s one thing. Then there’s lots of £40m Premier League players that haven’t succeeded. It’s not a guarantee. And there’s a lot of good players in this league that haven’t scored as many as Neal. So it feels a bit simplistic.” Does xG mean anything to him? “Not really. Well, yes and no. It’s a piece of performance data that can tell you something. But you have to be careful as well. It doesn’t tell the whole story. It’s not the truth. It’s just a piece of information.” And as if to prove the point, Maupay popped up on Wednesday night with a brilliant 88th-minute equaliser (xG of shot: 0.11) to rescue a point at West Ham. The point is that anyone can mine the data and tell you a seductive story. But what Brighton are trying to do is more than a story: it’s a way of doing things, a way of playing football, a way of treating people. “You’ve always got to provide a reason why players would come and play for your football club,” Potter says. “And if it’s just finances, then we’ll hit our ceiling, because 95% of the league’s determined by finance. “So you have to provide something else: an identity, a style that players can identify with. Tariq Lamptey, Rob Sánchez, Jakub Moder, Leo Trossard: they’re getting opportunities to develop their careers, improve their own situation. And then if we’re going to go down that path, we need our supporters to really be on board with that.” From the outside Potter may cut an implacable, unflappable sort of figure. But as with everyone there are flaws in the edifice. He admits to feeling self-doubt at times. He wishes he read or meditated a little more, but 50 games a season and three young children have largely put a stop to that. What he does strive for is work-life balance. “We like to dehumanise footballers and coaches,” he says. “Culturally, the coach has to be the first in and last out, working long hours, and I understand where that comes from. But it’s about balance, being able to see the bubble for what it is. See the noise for what it is.” So on Sunday, rather than sitting in a dark room watching tapes of the Leeds game, he took the day off and spent time with his family. He’s kept the same circle of friends from when he was growing up in Solihull. “They don’t care about the Premier League,” he says. “They don’t care about this nonsense.” Hearing Potter speak like this, you wonder whether, for all the satisfaction and security football has given him, he occasionally wonders whether it is entirely worth it. It’s a question many of us grapple with on a philosophical level: when you think about the Qatar World Cup and climate change and the racism and the greed, is football still a force for good in the world? Was it ever? Can it be? Potter gives the question some thought. “It’s a transient thing, isn’t it?” he eventually replies. “At any point in time, there’ll be things you can be really proud of. Positive emotions. The sense of connection and love that I think football still brings. And at the same time, there are challenges in football that we face in other areas of society and life. It’s never Shangri-la. But it’s not hell, either. “When we were going through the breakaway [the European Super League], that felt a bit strange. And then you see the reception that Claudio Ranieri got at Leicester the other day, which was quite a heartwarming moment. I guess it’s like life, you know. That’s why I like football. It’s a lot like life. Sometimes you can’t see the next good thing, and something comes and lifts you up. And just when you think you’ve got it sorted, there’s a kick in the backside coming your way.” Does he ever find the lack of control maddening? In this country at least, we still cling to the trope of the manager as a sort of all-powerful deity: the megalomaniacal obsessive who bends the game to his will. And yet to watch the Leeds game was to be reminded of all the things a manager does not control. The players, the bounce of the ball, the referee, the conditions, the finances. “It’s an interesting one,” he says. “Culturally, we think we should be able to control it. But the reality is there’s a million things that are uncontrollable. “Because football fundamentally is a players’ game. It’s not a coaches’ game. You can’t stop every five minutes and make adjustments. You can do some stuff on the sideline, but that’s just for show, really. Mostly the players have to take responsibility.” Perhaps, in a way, this is the underrated part of management. Because the point at which you recognise you can’t do it all, you also recognise that you need the input of others. Potter is often described as a “people person”, and Brighton are a club crafted largely in the same image: decent folk pulling in a common cause. “That’s one of the reasons I came to this football club,” Potter says. “Not accepting that 95% of the league is determined by finance. Aiming high. Creating an environment that’s special. “It’s not about having a bunch of nice guys here. You want different people, different perspectives, different characters. But it’s about whether you can share some sort of common ground in terms of how to be, how to act, how to respect each other, how to communicate. How to deal with disappointment. How to deal with success.” So far in 2021, Brighton have beaten Manchester City and Liverpool, beaten Tottenham and Leicester, drawn with Chelsea and Arsenal. Potter has gone from the coach at Leeds Metropolitan University to the top half of the Premier League in little more than a decade. Is it finally time for this most tactful and self-effacing of coaches to admit that he might actually, you know, be good? “The logical part of my brain will,” he says. “There’s still a part of the brain where there’s always a little bit of doubt. ‘Are you good enough?’ That type of stuff. But less and less. As you gain more experience, more time in the job, you realise that there’s certain things you do that are … competent.” Well, it’ll do for now. * Graham Potter is supporting the American Express Shop Small campaign which encourages the nation to support their local small businesses on Small Business Saturday (4 December) and beyond. For more information visit americanexpress.co.uk/shopsmallWalks taken by people in UK woodlands save £185m a year in mental health costs, according to a report. Spending time in nature is known to boost mental health, but the report by Forest Research is the first to estimate the amount that woodlands save the NHS through fewer GP visits and prescriptions, reduced hospital and social service care, and the costs of lost days of work. The research also calculated that street trees in towns and cities cut an additional £16m a year from antidepressant costs. The researchers believe the true savings are likely to be significantly higher. The report shows the importance of woodlands, they said, which the government is already aiming to expand to tackle the climate and wildlife crises. The coronavirus pandemic has increased the prevalence of mental illness, and the NHS was already increasing its spending on treatments. This includes green social prescribing, where activities including nature visits are used to help sufferers. In polling by Forest Research, more than 90% of respondents said woodlands were important to them in reducing stress. “If people spend 30 minutes a week in trees, doing whatever they like – walking, sitting meditating – there are noticeable benefits,” said Vadim Saraev at Forest Research. “It’s amazing how small that is in terms of time. You will feel much better than if you spent the 30 minutes looking at social media.” “After a couple of years of researching this, I really became a convert,” he said. “When you walk through woods, it’s always different. It also feels fresher there, the air is less polluted and you are totally cut off from traffic noise. At the moment, if you pay a little attention, you will notice the rustling of leaves and interesting musty smells of wet earth and wood.” Sir William Worsley, the chair of the Forestry Commission, which funded the report, said: “It demonstrates just how vital it is to invest in healthy trees and woodlands.” It makes medical, economic and environmental sense, he said. The government has committed to ramping up tree planting to 30,000 hectares (74,100 acres) a year by 2024, but last year just 13,300 hectares were planted. The Woodland Trust warned recently that the UK’s native woodlands are reaching a crisis point, with just 7% in good condition. “Forest Research have been leading the way in terms of estimating the economic values of the hard-to-measure health and wellbeing benefits of woodlands and forests for some years and this report adds further important new insights,” said Mathew White at the University of Vienna in Austria. “It would be great in the future if the team could estimate the effects of different types of woodlands, eg conifer plantations versus old deciduous woodlands, given the clear implications for forest management.” Alistair Maltby, at the Woodland Trust, said: “If we want to maximise the benefits for people and society, we need more trees and woods that are both closer and more accessible. We urge the government to set a legal target for increasing tree cover.” The Forest Research report uses evidence of reduced depression and anxiety as a result of regular nature visits, as well as data on woodland visitor numbers, and prevalence of mental health conditions and the associated costs. The evidence included an Australian study, showing that visits to green spaces of 30 minutes or more during a week reduced overall rates of depression by 7%, and a UK study led by White that found a two-hour “dose” of nature a week significantly boosted wellbeing. The evidence on the benefits of street trees came from studies in the UK, the Netherlands and Germany. The researchers said the calculated savings were based on conservative estimates of mental health costs. These only included NHS treatment, did not account for any illness prevented by woodland visits, and used the minimum living wage to calculate the value of lost work days, which accounted for about half the overall costs. The estimated £185m cost savings are comparable to estimates of the value of all recreation, which the Office for National Statistics puts at £557m a year. Saraev said woodlands have value in their own right but that economic valuations aimed to make them relevant for policymakers: “If there is no value, it is not considered in decision making.” Many people visit woodlands at least once a year, according to Forest Research surveys: 63% in England and about 80% in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. More than a third of people in England and Northern Ireland visit at least several times a month, and half of those in Scotland. “Although many of us feel like hibernating in winter, getting outside in green spaces and making the most of the little daylight we get can really benefit both your physical and mental health,” said Stephen Buckley at the mental health charity Mind.Andrea Pinchen knows she is not everyone’s identikit view of a leading Premiership rugby union figure. “Let’s not beat around the bush,” says Leicester’s chief executive, reflecting on her lesser-spotted status as one of the league’s only two female chief executives. “I think a lot of people looked at me in a strange way. I totally understand why they would have that image because there aren’t that many women in sport at senior level.” Nor have many other Premiership CEOs, regardless of gender, had to prove their worth in the Middle East, rising through the ranks with Emirates from cabin crew member to become a specialist in aviation security. “I was very much used to working in a male environment, standing up in front of 50 male pilots talking to them about bombs and hijackings. Going into a rugby club wasn’t really that intimidating.” Her obvious relish for a challenge is certainly paying off in the east Midlands. When Pinchen took on her current role in May 2020, Leicester were still surveying the debris of a wretched decade, having avoided relegation only because of the salary cap indiscretions of Saracens (who also now possess a female chief executive in Lucy Wray). Now the Tigers are kings of the jungle again, leading the field by six points as they prepare for the visit of the champions Harlequins on Sunday. For the first time in three years Welford Road will be full and the club’s mood has been transformed. The credit clearly has to be shared with the head coach, Steve Borthwick, his staff, the players and a reshuffled board but Pinchen’s determination to ensure everyone is pulling in the same direction has been crucial. A wry laugh is also never far away, perhaps the most heartening Leicester news of all. In the grand old Tigers days it was a defining characteristic: hard and committed, yes, but down to earth and fun with it. Pinchen gives the impression of being all those things, having grown up locally and worked in the club’s ticket office as far back as 2004. At busy times she would think nothing of yelling at passing players to answer the phone, sometimes resulting in unsuspecting callers finding Martin Johnson on the other end of the line. Fast forward 17 years and “one of the things that surprised me most” was discovering the straight-talking, tough discussions she routinely had in business were less regular within her local rugby club. “Nobody enjoys having conversations about people’s performance [but] in my experience business people are a lot more used to that. You’re like: ‘Hold on, you’re supposed to be the big testosterone-filled guys, what’s happening?’” There was certainly much embarrassed stammering the day she visited the training ground at Oval Park, while still the club’s commercial director, and asked the then-coaching staff to share their key performance indicators. “At the time I was putting together a three-year commercial strategy and wanted to talk to the coaches about what their strategy was.” Subsequently she presented a report to the chairman, Peter Tom, calling for a more unified sense of direction. “Peter and I had a pretty honest conversation. I don’t purport to know the in and outs of rugby, that’s not my field, but from a business perspective there were some real areas where I thought we could add value.” Strategically, in short, the Tigers have been reborn. Four key values – Club First, Tough, Passionate, Driven – were sewn into the collar of the team shirt and Pinchen – “You can’t put ‘tough’ all over your branding if you’re not prepared to be it” – makes no attempt to gloss over Leicester’s stuck-in-a-rut past. “Let’s not shy away from the fact we were pretty much saved from relegation by what happened with Saracens. You’ve got to face facts rather than trying to ignore it and simply plugging along doing the same things. That way lies insanity. Of course we all want to win, otherwise we’d be doing something else. But what are the stepping stones to maintaining it? What happens if you lose a game at some point? You can’t just be floundering around saying: ‘My whole ethos is to win.’” The next big challenge for all is to confirm a fly-half successor to George Ford, who is off to Sale at the end of this season. “We wanted him to stay, there’s no secret to that. But he’s gone for family reasons which we totally respect.” But can a club who lost £1m a month during lockdown afford a top-drawer marquee replacement? “It’s not a case of: ‘George is leaving, we need to panic.’ The club’s finances are stable. We’ll make sure, as we always have on the rugby side, that we’re spending up to the cap and that we’re as strong as we can be.” It clearly helps that Pinchen and Borthwick are on the same page. She says she has learned a lot from him – “He’s an amazing person to work with, just in terms of how analytical his brain is” – and has a similarly strong work ethic. Days off – “what are they?” – are rare and the occasional jog from her home near Melton Mowbray is her most relaxing hobby. “My family understand how all-encompassing the job is. And it is, let’s make no bones about that. Sometimes that work-life balance is not always there. But given what the NHS frontline staff have been through recently, I won’t complain about being the CEO of Leicester Tigers. I feel very lucky.” As she also stresses, though, there remains a long way to go. “When you’ve got something as big as Leicester Tigers that doesn’t happen overnight. It’s not a case of: ‘Look at us, aren’t we great?’ We’re far from the finished article.” Among the fans, though, faith is returning. “This weekend is our first sell-out since 2018. Did we lose some support when things weren’t going so well? Yes, of course. Those ad hoc ticket purchases, you lose some of that. But our season-ticket holders have stuck with us through thick and thin. It’s really humbling to see the depth of support.” If nothing else Leicester will find out this Sunday precisely how much of their bounce they have regained. “Quins are the champions, they’re the benchmark,” says Pinchen, her voice hardening slightly. “It’s not an ambition of Leicester just to be there or thereabouts. We want to be at the business end of the table when it matters.”Since 4 December 2011 Casagrande has been living with a feeling of emptiness. Ten years on from the death of his former Brazil and Corinthians teammate Sócrates, he is still struggling to deal with the loss. “I miss talking to him,” he says. “I think about him many times a week, mainly when something good happens to me. He is the man that comes into my mind at these good moments. Sometimes I get my mobile to call him, but I remember that I can’t, that he isn’t here any more. I would like to share things with him – only with him. There are some issues that I can talk about only to him. It’s sad. I can’t say these things to others because no one will understand me like he did. No one was on the same frequency with me as he was.” Sócrates was the captain of Brazil’s memorable 1982 World Cup squad, but he was more than a footballer. He was the leader of Corinthians Democracy, a movement in the 80s that fought against Brazil’s military dictatorship, which tortured more than 20,000 people and murdered or disappeared almost 500 between 1964 and 1985. For six years Sócrates had balanced football with medical studies, playing locally for Botafogo before he graduated from the Universidade de São Paulo in 1977. He then joined Corinthians and his background was essential to Corinthians Democracy’s development. “Our movement was successful because of many points, but the most fundamental was Sócrates,” Casagrande says. “We needed a genius like him, someone politicised, smart and admired. He was a shield for us. Without him, we couldn’t have Corinthians Democracy. “But as a football team we needed to win, too. Imagine calling for democracy under a military dictatorship – to fail as a team was unthinkable. We needed to be better than everyone. If we didn’t play well and win, we would be killed by the dictatorship.” Casagrande and Sócrates played together for only three years but it was an intense period. Casagrande, the younger by nine years, broke into the Corinthians first team in 1982, sparking a partnership memorable on and above all off the field. “Our relationship wasn’t of father and son or like an older brother,” he says. “It was a history of love in which both of us were very happy; both received a lot of love. My relationship with Magrão [Sócrates’s nickname] was pure love. We were a good match because we were genuine – we had passion for each other.” The “history of love” is the name of the book, Sócrates &amp; Casagrande – uma história de amor, that Casagrande wrote with the journalist Gilvan Ribeiro in 2016. Corinthians Democracy gave a lot to Casagrande. He was passionate about the arts, and the movement opened doors for him to meet artists, musicians and politicians. His rebelliousness and ideas attracted widespread attention in 1982, when the group that helped topple the dictatorship was founded. “Win or lose, but always with democracy,” read a flag carried by the Corinthians team the following year. Casagrande is proud of what he did for the country and recognises it is hard to create a similar movement today. He considers it shameful, though, that few Brazilian players choose to speak out on issues beyond football nowadays. “Players prefer their mobile phones to anything else,” he says. “Everything is Instagram and social media. They don’t care about the people. They don’t have any identification with the Brazilian people. It’s the most alienated generation of all time because they are playing abroad and when they are here in Brazil they ignore the people, walking with earphones to not hear anything. Come on! Look at how we are living in Brazil. How is it possible to be silent?” Casagrande had a formative encounter with the military dictatorship in 1979 during a concert in São Paulo demanding amnesty for politicians, musicians and artists. The event ended after an invasion by police, who aggressively beat the crowd. “I was shocked because I was only 16 years old. We were there only calling for amnesty. No one was a criminal, no one had stolen anything, no one was a fugitive. So why did the police beat us? That was my first experience and I then understood that I needed to fight for my rights.” For a while after democracy was restored Casagrande stayed away from political discussion. With the progressive governments of Fernando Henrique Cardoso and Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, he lay low. But his attitude changed when Jair Bolsonaro launched his candidacy for president in 2018. “I can’t be silent today,” he says. “That’s impossible as I am one more victim of this terrible government. After 2018, I decided to stand up against Jair Bolsonaro because he attacked me on social media. He posted and edited a video on social media, a fake news, provoking me and calling on many people to insult me. Bolsonaro is a liar. He is a man who believes that he can do anything, that we don’t need to have any limits, that we can be homophobic, racist and anti-science.” Since then, Casagrande has been an enemy of the Brazilian government and its supporters. Whenever he posts something on the internet or says something against the president, he suffers a wave of attacks. “It’s torture, psychological torture; a dirty game,” he says. “I can’t say anything without many people insulting me on social media. The first time, I accessed my mobile phone and I got a shock. I received a deluge of attacks. In the beginning it hurt me – it hurt a lot. They called me drugged, drunk, addicted and said that I had used cocaine when I wrote the text, that I was crazy, that I finance drug trafficking. But today I don’t care. I think it is proof that I have overcome my problem. They are wasting their time attacking me because I don’t care about them. “I don’t care if many players support Bolsonaro. That’s the democracy I fought for in the past. It’s a right. My problem is when you attack our democracy, our values, gay people, black people and don’t have respect for each other. We are living in a period that is worse than the military dictatorship. I’ve never seen what is going on today before. We are facing a disaster in all aspects: social, political, environmental and economical. There is a hate culture.” Asked what Sócrates would be doing if he were alive, Casagrande has no doubt. “He would be on the streets organising protests against Bolsonaro. I’m sure of it. He would be more active than me because I have some limits. TV Globo never said anything to me, but I can’t do a few things because I am a voice of the company. It would be nice to walk side by side with Magrão fighting for democracy again.” In the 90s, the paths of Casagrande and Sócrates parted for a specific reason. Casagrande jumped into drugs after retiring from football, revealing in his autobiography the long trips with cocaine, heroin and alcohol. Sócrates never supported Casagrande over his involvement with drugs, though he too was an addict. Sócrates was an alcoholic, an addiction that took his life, from a septic shock. “Throughout my life, I created many excuses for our distance,” Casagrande says. “We never fought or argued, but we were suffering from our addictions. I was immersed in drugs. I didn’t want to live a normal life. Drugs make you isolate yourself from society, wanting only to use drugs. Alcohol is different, but you become boring; no one cares about you. It wasn’t my fault, neither his. We were very different from what we were when we met.” Casagrande reconciled with Sócrates in the last year of his friend’s life but laments that they did not have more time to live a new life together. “I have no doubt that I could have saved him because I’m a survivor, a living example of someone who overcame an addiction. Ten years ago, it was impossible because I was sick, addicted. But now I’m fine. I would show him that it is possible to grow older and live a good life. We could go to a library, discuss politics and drink a coffee. Yes, coffee, not beer, because some things are very different now.”Check your moles regularly is advice routinely trotted out by beauty journalists and dermatologists, but what, in practice, does it mean? The basics are that moles shouldn’t change in size or shape (take timestamped photos every three to four months and store them in a dedicated folder on your phone, so you can monitor any developments). Their rounded footprint should not become jagged or irregular; any changes in colour or sensitivity should be reported soonest to your GP. The NHS advises people to ask a pharmacist about moles, and it also has a mole care app. But in a Covid world it’s easy to ignore minor changes in favour of helping to lighten the NHS load. If you’ve convinced yourself that you’re making undue fuss it might be worth paying for a mole check service if you can afford it. Last month, I visited my local SK:N clinic for precisely that. My consultant, registered nurse Sophie Reading, conducts mole checks on about 50 patients a week, from those with one isolated freckle (a single mole examination costs £50) to those with a top-to-toe constellation of moles (£140 for a full body check). She, or a colleague, peers carefully through a magnifying loupe at each dot, spot or mound, separating fingers and toes, exploring roots of the hair, inside ears and anywhere else we might not think or manage to look. Despite seven Britons dying of melanoma each day, most skin cancers are less dangerous and treatable if caught early, and Reading has intercepted plenty of developing cases, as well as reassured many perfectly healthy patients suffering from undue anxiety (she says the problem is rife since the pandemic). Minor issues such as healthy mole removals are dealt with on site, whether by freezing, laser or excision. Complex or ambiguous findings are referred urgently to an NHS doctor and, where appropriate, to specialists for an emergency appointment usually within a fortnight. In any case, any concerning findings are photographed with a dermascope and sent to histology for investigation in the meantime. All remaining well, I’ll return in a year. Because, while standing legs apart in my pants while a stranger peered into my bum cellulite wasn’t my favourite moment of 2021, hearing that my handful of moles were healthily unremarkable was certainly one of them. May I remind you yet again that this whole sunscreen business really does pay off.In February 2020, I joined Mel Brooks at the Beverly Hills home of his best friend, the director and writer Carl Reiner, for their nightly tradition of eating dinner together and watching the gameshow Jeopardy!. It was one of the most emotional nights of my life. Brooks, more than anyone, shaped my idea of Jewish-American humour, emphasising its joyfulness, cleverness and in-jokiness. Compared with his stellar 60s and 70s, when he was one of the most successful movie directors in the world, with The Producers and Blazing Saddles, and later his glittering 2000s, when his musical adaptation of The Producers dominated Broadway and the West End, his 80s and 90s are considered relatively fallow years. But his 1987 Star Wars spoof, Spaceballs, was the first Brooks movie I saw, and nothing was funnier to this then nine-year-old than that nonstop gag-a-thon (forget Yoda and the Force; in Spaceballs, Mel Brooks is Yoghurt and he wields the greatest power of all, the Schwartz). I loved listening to Brooks and Reiner – whose films included The Jerk and The Man With Two Brains – reminisce about their eight decades of friendship in which, together and separately, they created some of the greatest American comedy of the 20th century. The deep love between them was palpable, with Brooks, then 93, gently prompting 97-year-old Reiner on some of his anecdotes. It was impossible not to be moved by their friendship, and hard not to feel anxiety about the prospect of one of them someday having to dine on his own. Only a month later, the US went into a lockdown. Then in June Reiner died, followed a few months later by Jeopardy!’s long-term host, Alex Trebek. I worried about Brooks. What was he doing with his evenings without even Jeopardy! for company? When his memoir, All About Me!, arrived in the post last month, my concerns were not assuaged. It is as sparkling and delightful as you’d expect from Brooks, full of great advice, such as how to get a studio head to give you more money for your film (catch them off-guard in the bathroom), and memories from the making of his gold-plated classic movies. But it’s also full of ghosts. Almost everyone he writes about is now dead: Reiner, Brooks’s wife Anne Bancroft, Richard Pryor, Gene Wilder, TV star Sid Caesar, comedian Dom DeLuise, film-maker Buck Henry – all gone. Living to 95, as Brooks now is, is not for the faint-hearted. I became even more concerned in the run-up to this, our second interview. Brooks has never needed much encouragement to get in front of a camera, but I was told that he wanted to talk by phone, not video chat, because he doesn’t want to be on a screen. As I dial his number, I am braced, unsure what to expect. “Hi! How are you? Thank you so much for your time, I appreciate it,” says Brooks, when he answers, sounding reassuringly chipper. I ask how he’s been during the pandemic. “Good and bad,” he says. “But my son Max – he’s a very good writer, he wrote The Zombie Survival Guide, World War Z, that’s Max – he said to me, ‘You’re stuck in the house during this pandemic, and sooner or later you want to write your memoir, so this is a good time to do it. Just write down all the stories you told me growing up.’ So I did that.” Did he find it painful or comforting to write about his past? He hesitates before replying: “A little of both. Yeah, a little of both. When I look back at people like Gene, who I loved so much and miss so much, and my adventures with Carl – you met him, you saw what a sweetheart of a guy he was, my best friend – and, of course, my wife who was my great love and support, it was hard to keep going sometimes.” Brooks is one of just 16 people in history to win an EGOT, short for an Emmy, a Grammy, an Oscar and a Tony (he has 11 of those in total, many for the 1967 film The Producers, or his 2001 Broadway adaptation). In 2009, President Obama gave him a Kennedy Center Honor, in recognition of his contribution to American culture, after he turned one down from President George W Bush in protest against the war in Iraq. (Brooks asked Obama if he could have two honors, to make up for the one he turned down. “Only one per customer,” Obama replied.) He has a star on the Walk of Fame on Hollywood Boulevard (although instead of leaving his own handprints on the pavement, he used a prosthetic hand with six fingers) and an American Film Institute (AFI) lifetime achievement award. As part of the AFI presentation, Clint Eastwood talked about how the western movie was a central part of the American identity. “And this is what Mel Brooks did to it,” he faux-snarled, and cut to the famous fart scene in Blazing Saddles. Brooks relates all this and more with relish in All About Me!. As he writes, “I’m not bragging. It’s just a fact.” Brooks’s story begins – as it did for so many American comedians of his generation, including Reiner – in a working-class Jewish family. “People say, ‘Out of the suffering of Jews, the need to laugh is critical for the survival of the race.’ But we didn’t become comics out of misery. We became comics because there are a lot of laughs in Jewish households. There’s always some wiseguy making cracks about how fat Aunt Sadie is, and it’s a need for that joy to continue that was the engine for all of us to become comics. It was fun being a little Jewish boy in a household with three older brothers and my mother; my aunt and my grandmother living next door,” he says. He was born Melvin Kaminsky and grew up in the Brooklyn tenements. His father died of kidney disease when he was only two, and even as an adult, when Brooks would get a big laugh doing standup at Radio City Music Hall, he would think: “I wish my father could have heard that laugh.” His mother compensated by lavishing love on him, singing the Bing Crosby song You Must Have Been a Beautiful Baby as she dressed him on cold winter mornings. He knew it so well he sang it to his teacher, and she made him sing it to the whole school. Is that when he caught the performing bug? “I think so. I loved it – their applause and their whistles. I was only five, but I knew what I had to be, to do that strange thing of getting up in front of a bunch of people and make them applaud and laugh,” he says. He got plenty of inspiration for laughter from his mother. “She made me keep lookout for when my grandmother would come into the apartment. When she did, I’d whisper, ‘It’s Grandma!’ and my mother would run around the kitchen and hide anything treif [non-kosher] like ham, because my brothers liked ham-and-cheese sandwiches. And then she’d sit at the table with a calm smile on her face,” he laughs. This scene, with its caperishness verging on slapstick, all wrapped up with a gleefully Jewish twist, could have come straight out of a Brooks movie. “I remember always being funny,” he writes in his book, and this was partly to fend off the bullies at school, who were all much taller than him. Comedy, Brooks writes, was his weapon. As a teenager, he got a job as a busboy working at a resort in the Catskills, a holiday destination so popular with Jews that it was known as “the Borscht Belt”. He was quickly spotted by the hotel’s owner as someone who could entertain the guests round the pool. It was about this time that he became “Melvin Brooks”, because he also dreamed of being a drummer, and it was easier to fit Brooks – a homage to his mother’s maiden name Brookman – on a drum kit than Kaminsky. But his budding drumming and comedy career was interrupted when he was 18 and he followed his three older brothers into the army to fight in the second world war. (Miraculously, all four boys survived.) Brooks was shipped out to Normandy, where he swept for landmines, and he fought in the Battle of the Bulge. Over the years, Brooks has been criticised by some for making fun of Hitler in his movies and treating him as a joke. But not many of his critics literally fought against Hitler in the war. Who would know better than Brooks that comedy is a weapon? After the war, Brooks met Sid Caesar, who had also worked in the Borscht Belt and was now a comedian in need of a writer. Brooks wrote for Caesar’s popular TV variety shows Your Show of Shows and Caesar’s Hour, and he worked alongside a bunch of fellow young unknowns: Reiner, Neil Simon and, later, Woody Allen. Brooks scoffs at my suggestion that, between them, they coined modern Jewish-American humour – “We were just part of the swim” – but they certainly popularised it, and in turn, it helped to popularise all of them. What was Allen like to work with? “Woody was so young then. I was about 24 when I started, but Woody must have been 19. But so wise, so smart. He had this tricky little mind and he’d surprise you, which is the trick of being a good comedy writer. That was Woody – always making a left turn. Then I moved to California and he was in New York, but every once in a while, we’d send each other letters. I’d say how great his movie was, he’d say how great mine was – that kinda thing,” Brooks says. But the writer Brooks was closest to was Reiner. Pretty much from the moment they met, the two men became best friends, and Brooks loved to make him laugh. Just to amuse one another, they came up with their routine of The 2000 Year Old Man, in which Reiner would ask Brooks, the man who had lived through two millennia, about his life, and Brooks would riff answers: Reiner: Did you know Jesus? Brooks: Thin lad, right? Wore sandals? Hung around with 12 other guys? They always came into my store. Never bought anything, just asked for water. It progressed from being their private joke to their party trick to, in 1960, a successful series of comedy albums that won them a Grammy. Whether The 2000 Year Old Man was recalling the Crucifixion or the French Revolution, he always spoke in the same accent, which sounded a lot like a Yiddish-inflected Brooklyn accent from the early 20th century. “I wanted to preserve that dialect. When I was a little kid, it was all over the place, but then suddenly, it was kind of gone. Nobody spoke Yiddish any more, that wonderful crazy language. Like, English has ‘chide’, but it can’t compare to [the Yiddish translation] ‘kibbitz’,” Brooks says. For Brooks, the real joy of The 2000 Year Old Man was spending time with Reiner. “Any time I could surprise him and really break him up, I knew it was funny. He was the greatest audience. Ahhh, I miss him so much, Hadley. He would call me in the evenings and say ,‘Come over, come over! I got a big stuffed cabbage for us!’ Even at the end he was always Carl: funny, sweet-natured, warm and just the most wonderful friend a person could ever have. People know how good he was, but not how great,” Brooks says. Can he watch Jeopardy! – which currently has a series of guest hosts – without Reiner sitting next to him? “It’s over for me. All the stuff I used to do with Carl is still around, but I don’t enjoy it if I don’t share it with Carl. It’s as simple as that.” I tell Brooks that I recently interviewed Steve Martin, with whom Reiner frequently collaborated, and he said Reiner’s memorial happened over Zoom due to the pandemic. I can almost hear Brooks wince down the line. “Oh. Yeah. So bad. Anyway, I love Steve – so wise and witty,” he says, changing the subject. Soon after Brooks and Reiner released The 2000 Year Old Man album, Brooks divorced his first wife, with whom he had three children. On a whim, he tagged along with a friend to go to hear the actor Anne Bancroft rehearse for a performance. Brooks walked into the dark theatre, and saw Bancroft in the spotlight. “Anne Bancroft, I love you!” he shouted. “Who the hell are you?” she shouted back. “I’m Mel Brooks! Nobody you’ve ever heard of!” “Wrong!” she replied. “I’ve got your 2000 Year Old Man record with Carl Reiner and it’s great.” What was it about her that made him fall so fast? “She was smart. She was a short stop: she would get the ground ball, toss it to second and make a double play,” he says, making the most romantic baseball metaphor I’ve ever heard. “I could never bamboozle her – she always knew what was going on. Also, she was downright, flat-out beautiful!” For the next week, he made sure to turn up wherever she was. “It’s kismet!” he’d say, as they bumped into one another at yet another restaurant. “No, you’re stalking me! If you want to see me, why don’t you just ask me on a date?” she replied. So he did, she said yes, and that, for the Italian Roman Catholic girl and Brooklyn Jewish boy, was that. It was only after he met Bancroft that Brooks’s movie career took off. “I’d still be a TV comedy writer if it weren’t for Annie, because she always thought there was nothing I couldn’t do, no rhyme I couldn’t make, no joke I couldn’t pull off. She was my biggest fan,” he says with feeling. With Bancroft’s encouragement, Brooks wrote The Producers, his classic story about two men who try to put on a theatrical flop and inadvertently make a hit, and he talked the studio into letting him direct, despite never having directed a movie. He cast Zero Mostel as Max Bialystock and Gene Wilder as Leo Bloom. “The studio said, ‘Get rid of the curly-haired guy, he’s not handsome enough and he looks a little nuts,’ meaning Gene, of course. And I said, ‘It’s done, you’ll never see him again.’ That’s another movie-making tip: just say yes to whatever the executives say, and then stick to your vision. When it’s a hit, they’ll be happy,” Brooks says. It was and they were, and then there was no stopping Brooks. Over the next decade he wrote and directed five more movies, each one a hit, including Blazing Saddles (1974), Young Frankenstein (also 1974) and High Anxiety (1977, a riff on Hitchcock movies, which Hitchcock loved). Suddenly Brooks, who hadn’t been able to afford pay for Bancroft’s meals when they were dating, was one of the most successful directors of the 1970s. He then founded his production company, Brooksfilms, so he could produce movies that weren’t the kind of comedies audiences expected from him. These included The Elephant Man, for which he hired the near unknown David Lynch as director, and The Fly, in which he insisted on casting the then unknown Jeff Goldblum. People know how good Brooks is, but not how great. The support did not flow in one direction in Brooks and Bancroft’s relationship: it was only after they got married that Bancroft won a Tony and then an Oscar for her performance in The Miracle Worker. During the course of their marriage, she accumulated four further Oscar nominations including for Mrs Robinson in The Graduate. So he must have encouraged her, too, I say. “Yes, but she didn’t need it. Like I said, she was a short stop, always playing on the infield,” he says, meaning she knew how to look after herself. “I was so lucky to have her, and I was very lucky that together we made Max.” Bancroft was 40 when Max was born, by which point she’d given up hope that she could have a child. He was their miracle baby, and with his father’s features and mother’s colouring he still looks strikingly like both his parents. These days, it’s 49-year-old Max – and his wife and son – whom Brooks often goes to for dinner. During lockdown, he and Max made funny videos, which Max tweeted, about the importance of social distancing and voting for Biden, and it’s not hard to imagine that Brooks might have once done those with Reiner. Brooks’s book is mainly about his work as opposed to his personal life: “Personal means personal, and I don’t want to spill the beans,” he says. But he couldn’t resist sticking in a few anecdotes about happy holidays he took with Bancroft, dinners they hosted, their weekends away with the Reiners, and laughing, always laughing. Did they ever fight? “We fought a lot. One time, I left the house after a terrible fight and I checked into a hotel at midnight and at about three in the morning I called her and said,‘You still up?’ She said yes. I said, ‘I’m coming home.’ The people at the desk said, ‘That was a short stay.’ But I couldn’t spend the whole night without being with her,” he says. Bancroft died from uterine cancer in 2005, at the age of 73, yet Brooks makes no mention of this in the book. “No, that still hurts too much,” he says. Does he ever watch her movies? “I don’t decide to turn on one of her movies, but if one is on when I turn on the TV, then I’m caught, and I’ll stay until the end and cry. I’ll see her energy, her joie de vivre. She was just amazing. I don’t think there was anybody better,” he says quietly. It was Bancroft who convinced Brooks he could write the songs when he decided to turn The Producers into a Broadway musical, even though he had never scored a show before. “She said, ‘Just write the songs, they’re in you! You’re the Jewish George M Cohan,’” Brooks says. (Cohan was the early 20th-century songwriter behind Give My Regards to Broadway and Yankee Doodle Dandy.) Bancroft was right, and the original Broadway production, starring Nathan Lane and Matthew Broderick, won 12 Tonys in 2001, more than any other show ever. When Hamilton won 11 in 2016, Brooks quietly cheered that The Producers still held the record. Does his competitive spirit still burn bright at 95? “It’s always there. When I saw Hamilton I wrote, ‘It’s the best musical ever on Broadway (except for The Producers),’” he cackles. “That’s how it is in show- business. It’s always, ‘You’re good – but you’re not me!’” But that’s not how it was with you, Reiner and Bancroft, I say. The three of you were each other’s biggest fans. “That’s true, that’s true,” he says, quiet again. Brooks used to love meeting his fans and didn’t even mind when they would interrupt his meal in a restaurant, where he was invariably dining with several dozen of his closest friends. But now he does mind: “They crowd around me and breathe on me and give me their pens. It’s just too dangerous. So I don’t go out for meals until [the pandemic] is gone,” he says, and for the first time he sounds not just alone but vulnerable. I ask why he didn’t want to talk by video chat. “Ach! Because I don’t want to have to worry about two things – how I look and how I sound. I just want to be free to sit and talk. And we did that, didn’t we?” We did. “Right! Good!” he says, back to his puckish self. “So look, next time I make it to beautiful London, that city that I love, we’ll go out for dinner together, OK? It’s a deal!” The shadows grow long in the twilight, but the sun hasn’t set yet. • All About Me! by Mel Brooks is published by Cornerstone. To support The Guardian and Observer, order your copy from guardianbookshop.com.Along with tens of thousands of university workers at 58 institutions across the UK, I have been on strike for three days this week over pensions, pay and conditions. For workers at Goldsmiths this national strike has fallen in the middle of an epic, local three-week strike of our own – over management proposals to sack 52 staff, as part of a cost-cutting plan financed by big banks. The national action and our local strike are connected: the factors that led to a vote for strike action by more than 70% of University and College Union (UCU) members nationally are the same ones that have produced a dramatic confrontation at Goldsmiths. Indeed, the situation at Goldsmiths, a small University of London college specialising in arts, humanities and social sciences, could be a window on to the future of higher education nationally: a future of casualisation, swingeing cuts and the possibility of troubling interventions from financial institutions. The national dispute encompasses a wide range of elements, the most high-profile of which is pensions: like public sector workers before them, university staff face an attack on our defined-benefit retirement schemes. The employer, Universities UK, is attempting to cut our pensions by more than 30%, using a reportedly flawed valuation taken at a low point in the economic and social crisis caused by the pandemic. The dispute amounts to a cluster of grievances over working conditions known as the “four fights”: pay, equalities, workload and casualisation. Higher education is one of the most heavily casualised sectors in the UK, with two-thirds of researchers and half of teaching staff employed on fixed-term (ie temporary) contracts. For many younger academics it is casualisation that has spurred us to take action in the national dispute. I spent seven years on seven different casual contracts across three institutions before I got my first permanent position at Goldsmiths this summer. Many of these contacts are desperately low paid; at times I was taking home just £2,000 a year from teaching, and having to work three jobs to survive. But it is also the insecurity that is crippling: it is impossible to plan your career trajectory and life in general without knowing if you’ll be in work next year. Casualised staff are also the first to be laid off in a crisis: Goldsmiths attempted to release nearly 500 of us at the start of the pandemic last spring, though we fought back. The national dispute is the result of what has been called “a decade of marketisation” in higher education. And it is marketisation – the move to turn education from a public service into a commodity – that laid the conditions for our local dispute at Goldsmiths. The overhaul of higher education funding in 2010 by the coalition government, particularly the removal of most direct government funding for courses, meant universities became heavily reliant on the volatile and unpredictable stream of income from student tuition fees. Humanities departments outside of the elite universities have been under pressure ever since, with several (such as politics and history at Kingston) being shut down altogether. Universities have sought to cut staff costs through redundancies and increased use of casualised contracts. The 2010 reforms also empowered a new generation of university senior managers who see their role as combining “streamlining” and cost-cutting measures with management speak about social justice and inclusion. Goldsmiths’ senior management is archetypal in this respect, with the warden, Frances Corner, dressing up a 2019 plan to axe staff as part of a mission to “secur[e] our legacy as a beacon of progressive, critical thought and in the vanguard of social justice”. Goldsmiths’ latest move in this direction involves a plan to cut 52 jobs across professional services, English and creative writing, and history courses, centralising administration and likely cutting courses in the process. An alarming aspect of the plan is the mooted role of the banks: Lloyds and NatWest are thought to have insisted on reductions in staff costs as a condition of loans given to the university. If this is the case, it raises the worrying prospect of private banks dictating terms to a public university: an eerie echo of Gary Shteyngart’s 2010 novel Super Sad True Love Story, which imagined a character “studying art &amp; finance at HSBC-Goldsmiths”. The possibility of an alliance of cost-cutting senior management and finance capital has provoked a heartening response from a militant union branch and a politicised student body: 86% of Goldsmiths’ UCU members, on a 70% turnout, voted to strike. The three-week period of industrial action has featured a varied programme of teach-outs run jointly by students and staff, a march on local branches of Lloyds and NatWest, and a huge solidarity rally addressed by former shadow chancellor John McDonnell. Unless marketisation can be resisted at a national level, the situation at Goldsmiths – in which funding volatility linked to the 2010 reforms has allowed banks to exert influence – will become much more common. These are two struggles we have to win. Jacob Mukherjee is a lecturer in media, communications and cultural studies, and co-secretary of Goldsmiths UCUAs you preside over the bewildering and nonsensical inconsistency of mask-wearing in schools, I thought I might distract you with another matter of great importance: the behaviour of Ofsted inspectors. As all of us involved in schools in England know, we work in a territory policed by a triumvirate: Ofsted, the league tables and the Sats results. There are no Covid-like press conferences where representatives of these three stand at lecterns being quizzed by journalists. Why not? After all, at key moments in the year (like GCSE Handwringing Day or International Performance Comparison and Sneering Day) education in schools is presented as if it were a pandemic of decline. Perhaps we are supposed to believe that the three parts of the triumvirate work independently of each other, doing good, in the manner of Oxfam, Christian Aid and Children in Need, though with you at the helm. But if you had wanted to invent a set-up that was as undemocratic as possible and as unrepresentative of the people working in it, you’d be hard pushed to beat it. Right now Ofsted is causing particular concern. Did you see last week’s Guardian article, ‘I can’t go through it again’: headteachers quit over brutal Ofsted inspections, and the readers’ letters that followed? If you missed them, please take a look. They paint a picture of a profession in distress. Headteachers say Ofsted inspectors are refusing to take into account the effects of Covid on schools. The head of Lancaster Royal grammar school, Dr Chris Pyle, says that some recent Ofsted reports “exclude all specific references to the pandemic”. As I’d hope you would acknowledge, the impact of the illness itself, the absences, the casualties, the lockdown and the online teaching has been a trauma felt acutely by school communities. Of what benefit can it be for Ofsted to turn up at a school and trample over people who have experienced such high stress and, in some cases, loss and bereavement? The fact is this high-handed approach is bred by the structure and terms of reference of Ofsted. The idea that a judge, prosecution and jury arrive one day at a school, at short notice, conduct a trial and then leave is a poor way to run education. In my school visits these days, I also rush in and out – though usually I give them a bit more notice of my arrival! But I’m not inspecting teachers, I’m doing that very non-Ofsteddy thing of coming in to support teachers and pupils. While I’m there, I often hear from teachers about Ofsted visits. The one theme I hear over and over again is that they feel the inspectors were not sympathetic to the specific conditions of the school. It’s as if inspectors come briefed with a notion that teachers are bad people making excuses for their own incompetence. So the report that some inspectors don’t want to hear about the experience of Covid came as no surprise to me. One headteacher told me an Ofsted inspector complained that the Year 6 results were showing a significant decline. The headteacher pointed out that the dip in scores coincided with the sudden arrival of a cohort of refugee children, none of whom spoke English. In other words, the composition of the class had changed between one set of scores and the next. Though the refugee children had made huge advances in the few months they had been here, the effect on the data was that the scores were “low” in an absolute sense. What did the inspector say to the headteacher? That it was “no excuse”. In Ofsted’s world, data can exist independently of the people being measured. Please, Mr Zahawi, listen to the teachers and headteachers in the Guardian article and the letters. The system is not benefiting teachers, pupils or families, and it’s all predicated on the idea that the only way to improve education is through top-down hectoring. How interesting to see that your government is trying to cope with Covid by encouraging people to choose the right path, whether that be the wearing of masks, getting vaccinated or holding parties. This approach is much preferred, I’ve heard ministers saying on the radio, to making such measures compulsory. And yet when it comes to education, you and your colleagues drop this libertarian approach and opt for the big stick. Tell us: why should education be excluded from your libertarian methods? We really do have to make our minds up whether we think education should be about consent or coercion. Here we are, in the midst of two crises threatening humanity: disease and climate change, and the best we can come up with for schools is the authoritarian triumvirate. Does it ever give you pause for thought that a coercive system might not be the best way to foster creative and questioning minds, the kind of minds we desperately need to solve humanity’s problems? Yours, Michael RosenIt’s a glorious late autumn day at Herne Bay high school in Kent, and boys and girls in red tops are playing sport on neat artificial pitches, but the principal, Jon Boyes, is looking into the distance, pointing out a piece of land on the other side of the road. If the local authority could be persuaded to buy it, he says, maybe he could squeeze in a much-needed new sixth-form centre. The school, a secondary modern – a non-selective school in a selective authority – is heavily oversubscribed, and a huge housing development next to the school is about to bring yet more pupils to the door. While local grammar schools have had permission to expand in recent years, however, there isn’t ready cash for necessary building works at Herne Bay high school. The irony of the situation is not lost on Boyes. Several of the local grammar schools can’t fill their places with pupils who’ve passed the Kent entrance test and are instead taking large numbers on appeal. Meanwhile, Herne Bay high is turning away significant numbers: it’s meant to take 258 11-year-olds each year but actually takes 280. Nationally, grammars have been allowed to expand; a handful of authorities, including Kent, remain fully selective, while several others are partially so. So are more children in those areas reaching the required standard? Or is it getting easier to go to a selective school? The Guardian questioned all 162 remaining grammar schools in England about their recent admissions numbers through a freedom of information request, which also went to relevant local authorities, and received figures for 143 for the past five years. The results show an interesting pattern. Those 143 schools grew by 5.4% – about 1,200 pupils in total – but the numbers taking the 11-plus test didn’t keep pace; they grew by just 2.4%, in a period when the numbers of 11-year-olds were also rising. How did the grammars manage to expand while still apparently requiring children to pass the same tests? The Kent example can shed light on the issue. Of seven east Kent grammars that take pupils from Herne Bay, three have expanded since 2016. Yet not all are full – and all but one are taking significant numbers of pupils who didn’t pass the 11-plus test. The range of ways in which Kent grammars find pupils who didn’t pass the controversial test is impressive. About 20% pass the test first time. A further 4% – about 600 each year – are then offered grammar school places on the basis of appeals by their primary headteachers to panels chaired by grammar heads. Another tranche win places following parental appeals – a further 425 this year. In addition, children living in Dover or Folkestone can sit a second, local 11-plus test: in 2017-19, six out of 10 children taking that test passed. Six out of the seven grammars that serve Herne Bay took pupils this year who had failed the 11-plus, after parental appeals – 10% of their intake. Across Kent, 14 grammar schools that have expanded are taking pupils in this way, and 35% of 11-plus applicants in the county now go to grammar school – that’s at least 10% more than are meant to. Meanwhile, dozens of local Herne Bay children have to go elsewhere, to non-selective schools. Boyes says this is discriminatory: his is the only school in this coastal town and most pupils who can’t get in have to go to Canterbury, seven miles away. “A high proportion will be from disadvantaged families, just because that’s the way it works,” he says. “Most students who go to grammar schools come from the kind of family where they make an active choice to travel and have the means to do so. That isn’t the case for students who can’t get into their local high school.” While Kent grammars fill spaces with pupils who haven’t passed the test, different means have been adopted elsewhere. In Buckinghamshire – where schools were unable to fill places with pupils from inside the county and were being forced to take “test tourists” from elsewhere – the solution was to lower the pass mark. Over a 10-year period, numbers in the county’s 13 grammar schools rose by almost 300, or 14%. Information disclosed in response to freedom of information requests by a local campaigner, James Coombs, confirms what happened. The disclosure, a transcript from an employment tribunal involving the test provider, CEM, says Buckinghamshire’s grammar schools decided that while the published pass score would stay the same, the raw score required would change. As a result, a significantly higher number of children passed. In 2014, 27% of candidates were successful; by 2018 the figure was nearly 35%. “If grammar schools are making the test easier so they can expand, this must come at the expense of neighbouring comprehensives,” Coombs says. “Proving that is difficult because they withhold the raw test marks and mask any underlying changes through ‘standardisation’.” Between 2010 and 2020, grammars increased admissions nationally by 24%, while the overall number of state-educated children increased by 13%, an analysis of official data by Coombs shows. Dr Nuala Burgess, the chair of the Comprehensive Future campaign group, believes pass marks were lowered in other areas around the country. “It’s happening in a number of areas,” she says. “This just isn’t fair – they are riding on the myth of a reputation that’s unwarranted.” Admitting large numbers on appeal, as schools in Kent do, is bound to discriminate in favour of pupils from middle-class families, she says. “I would like to ask those grammar schools: are they taking those pupils from disadvantaged families? We know a large proportion of those in grammars tend to be more affluent.” Ian Widdows, the founder of the National Association of Secondary Moderns and a former secondary modern headteacher in Lincolnshire, says lazy assumptions are made about grammar schools. Ofsted tends to judge grammar schools as “outstanding”, he says, but actually their high attainment scores are driven by their intakes rather than by their excellence. “It’s wrong to assume grammars are fundamentally better schools,” Widdows says. “There’s an assumption that if you get more kids to go to grammar schools, those kids will do better because they are going to better schools.” Widdows is working on a PhD that will examine performance measures of different types of schools: “Measures such as Progress 8, which is perceived to show value added, are really a measure of the intake of the school. Some secondary moderns work really hard but hit a glass ceiling because of their intakes.” A Department for Education spokesperson said it was providing far more money to expand non-selective schools than grammars, and that some extra places in grammars were earmarked for disadvantaged pupils: “Grammar schools are taking action to admit greater numbers of high-ability disadvantaged pupils, providing more children and families with the opportunity to receive an excellent education,” he said. Back in Herne Bay, however, attempts to provide for the town’s growing cohort of 11-year-olds – in both selective and non-selective schools – have stalled for lack of cash. In Canterbury, the Simon Langton grammar school for boys is building a £6m extension to house an extra class in each year, while a trust consisting of two grammars will open a new non-selective free school next year. A spokesperson for Kent county council says it has little control over school expansion – changes made in 2012 mean that schools and academies can increase their own intake without consulting the local authority, which only controls three selective and one non-selective secondary. Kent does not favour the introduction of extra tests in Dover and Folkestone, but these have been deemed legitimate by the Office of the Schools Adjudicator. “There is no difference in the process for expanding grammar and non-selective schools and it is clear that the two sectors need to expand at approximately the same rate in order to maintain the current balance,” he said. “Our grammar school selection process has two stages: the setting of a threshold based on test scores, which selects approximately 20% of the cohort, followed by the meeting of four headteacher panels to which schools can submit a wider range of data and examples of work for candidates who – for a variety of reasons – are thought to have unrepresentative scores.” Boyes says he is not opposed to selection: “But what I am against is the uneven playing field we’re on. If we’re in a system where 20% are meant to go to grammar school, then they should make it 20%. We need open, transparent choices, where all schools are supported to do the best for their kids. “I just want to be able to provide the best education for Herne Bay residents. I’m not after some sort of massive takeover, but just let’s have a level playing field, and let’s make sure everyone’s treated fairly.”The most anticipated, discussed and accessorised novel of the year was Sally Rooney’s Beautiful World, Where Are You (Faber), launched on a tide of tote bags and bucket hats. It’s a book about the accommodations of adulthood, which plays with interiority and narrative distance as Rooney’s characters consider the purpose of friendship, sex and politics – plus the difficulties of fame and novel-writing – in a world on fire. Rooney’s wasn’t the only eagerly awaited new chapter. Polish Nobel laureate Olga Tokarczuk’s magnum opus The Books of Jacob (Fitzcarraldo) reached English-language readers at last, in a mighty feat of translation by Jennifer Croft: a dazzling historical panorama about enlightenment both spiritual and scientific. In 2021 we also saw the returns of Jonathan Franzen, beginning a fine and involving 70s family trilogy with Crossroads (4th Estate); Kazuo Ishiguro, whose Klara and the Sun (Faber) probes the limits of emotion in the story of a sickly girl and her “artificial friend”; and acclaimed US author Gayl Jones, whose epic of liberated slaves in 17th-century Brazil, Palmares (Virago), has been decades in the making. Pat Barker’s The Women of Troy (Hamish Hamilton) continued her series reclaiming women’s voices in ancient conflict, while Elizabeth Strout revisited her heroine Lucy Barton in the gently comedic, emotionally acute Oh William! (Viking). Ruth Ozeki’s The Book of Form and Emptiness (Canongate), her first novel since the 2013 Booker-shortlisted A Tale for the Time Being, is a wry, metafictional take on grief, attachment and growing up. Having journeyed into the mind of Henry James in 2004’s The Master, Colm Tóibín created a sweeping overview of Thomas Mann’s life and times in The Magician (Viking). There was a change of tone for Colson Whitehead, with a fizzy heist novel set amid the civil rights movement, Harlem Shuffle (Fleet), while French author Maylis de Kerangal considered art and trompe l’oeil with characteristic style in Painting Time (MacLehose, translated by Jessica Moore). Treacle Walker (4th Estate), a flinty late-career fable from national treasure Alan Garner, is a marvellous distillation of his visionary work. At the other end of the literary spectrum, Anthony Doerr, best known for his Pulitzer-winning bestseller All the Light We Cannot See, returned with a sweeping page-turner about individual lives caught up in war and conflict, from 15th-century Constantinople to a future spaceship in flight from the dying earth. Cloud Cuckoo Land (4th Estate) is a love letter to books and reading, as well as a chronicle of what has been lost down the centuries, and what is at stake in the climate crisis today: sorrowful, hopeful and utterly transporting. And it was a pleasure to see the return to fiction of Irish author Keith Ridgway, nearly a decade after Hawthorn &amp; Child, with A Shock (Picador), his subtly odd stories of interconnected London lives. Damon Galgut’s first novel in seven years won him the Booker. A fertile mix of family saga and satire, The Promise (Chatto) explores broken vows and poisonous inheritances in a changing South Africa. Some excellent British novels were also listed: Nadifa Mohamed’s expert illumination of real-life racial injustice in the cultural melting pot of 1950s Cardiff, The Fortune Men (Viking); Francis Spufford’s profound tracing of lives in flux in postwar London, Light Perpetual (Faber); Sunjeev Sahota’s delicate story of family consequences, China Room (Harvill Secker); and Rachel Cusk’s fearlessly discomfiting investigation into gender politics and creativity, Second Place (Faber). Also on the Booker shortlist was a blazing tragicomic debut from US author Patricia Lockwood, whose No One Is Talking About This (Bloomsbury) brings her quizzical sensibility and unique style to bear on wildly disparate subjects: the black hole of social media, and the painful wonder of a beloved disabled child. Raven Leilani’s Luster (Picador) introduced a similarly gifted stylist: her story of precarious New York living is full of sentences to savour. Other standout debuts included Natasha Brown’s Assembly (Hamish Hamilton), a brilliantly compressed, existentially daring study of a high-flying Black woman negotiating the British establishment; AK Blakemore’s earthy and exuberant account of 17th-century puritanism, The Manningtree Witches (Granta); and Tice Cin’s fresh, buzzy saga of drug smuggling and female resilience in London’s Turkish Cypriot community, Keeping the House (And Other Stories). Caleb Azumah Nelson’s Open Water (Viking) is a lyrical love story celebrating Black artistry, while the first novel from poet Salena Godden, Mrs Death Misses Death (Canongate), is a very contemporary allegory about creativity, injustice, and keeping afloat in modern Britain. Further afield, two state-of-the-nation Indian debuts anatomised class, corruption and power: Megha Majumdar’s A Burning (Scribner) in a propulsive thriller, and Rahul Raina’s How to Kidnap the Rich (Little, Brown) in a blackly comic caper. Meanwhile, Robin McLean’s Pity the Beast (And Other Stories), a revenge western with a freewheeling spirit, is a gothic treat. When is love not enough? The summer’s word-of-mouth hit was Meg Mason’s Sorrow and Bliss (W&amp;N), a wisecracking black comedy of mental anguish and eccentric family life focused on a woman who should have everything to live for. Another deeply pleasurable read, The Hummingbird by Sandro Veronesi (W&amp;N, translated by Elena Pala), charts one man’s life through his family relationships. An expansive novel that finds the entire world in an individual, its playful structure makes the telling a constantly unfolding surprise. There was a colder take on family life in Gwendoline Riley’s My Phantoms (Granta): this honed, painfully witty account of a toxic mother-daughter relationship is her best novel yet. Two debut story collections pushed formal and linguistic boundaries. Dark Neighbourhood by Vanessa Onwuemezi (Fitzcarraldo) announced a surreal and inventive new voice, while in English Magic (Galley Beggar) Uschi Gatward proved a master of leaving things unsaid. Also breaking boundaries was Isabel Waidner, whose Sterling Karat Gold (Peninsula), a carnivalesque shout against repression, won the Goldsmiths prize for innovative fiction. It will take time for Covid-19 to bleed through into fiction, but the first responses are already beginning to appear. Sarah Hall’s Burntcoat (Faber) is a bravura exploration of art, love, sex and ego pressed up against the threat of contagion. In Hall’s version of the pandemic, a loner sculptor who usually expresses herself through monumental works is forced into high-stakes intimacy with a new lover, while pitting her sense of her own creativity against the power of the virus. A fascinating historical rediscovery shed light on the closing borders and rising prejudices of current times. In The Passenger by Ulrich Alexander Boschwitz (Pushkin, translated by Philip Boehm), written in 1938, a Jewish businessman tries to flee the Nazi regime. The J stamped on his passport ensures that he is met with impassive bureaucratic refusal and chilly indifference from fellow passengers in a tense, rising nightmare that’s timelessly relevant. Finally, a novel to transport the reader out of the present. Inspired by the life of Marie de France, Matrix by Lauren Groff (Hutchinson Heinemann) is set in a 12th-century English abbey and tells the story of an awkward, passionate teenager, the gifted leader she grows into, and the community of women she builds around herself. Full of sharp sensory detail, with an emotional reach that leaps across the centuries, it’s balm and nourishment for brain, heart and soul. • Browse all the featured books and save up to 15% at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Rafael Benítez has cited Arsenal’s recovery under Mikel Arteta as evidence of how patience can reward a new manager under pressure. But Arsenal enjoyed a 10-game unbeaten run before conceding four times against Liverpool whereas Everton, while enduring similar torment in the derby, are eight games without a win heading into what feels a critical game. Farhad Moshiri missed the derby and the abuse directed at the board afterwards but is expected to be present against the club he sold his stake in to purchase Everton. He, Benítez and the Everton team could be in for another uncomfortable night. Andy Hunter Monday 8pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Goodison Park Last season Everton 2 Arsenal 1 Referee Mike Dean This season G9 Y27 R0 3 cards/game Odds H 5-2 A 15-13 D 19-7 EVERTON Subs from Begovic, Tyrer, Lonergan, Godfrey, Holgate, Kenny, Branthwaite, Gomes, Gbamin, Iwobi, Gordon, Simms, Dobbin, Tosun, Whitaker, Onyango, Welch Doubtful Mina (hamstring) Injured Calvert-Lewin (thigh, 19 Dec), Davies (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y28 R1 Form LLDLLL Leading scorer Gray 4 ARSENAL Subs from Leno, Hein, Okonkwo, Chambers, Marí, Holding, Soares, Tavares, Elneny, Maitland-Niles, Pépé, Balogun, Martinelli, Nketiah, Lacazette Doubtful Leno (groin) Injured Xhaka (knee, 26 Dec), Kolasinac (ankle, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y18 1 Form WWWLWL Leading scorer Smith Rowe 5Patrick Bamford is scheduled to make his long-awaited return from a serious ankle injury but it remains to be seen whether Marcelo Bielsa will start his leading scorer last season on the pitch or the bench. Bielsa hopes to build on Tuesday night’s home win against Crystal Palace yet is not underestimating Brentford. “To win consecutively fortifies you,” said the Leeds manager. “But anyone who has seen Brentford this season will know they attack with six players and always want to keep the ball. That’s not common in any league.” Louise Taylor Sunday 2pm Venue Elland Road Last season n/a Referee David Coote This season G7 Y39 R2 5.86 cards/game Odds H Evens A 3-1 D 11-4 LEEDS Subs from Klaesson, Struijk, Firpo, Cresswell, Shackleton, Roberts, Rodrigo, Harrison, Gelhardt, Summerville, Jenkins Doubtful Struijk (hip) Injured Koch (pelvis, 14 Dec) Suspended None Discipline Y36 R1 Form DWDLDW Leading scorer Raphinha 6 BRENTFORD Subs from Cox, Sheppard, Roerslev, Sørensen, Forss, Thompson, Ghoddos, Valencia, Jensen, Fosu, Peart-Harris, Baptiste, Bidstrup, Zamburek, Racic, Wissa Doubtful None Injured Ajer (hamstring, Jan), Raya (knee, Apr), Dasilva (hip, unknown), Jeanvier (knee, unknown), Jorgensen (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y24 R1 Form LLLDWL Leading scorer Toney 4The fortunes of Norwich and Tottenham have improved since replacing underachieving managers last month. Dean Smith has guided Norwich to five points from three games – riches compared to five from 11 matches under Daniel Farke – while Tottenham have collected seven from a possible nine since Antonio Conte took over from Nuno Espírito Santo. Both sides have yet to convince though, meaning the outcome is hard to call. It might come down to who has the most in-form striker – with Teemu Pukki having scored three in his last four while Harry Kane has just the one league goal all season. Stephen Hollis Sunday 2pm Venue Tottenham Hotspur Stadium Last season n/a Referee Jarred Gillett This season G2 Y12 R0 6 cards/game Odds H 1-2 A 15-2 D 4-1 TOTTENHAM Subs from Gollini, Austin, Doherty, Roden, Winks, Ndombele, Lo Celso, Alli, Bergwijn, Sessegnon, Clarke, Gil, Tanganga, Scarlett Doubtful None Injured Lo Celso (knee, 15 Dec), Romero (hamstring, Jan) Suspended None Discipline Y22 R1 Form WLLDWW Leading scorer Son 5 NORWICH Subs from Gunn, Dowell, Tzolis, Sørensen, Idah, Placheta, Giannoulis, Dowell, Kabak, Lees-Melou, Omobamidele, Rashica Doubtful Rashica (groin) Injured Norman (groin, 11 Dec), Byram (match fitness, unknown), Zimmermann (ankle, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y26 R1 Form LLWWDD Leading scorer Pukki 5Another week, another reunion for Steven Gerrard. Having got the better of his former adversary Patrick Vieira last weekend, the Aston Villa manager will be attempting to outwit his old Liverpool coach Brendan Rodgers. Gerrard has made a solid start at Villa Park with two wins from three games but, having lost narrowly to Manchester City in their last outing, Villa face a Leicester side that have regained some of their swagger. Gerrard will also be without the winger Leon Bailey, who picked up an injury in midweek, while the striker Danny Ings is unlikely to be fit. Stephen Hollis Sunday 4.30pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Villa Park Last season Aston Villa 1 Leicester 2 Referee Michael Oliver This season G11 Y34 R1 3.18 cards/game Odds H 16-11 A 2-1 D 12-5 ASTON VILLA Subs from Steer, Archer, El Ghazi, Hause, Bogarde, Tuanzebe, Caleb Chukwuemeka, Sanson, Trezeguet Doubtful Trezeguet (knee), Targett (head) Injured Traoré (hamstring, Jan), Ings (hamstring, unknown), Bailey (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y31 R1 Form LLLWWL Leading scorer Watkins 4 LEICESTER Subs from Ward, Thomas, Dewsbury-Hall, Choudhury, Daka, Vestergaard, Pérez, Iheanacho, Amartey, Albrighton Doubtful Tielemans (calf) Injured Pereira (hamstring, 12 Dec), Fofana (ankle, Jan), Justin (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y20 R1 Form WLDLWD Leading scorer Vardy 9For many people Christmas is about eating and drinking but it is easy to get carried away, not just eating too much but buying too much, and then throwing it away. “It only lasts a couple of days so don’t shop as if you are under siege for a month,” says Rob Percival, the Soil Association’s head of food policy. “Resist the temptation to buy a huge turkey you will never finish and which will end up in the bin once you have exhausted ideas to use up the leftovers.” Around the world, households discard 74kg of food a person, according to data from the UN, and food waste and loss causes about 10% of the emissions driving the climate emergency. If food waste was a country, it would have the third highest emissions after only the US and China. “We’re too casual about throwing away food,” says Marija Rompani, director of ethics and sustainability at John Lewis Partnership, which owns Waitrose. “The reality is food waste creates six times more greenhouse gases than aviation. When we throw food away, we waste the precious resources taken to grow, package and transport it – and as it rots in landfill, it produces methane, a greenhouse gas more potent than carbon dioxide. So the simple action of throwing food in the bin has more of a negative impact on our planet than people often realise.” Spend time thinking about the number of people you are catering for, and work out exactly how many meals you will have to prepare. Remember to take into account that some will be made up of leftovers from the main Christmas dinner. Kendall Zaluski, chef tutor at the Waitrose Cookery School in central London, says: “If you’re keeping it traditional, and opting for turkey, buy the right size for the number of people you’ll be cooking for. Waitrose clearly states on the pack how many people it will serve.” Many other suppliers offer that kind of guidance, or, if you are buying from a butcher, they should be able to advise you. Online, too, you can easily find information on what sized roast you need for the number of people you are catering for. For anyone trying to reduce their environmental footprint, eating less and better meat is a simple mantra to follow. Most turkeys eaten in December are intensively reared indoors and fed cheap soya, which is linked to deforestation, so it is important to select your bird carefully. If you can afford to, the Soil Association urges shoppers to buy an organic bird or consider other proteins. At a time when food prices are rising anyway, going organic comes at a price. The birds cost more, and worker shortages bedevilling the industry mean you probably need to order well in advance. “If an organic bird is not feasible then look at welfare-assured and free-range options,” says Percival. “If you are buying a barn-reared turkey then look for a Bronze bird, which has been more slowly reared in less crowded conditions.” At Tesco, for example, a basic turkey crown is listed online at £7.95 a kilo, while free range costs £15 a kilo and organic is £19 a kilo. If these alternatives don’t work, consider pasture-fed beef or lamb, or ditch meat altogether for a vegetarian or vegan centrepiece. Another way to limit the environmental impact of your dinner is to avoid exotic veg. Just stick to traditional accompaniments such as spuds, sprouts, carrots, leeks and parsnips, which are in season. If you can, buy loose veg so as to reduce packaging and get the exact quantities that you need. If you need help working out how much to buy, Zaluski suggests you allow one large handful of greens for each person, and two root veg, such as carrots or parsnips. She thinks one large potato each is enough (with maybe an extra thrown in for every fourth person, just in case). Another festive favourite, cheese, has a high carbon footprint so go easy when stocking up the fridge. All is not lost if you have lots of turkey left over, Zaluski says. It is a versatile food to incorporate in other meals with the carcass perfect as the base for stocks or gravy: “I like to roast the carcass for a more intense flavour. This is a great way to yield as much flavour as possible, as the roasting caramelises the tiny bits of meat still attached.” Another way to make greener choices about what you eat over the festive period is to seek out B-Corp certified food and drink brands. On both the Ocado and Waitrose websites you can browse virtual aisles dedicated to thousands of products, including beer, wine, spirits and chocolates, from companies that are part of the ethical scheme.Who will Ralf Rangnick pick? How will his Manchester United set up? How much pressing and structure will the XI have under the so-called “godfather of German foootball”? Tune in at 2pm on Sunday to Old Trafford to find out against a Crystal Palace side who went to the Etihad Stadium earlier this season and handed Manchester City a rare 2-0 lesson before their own fans. Rangnick has cautioned – correctly – that time is needed to fix the ailing United but time is the one commodity even an interim manager of the club is never granted by so many United supporters. Jamie Jackson Sunday 2pm Venue Old Trafford Last season Manchester United 1 Crystal Palace 3 Referee Craig Pawson This season G9 Y32 R1 3.66 cards/game Odds H 3-5 A 6-1 D 3-1 MANCHESTER UNITED Subs from Heaton, Henderson, Shoretire, Matic, Mata, Hannibal, Mengi, Lingard, Elenga, Martial, Jones, Wan-Bissaka, Lindelöf, Fred, Shaw, Cavani Doubtful Cavani (match fitness) Injured Varane (hamstring, 1-2 weeks), Pogba (thigh, 3 months) Suspended None Discipline Y32 R2 Form LWLLDW Leading scorer Ronaldo 6 CRYSTAL PALACE Subs from Butland, Kelly, Clyne, Riedewald, Banks, Hannam, Street, Rak-Sakyi, Mateta, Schlupp, Olise, Eze, Édouard Doubtful Andersen (thigh) Injured McArthur (hamstring, unknown), Ferguson (achilles, unknown) Suspended Ward (one match) Discipline Y28 R0 Form DDWWDLL Leading scores Benteke, Gallagher, Zaha 4Jodie Whittaker made history in 2017 when she took over from Peter Capaldi and became the 13th Doctor in Doctor Who, making her the first woman to ever play the time-travelling alien with two hearts. She grew up near Huddersfield, West Yorkshire, and is, she says, “really emotional”, a trait she turned to good use in a series of harrowing parts, most famously in Broadchurch, where she played a grieving mother alongside David Tennant (himself the 10th Doctor). When the Broadchurch creator Chris Chibnall took over as Doctor Who showrunner, he said that casting Whittaker was “a no-brainer”. Their first series came out in 2018, and this year Chibnall revealed that the two of them had a “three series and out” pact. In July, they announced they would be leaving the show after three specials, which will air in 2022, when Russell T Davies will return as showrunner and a new Doctor will take over from Whittaker. Her final full series of Doctor Who, subtitled Flux, ends on 5 December. In summer, you said that you thought you’d be “filled with grief” at the end of your run. It has been a few weeks since you filmed your last scene as the Doctor – how are you feeling? I’ve literally just got off the phone with Mandip [Gill, who plays the Doctor’s companion, Yasmin Khan]. It’s been four years of my life. My grief of saying goodbye to the job is one thing. But it won’t feel like the end until it’s the end. It’s the everydayness of these people and this atmosphere and this group … I find myself monologuing at various people on WhatsApp, checking that they miss me! Mandip’s had to take the blue ticks off because I’m “exhausting”. It’s something of a drawn-out farewell, because after Flux ends you’ve still got three specials. Once they’ve decided on the next Doctor and announced that, then it will become really real. The way they shot the last day was brilliant, because they shot it in order, and we never do that. I knew my last shot was my last shot when I filmed it, which was necessary for my head to make sense of it. Do you know how you’ll feel when there’s a new Doctor? I don’t mean in a patronising sense, but I think it will be more like a maternal [thing]. Even if they’re 20 years older than me, there’ll be that thing of knowing: ah, you are going to have the best time and you’re going to smash it. But the good thing is, for me now, it hasn’t been cast, and I don’t have to know about it. So it’s still mine, which is really lovely for me, because it just means that I have my joy of sharing the season and going: I hope everyone’s enjoying it. Chris Chibnall said that you and Mandip made a secret video for the crew. What did that involve? That’s never seeing the light of day! I am quite into a power ballad, so it was a music video and we shot it on location after work one night. It was absolutely pissing it down. We roped a couple of other people into it, who were sworn to secrecy. We wanted a cheesy goodbye, with photos from the last four years. Once the series comes out, I’ll probably get Mandip to put it up on her Instagram. It was my finest work. I am an excellent lip-syncer. I think it basically summed up mine and Mandip’s personalities, in the sense that I’m sentimental, and she is hilarious. She’s got very good funny bones. I mean, it’s not the normal goodbye gift, is it? It sounds like a great goodbye gift. So then you had the wrap party … It was really good. It was fancy dress as well, and I go all out. I take that really seriously. I’d spent more time working out the bloody music video and my costume than some of the other things that I should be prioritising as a 39-year-old. Weirdly, it was one of those things where the night was great, but you know you’ve had your best times, because your best times have been four years of unexpected moments. And then there’s the things that go with this job that you can’t imagine, like the random interactions you have with people who’ve been watching it far longer than I’ve been alive. It’s so much more than a part. That must have felt like a lot of pressure at times. The most heightened point of pressure for me was at Madison Square Garden in September 2018, at New York Comic Con. The very first episode was being shown live in front of a massive audience, and I went and sat next to my husband, and I’d absolutely gone. I just thought: “There’s this crowd of Whovians that are really excited and full of love and support.” And I was like: “What if I have pitched this so badly wrong? What if I’ve ruined it for actresses?” Because I know full well that when lads were cast in the part, they weren’t representing men, they were representing their own personal casting. The way it was described in every outlet was not: “Can Jodie Whittaker play the part?”, it was: “It’s a woman!” I suddenly thought: “Have I hindered us? Have I held us back?” Because we’d filmed the first series, and I’d loved it. I really felt confident all the way through. Then there is that moment where you go, oh God … I don’t think the backlash to the Doctor being a woman was necessarily there in the way that some people anticipated, though. “No bras in the Tardis” and stuff like that? There’s noise like that about everything, and that’s not the kind of thing that affects me, day to day. As soon as the first episode goes out, it’s either your cup of tea or it’s not. You realise, you’re not representing anyone other than yourself. Then you get the amazing Jo Martin [another incarnation of the Doctor], so then it’s really old news about me. And hopefully, with the next 15 generations of Doctors, we never have to have this chat again. I’m delighted it was mine, but it never has to happen again, thank God. Matt Smith said that when you become the Doctor, “the shift in your life is extraordinary, because it crosses generations”. Have you found that? I’ve been friends with David Tennant since Broadchurch, which is way after Doctor Who. At no point when we were out did people come up to him and go: “You’re that guy in Broadchurch.” They all went: “You’re the Doctor!” And that was years after he left, so I was very aware of the culture of it. Some viewers are very young. I don’t think you’ve done any roles before this that were … … age-appropriate? [Christmas family film] Get Santa is the only thing I’ve done that is family-friendly in that way. I adore that side of it, because I am a massive fangirl. I’m really into Brooklyn Nine-Nine and at Comic-Con the entire cast was there; I was beside myself, I just wanted to quote all of their lines at them. I find the escapism of music, film and television has been my outlet for my noise [the chatter in her head], which is quite hyperactive all the time. It’s been my outlet all my life. So from that side, being able to share it with every generation is the most joyous thing about Doctor Who to me. It’s for everyone or anyone, and it doesn’t exclude. It shines a light on the outsiders being on the inside, and I really love that. Are you aware of the “shipping” that goes on around the Doctor and her assistant? I’ve never heard that term! It’s an internet thing: when you ship two characters, you want them to get together. Mandip’s on social media, so I’ve been aware of it. It’s probably also based on the fact that every time me and Mandip are photographed on set, my arm’s forever draped over her. You can base it on the fact that I absolutely adore her and I’m never more than a foot away from her in real life anyway. Which Doctor Who baddies are creepy in real life? When there’s a group of Weeping Angels and you don’t know which ones are the actresses and which are the statues, and you’re in between takes and then someone will scratch their face, you’re like: ahhh! And when a troop of Cybermen are power-walking towards you, there is something in that. They’ve earned their presence. That can catch your breath. In terms of what you will do next, nothing’s going to be quite like this, is it? It’s not. This has been the most unique thing of all, so there’s going to be nothing that I read that makes me go, it’s a bit similar or I feel like I’ve done that. Really, what [Doctor Who] does is make you feel like everything is interesting. I suppose in a way, I’ve always been scared of comedy, because it’s never been something I’ve ever done, and it feels like a very particular, talented world. My confidence has always been in drama; I’ve done a lot of crying. Doctor Who has a bit of everything, so I feel like now I don’t ever want to shut myself off to anything. Also, I’m lucky: I’ve only just got home. I don’t have to worry about that yet. They have just announced a sequel to Attack the Block. Are you in it? I’m not, but I’d bloody better be. I really want to be an extra. Now I’m unemployed, I’m definitely writing to [director] Joe Cornish, because I loved that film. Even if I just walk past the lens and I’m blurry, I just want to be in it. You did an early episode of Black Mirror, The Entire History of You, about people being able to record and rewatch their memories. What is your relationship with tech like? You’re not on social media. That episode is my idea of hell. I don’t want that [technology] being invented. I think we’ve gone far enough, thank you. I never joined Facebook; not out of protest, I just didn’t join it. So then it gets to a point where you’re too old. With Twitter, I just felt like: “Well, I’ve not even got a Facebook page, I’m not going to join Twitter.” Instagram’s the next thing, and that’s an even bigger jump. To me, it was just the natural progression: if I haven’t started, I’m all right with that. I can totally appreciate that with all my geek stuff, I miss out on so many things. But what I get out of it is a less noisy head. Does it help with your noisy head? I just think I’d believe my own hype and I’d believe my own shite. I like being flawed. We’re all flawed. I want to have flawed people in my life. I’m not interested in perfection, and I think I would absolutely be down a rabbit warren trying to present some form of perfection that isn’t realistic. So I’m just not going to. How will you watch your last episode as the Doctor? I’ll definitely want some ceremony around it. My best mates up north, for my very first ep ever, they had their own premiere. People brought the kids, and they walked in, they all had a daft costume on, nothing to do with Doctor Who, just whatever was in the back of the cupboard. They were videoing it, and I did notice throughout all the videos that they were just sat chatting through my episode. So I think what I might do is make everyone come round and do that, but: “Shh! Watch me on this bit!” We don’t get to see the episodes before they go out. Really?! I got sent the very first episode, but none of the rest. I’m sure if I asked they’d probably send it to me, but I don’t want to watch it on a laptop, I want to watch it on television. Because of that, it’s brand new to me and I love that. I watch it like an audience member. So I’ll make sure there’s a lot of us, if we’re allowed a group, and if we’re allowed a group, then they will be silent. Doctor Who: Flux concludes 5 December, 6.20pm, BBC One; the first of Jodie Whittaker’s final three specials airs on New Year’s Day 2022.Barely one month ago, Florida’s Republican governor Ron DeSantis was on a victory lap. The state’s average rate of new Covid-19 infections was the lowest in the nation, and a lapdog legislature was about to sign into law his sweeping new coronavirus measures, including the outlawing of mask and vaccine mandates in pursuit of “striking a blow for freedom”. There was no mention of the 61,500 Floridians who have lost their lives to the virus. Now, with the highly transmissible Omicron variant gaining a foothold in the US and likely already present in Florida, doctors say, the robustness of the governor’s controversial steps could be about to receive a first real test. And while health experts and DeSantis’s political opponents agree it is too soon to know exactly how the state could be affected by any spread of the variant, they are worried. The rigidity of the DeSantis anti-mandate laws, including the removal of local authorities’ power to enact community protection measures based on conditions in their own areas, they say, could allow Omicron to circulate at a faster rate than it otherwise might. Evan Jenne, co-leader of the Democratic minority in the Florida house of representatives, accused DeSantis of fitting Florida with “concrete shoes”. “At the beginning of the pandemic a lot of free rein was given to local governments, because they were the ones with boots on the ground, they were the ones seeing what was happening and a lot of people were saved an untimely death because of actions of local governments,” he said. “By hamstringing them, by putting their hands behind their back and lacing up concrete shoes, it’s just going to make it that much more difficult. When you have a government the size of Florida’s, covering 22 million people, it’s going to be less nimble and less agile than the smaller, local governments and our local health departments. “Having an executive branch take all of that authority and power away from them is just not going to be a good move for public health into the future.” Jenne and his Democratic colleagues were vocal opponents of the measures, but outnumbered by Republicans almost two to one during last month’s special legislative session convened by DeSantis, a Donald Trump protege who is tipped for a presidential run in 2024. Since the summer, a period in which his state recorded its highest coronavirus death rates since the start of the pandemic, DeSantis has also battled with and fined school districts and local authorities over vaccine and mask mandates, offered $5,000 payments to unvaccinated police officers to work in Florida, and appointed the tendentious Dr Joseph Ladapo, a fellow skeptic of vaccine and mask mandates, as Florida’s new surgeon general. “If Donald Trump says I’m not running to be president again, Ron DeSantis will be the Republican nominee for president without question, and a lot of the stuff that you’re seeing him doing is buoying that idea and reaching out to his base and a particular segment of society that loves this stuff,” Jenne said. “Politically, I think it’s a wise move. For public health I think it’s dangerous.” Other elected officials, healthcare professionals and parents have also accused the governor of putting politics ahead of science. The notoriously prickly DeSantis, meanwhile, continues to present himself as a defender of the Florida economy, and citizens’ freedoms against the perceived tyranny of the Biden administration’s efforts to implement national mandates or lockdowns. At a press conference this week defending the new laws, the governor was asked about the Omicron variant, and lashed out at a familiar target: what he sees as “corporate media” controlling the conversation around Covid-19. “We are not, in Florida, going to allow any media-driven hysteria to do anything to infringe people’s individual freedoms when it comes to any type of Covid variants,” DeSantis said, before turning his attention to Biden and the chief White House medical adviser, Dr Anthony Fauci, a familiar sparring partner. “In Florida, we will not let them lock you down,” he said. “We will not let them take your jobs, we will not let them harm your businesses, we will not let them close your schools.” Jay Wolfson, distinguished professor of public health, medicine and pharmacy, and associate vice-president for health law at the University of South Florida, sees little prospect of DeSantis backing down if Omicron takes hold in the state. “I don’t expect the governor nor the Florida legislature are going to change their position, unless, God forbid, the death rate increases,” he said. “People will get sick, the hospitals might get crowded, but unless people are dying, it’s unlikely that the policies are going to change.” Wolfson noted that with DeSantis’s measures now enshrined in law, rather than executive orders that can more easily be challenged, there appears little appetite to defy him. All of the Florida school districts that once implemented strict mask mandates for students and staff have now terminated them, although many said it was because classroom coronavirus cases have fallen. Meanwhile Disney, one of the state’s largest employers, dropped its requirement for cast members to be vaccinated. “There’s no exemption for venues where there’s a higher risk of contact, such as theme parks, or a hospital, so you’re creating an environment where it’s increasingly likely that unvaccinated people will be exposed and get sick, and people whose vaccinations have declined efficacy could be exposed to those people and others and they could get sick,” Wolfson said. “But we just don’t know yet to what degree the Omicron variant is both more contagious and more virulent. We’re rolling the dice.”In 2015, Freya Robinson decided to go vegan. For more than a year, the 28-year-old from East Sussex did not consume a single animal product. Then, in 2016, on a family holiday in Bulgaria, she passed a steak restaurant and something inside her switched. “I walked in and ordered the biggest steak I could have and completely inhaled it,” she says. After finishing it, she ordered another. For the previous year, Robinson had been suffering from various health problems – low energy levels, brain fog, painful periods and dull skin – which she now believes were the result of her diet. She says her decline was gradual and almost went unnoticed. “Because it’s not an instant depletion, you don’t suddenly feel bad the next day, it’s months down the line. It’s very, very slow.” In just over a year, the balanced plant-based food she cooked daily from scratch, using organic vegetables from the farm she works on, and legumes and nuts vital for protein, had, she felt, taken a toll on her body. The morning after the steak felt revelatory: “I felt this surge of energy. My face was glowing again. I remember leaping out of bed and it was only in that moment I realised I’d been slowly depleting my body of vital nutrients.” She says that the days after the reintroduction of animal products to her diet saw her clarity and ability to cope with stress return. Minor inconveniences, such as dealing with a grumpy customer at the farm’s market stall, no longer seemed like a mammoth burden; the intense physical work on the farm felt less laboured. Having operated at what she describes as 60% both physically and mentally, she was now “realising what normal should be”. In just over 75 years, veganism has grown from a fringe movement to a mainstream lifestyle choice practised by millions globally. In 2019, it was estimated that around 600,000 people in Britain were following a vegan diet – up from approximately 150,000 people in 2014. This year saw the biggest number (more than 580,000 people) sign up for Veganuary, pledging to eat a plant-based diet for the month. Next year is likely to be even bigger. A host of new vegan brands, some owned by the major supermarkets, have made the once niche diet easy to follow. Since its inception, the raison d’etre of western veganism has been the reduction of suffering caused to animals (the core value, according to the Vegan Society, is to “exclude, as far as is possible and practicable, all forms of exploitation of, and cruelty to, animals”). It has come to be thought of as a whole way of living, rather than a diet – adherents typically eschew leather, honey and other things made from animal byproducts. But the food – all plant-based, with no meat or dairy – is what most people think of. And it is increasingly championed for its health benefits. Studies have shown a plant-based diet can be effective for losing weight. “People do lose weight on a vegan diet. That’s quite common,” says Tom Sanders, emeritus professor of nutrition and dietetics at King’s College London. It can also reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes and some cancers, lower cholesterol levels and reduce cardiovascular disease. Many athletes who have gone vegan praise the diet for rejuvenating their careers. In 2017, England striker Jermain Defoe said a vegan diet was partly responsible for his continued career in the Premier League in his late 30s. Though now a pescatarian, he’s still playing for Rangers at 39. Tennis superstar Venus Williams said in the same year that her raw vegan diet had given her a new burst of energy, and credited it with the return of her endurance and strength. Other sporting vegans include Lewis Hamilton and ultramarathon champion Scott Jurek. Environmental factors strengthen the argument for a plant-based diet as research suggests individuals can reduce their carbon footprint from food by up to 73% by cutting out meat and dairy. The popularity of plant-based alternatives is now big business: the UK’s meat-free food industry is predicted to generate around £658m in retail sales this year. But just as hundreds of thousands in the UK adopt veganism, many are giving it up – and face a fierce backlash from die-hard vegans for doing so. British freerunner and YouTuber Tim Shieff, who made his name as a passionate vegan athlete, but then admitted he had given up, faced a barrage of abuse. Meanwhile, Canadian fitness blogger Maddie Lymburner, who built up a huge following for her vegan recipes and workout videos, and then admitted she was adding “some animal products” to her diet, was forced to stop posting about food due to the vicious backlash. In dedicated online communities across Facebook, Twitter, Reddit and other platforms, large groups of ex-vegans are sharing stories of declining physical and/or mental health that they believe was caused by their diet. These groups provide support and offer advice for reintroducing animal products. They are also a place to navigate the social fallout that can come when a person leaves a major part of their identity behind. *** At first, Tommy Kelly felt his vegan diet was having a positive effect. The 41-year-old from Ayrshire in Scotland made the decision to go vegan for animal rights reasons in 2016 during his recovery from a severe eating disorder. Overseen by a team of specialists, including a nurse, dietitian and psychiatrist, he was consuming a high-calorie diet in order to steadily increase his body mass. “I was constantly gaining weight,” says Kelly. “My health just seemed to be getting better and better and better.” But around year three, despite taking all the right supplements, problems began to arise. Kelly began noticing he was struggling to put on weight despite eating a calorific diet of grains, fruits and vegetables, proteins and plant fats. Digestive issues left him passing blood and going to the toilet up to 16 times a day – there is evidence that for some people foods high in lectins, like legumes, grains, certain vegetables and nuts, can damage the gut lining if eaten in large quantities over a sustained period of time. Then came the short-term memory loss, mouth ulcers, dry skin, low libido and slow hair growth. The migraines he’d previously suffered a handful of times a year became daily and debilitating. “My wife actually thought I’d had a stroke at one point,” he says, “I was slurring my speech and I had this facial droop.” In January 2020, Kelly reluctantly made the decision to reintroduce ethically sourced animal products under advice from his dietitian and wider team. They had become worried about his weight loss, and suspected his decline was linked to the diet. It was a choice that left him racked with guilt. “I didn’t want to do it, because I was obviously really about the ethics,” says Kelly. “It took four to six months for me to even introduce eggs.” Shortly after he started eating local salmon and oily fish, he noticed a significant improvement in his symptoms, which he says have “totally reversed”. Now, having put on weight on an omnivorous diet despite eating fewer calories, he feels the best he’s ever felt. For the almost five years Kelly was vegan, he was immersed in the community, organising vigils outside abattoirs, signing up to animal rights group Anonymous for the Voiceless, and undertaking vegan outreach under the name Tofu Tommy. “The veganism kind of becomes your identity,” he says. After reintroducing animal products, and speaking out about his experiences, Kelly was branded a “murderer” and received death threats from strangers. “They lash out at everybody and call you every name under the sun. They’re supposed to be compassionate and they’re really not.” When Lymburner announced in an Instagram post in August 2020 that she had reintroduced eggs and fish after six years of being vegan, saying it was “something I needed to do for my health and overall wellbeing”, she faced a barrage of horrible comments. She explained that she had been suffering terrible period pains, was losing her hair and had bad acne. Reintroducing a small quantity of animal products allowed her to be a “functioning human” again, she said. Lymburner had built up a following largely around plant-based nutrition and fitness, and had a combined following of almost 900,000 on YouTube and Instagram. (She has since launched a fitness channel which has almost 6.5m subscribers.) Although most comments were posted in support, the 26-year-old was also labelled a “snake”, a “sellout” and, from another plant-based influencer, a “selfish narcissist who is going back to killing animals again”. *** For Chloe Reed (not her real name), the change after she became vegan was less physical than psychological. In 2017, she and her husband decided to go vegan for ethical reasons; like many others, they were inspired by watching influential pro-vegan documentaries such as Earthlings, Cowspiracy, The Game Changers and Seaspiracy. Food and nutrition documentaries like these have boomed in the past few years with the help of global streaming platforms, though some have faced questions over their scientific rigour. (The Game Changers’ claim, for example, that “simply drinking cow’s milk” can reduce testosterone and increase oestrogen in men, was based on a study of just 18 participants, of whom only seven were male.) Adopting a well-planned wholefood diet – using ingredients that have been processed or refined as little as possible – Reed and her husband both lost weight. “I felt amazing,” she says. But the initial euphoria was short-lived. What had previously been manageable, “in the background”, intrusive thoughts she had lived with her whole life, became impossible to ignore. “The intrusive thoughts got so much worse and started happening more,” says Reed, 32, who lives in Wiltshire. “And I developed the most horrendous anxiety. After a year or so of being vegan, it got really bad and led me to seek help. I was diagnosed with OCD and anxiety.” This year, after seeking advice from a dietitian, she made the decision to reintroduce some fish and eggs from a local free-range farm into her diet for the first time in four years. It wasn’t easy. “The fear and guilt were massive,” she says. But she’s since seen a marked improvement in her mental health. “I’m as sure as anyone can be that it was caused by the diet. I’ve only noticed a real improvement since eating animal products.” Conscious that some will say the two issues are not connected, the breastfeeding mother of two believes she has definitely had more energy and even seen her milk supply increase. “I don’t think that can be a placebo,” she says. Friends and colleagues took the news in their stride, but when she shared her experience on online forums she faced an onslaught – mostly from those she refers to as “dickheads on Reddit”. She describes the vegan movement as “toxic”. Whatever the intended effect, it ended up “calcifying my views even further”, she says. *** While veganism has never been so popular, it is a diet that defies the western meat-eating culture. Research suggests that vegans face negative bias from non-vegans, with one 2015 study finding that the only disparaged group viewed more negatively than vegans were drug addicts. This may explain why many vegans seek comfort and belonging in a community. “Depending on why people have decided to become vegan, you might find that some start to identify more with other vegans and veganism as a kind of group,” says Dr Madeline Judge, assistant professor in social and environmental psychology at the University of Groningen. “It’s not just about diet, it’s about a way of living, and because it requires diverging from the norm, you often have to learn a new way of eating, new places to eat, and you might find that you differ in your values from your friends and family.” For others, Judge explains, being part of a collective that shares the same belief system can bolster efforts and enthusiasm to make a positive difference. “It’s difficult to make a difference in the world on your own. It’s a lot easier if you have a group,” she says. Rebecca Jones, a practising GP who runs an advice website, The Vegan Doctor, advocates for a vegan diet as a lifestyle change for some patients – especially those who are overweight or have cardiovascular disease, high cholesterol or diabetes. “I always offer a plant-based diet as one of the ways of changing your health,” says Jones. “For me, it’s an ethical choice – a bit like religion or politics. I don’t want my patient to feel like I’m telling them this is the only way.” Jones, 39, became vegan in 2017 and was vegetarian prior to that. While she acknowledges that there are barriers that can make veganism difficult for some people (cost, climate, location), she believes a nutritionally balanced and well-planned plant-based diet is for everyone. “I think the important words here are ‘well-planned’,” Jones says. “Vegan junk food, for example, is high in calories but has very little nutritional value – if eaten routinely without the addition of legumes, fresh produce, nuts, wholegrains, it can lead to nutritional deficiencies and is a potential pitfall for newer vegans.” When it comes to purported health issues associated with the diet, she suspects the current popularity of veganism may be to blame. “Many non-vegans will also be deficient in some micronutrients, but because veganism is currently very topical, it’s often blamed as the sole reason why somebody might feel under the weather.” People have different motivations for eating a plant-based diet, but some staunch proponents of animal rights believe that anyone describing themselves as a vegan should be doing it for the animals. “I think the word veganism is thrown around a little bit too easily,” says Jones, adding that people quitting “kind of gives veganism a bad name because it’s seen as faddy and fashionable. If you identify as a vegan, then you are into animal rights. It’s a plant-based diet that’s quite fashionable. Veganism is what it always was.” “Responsible messaging within the vegan community would keep people healthier and prevent many from feeling they have to turn their back on veganism,” says Sophie Medlin, chair of the British Dietetic Association for London. This, she says, extends to advice around nutrition. “There is a misconception that a vegan diet is nutritionally complete and provides all essential nutrients in adequate quantities.” Vitamin B12, which is required in the production of red blood cells, is only found naturally in animal foods such as meat and dairy, so vegans must get their B12 from supplements. One study found vegans have lower levels of B12 than both vegetarians and omnivores, and were at higher risk of developing symptoms related to deficiency. “The risks of not supplementing on a vegan diet can be devastating,” Medlin warns. Other deficiencies, in vitamins and minerals including calcium and vitamin D, can manifest in different ways, affecting bone health, for example. “What we’re seeing now in the long-term follow-ups of vegans, compared with vegetarians and omnivores, is they actually have a greater risk of fractures,” says Sanders, who has been studying vegan nutrition for almost 50 years. For Chloe Reed, having to take supplements of B12, as well as iron, iodine, DHA (an omega-3 fatty acid) and calcium contributed to her decision to quit. “Something made me think, you probably shouldn’t be taking that many supplements if you haven’t got an existing health condition,” she says. Freya Robinson agrees: “I don’t really believe that supplements are the answer to a healthy diet.” *** Why does veganism work well for some, but appear to have a detrimental effect on others? According to Sanders, while we all require the same diversity of nutrients, “there’s individual variation in requirements”. When a person switches to a plant-based diet, they eat a whole host of foods their gut may not have encountered frequently on an omnivorous diet, including grains, fruits and other carbohydrates. “One of the first things that changes when someone becomes vegan is their gut flora, and it may take a bit of time to settle down,” says Sanders. “Genetics plays an important role in how efficiently we can convert essential fatty acids,” Medlin says. For some, it’s genetically more difficult to convert the essential nutrients our body needs from plant-based sources into bioavailable versions our bodies can actually absorb and use. “Some of us need more, and some will feel well with less.” No diet is a miracle cure. But when what you eat becomes a lifestyle – an identity, and with it a membership of a community – people can be left feeling as though they can’t change their habits without letting others down. Robinson hasn’t looked back since that fateful steak in Bulgaria. She now identifies as an “ethical omnivore”, and believes meat should be treated as an infrequent luxury rather than a daily commodity: once a week is ample, she suggests. But attempts to debate this point with sections of the vegan community on social media often descend into abuse. Beneath the often vitriolic online war of words, the two groups may find that common ground still exists. The ex-vegans I spoke to all continue to be conscientious about what they’re eating, examine the conditions in which animals are raised, and consider the impact their food consumption has on the environment. They have found that the fight to restore their health does not have to completely compromise the principles that originally drew them to veganism. “There’s the health side, but there’s also the planet side,” Robinson says. “And what cost can you really put on the planet?”As so often, says Eric Bouvet, the stage was set, the actors ready. “You get this amazing orchestra,” he says, “and you’re the conductor. You decide your point of view, your frame, you hit the button. A second either way, it wouldn’t have worked.” A five-time World Press Photo winner, Bouvet has covered conflicts from Afghanistan to Sudan, Iraq to Somalia, Chechnya to Lebanon. His Fujis have recorded the fall of the Wall, the release of Mandela, Tiananmen Square, for Time, Life, Paris Match. These days, as a Fuji ambassador, he works more on documentaries with large-format cameras. But a phone is “relatively high quality, and it’s practical. I’ve had a double page in Paris Match with my phone, at a demo where photographers had been banned.” This time, he was on the approach to Mont Buet, a 3,000 metre peak in the Haute-Savoie, south-east France. “It was 6.30am in August, the sun was just getting going in the background,” he says. “I was moving slowly, I had 30kg of large-format equipment in my bag.” The ibex “couldn’t care less about me. He was just there, magnificent, on his stage. Maybe he sensed I was respectful of nature, of the light, the Earth, animals. Whatever, it was a magical moment. I had my point of view, I hit the button.” Photography, for Bouvet, is “a means to connect – to go to extraordinary places, meet extraordinary people doing extraordinary things”. Smartphones mean “billions of people are now taking photos. Are they all photographers? That’s another question.”In 1909 two wildlife safari expeditions arrived by ship in Mombasa, Kenya, within days of each other. One party was enormous and led by the adventure-loving US president Teddy Roosevelt; the other consisted of just two men and was headed by Cherry Kearton, a young British bird photographer from Yorkshire. Over several months on safari the trigger-happy president and his son Kermit killed 17 lions, 11 elephants, 20 rhino, nine giraffes, 19 zebra, more than 400 hippos, hyena and other large animals, as well as many thousands of birds and smaller animals. By contrast Kearton, the first man in the world to hunt with a camera and not a rifle, killed just one animal, in self-defence. The two men came from different social worlds and had contrasting visions of the importance of wildlife. Roosevelt justified his massacres by saying he killed for science and education; Kearton was not against shooting “for the pot” but said he took pictures for the love of it. But when they met in the Kenyan bush, they struck up an unlikely friendship, with the president letting the photographer capture unique film of him setting out on one of his bloodbaths. The footage was poor quality but it earned Kearton enough to set up with his brother Richard a London film studio that gave birth to the world’s first wildlife documentary films – now a staple of TV, and possibly the single most important medium today for people to appreciate nature. Kearton’s work as a pioneer of nature photography will be celebrated later this month in a small exhibition that will show 37 of his “lost” pictures of lions, leopards, rhino and other wildlife discovered in an old desk last year by his great-granddaughter Evie Bulmer, as well as 30 minutes of cine-film that he shot in Africa and is now held by the British Film Institute. Kearton called Roosevelt “a dear friend” but was appalled by his hunting. He wrote later: “[T]o help in the least degree to accomplish the extinction of anything beautiful and interesting is a crime against future generations … Unfortunately, this is a crime that we have all been complicit in committing. “It is as a naturalist that I view the wanton slaughter of game with such abhorrence … I raise my voice with all its force against the wicked and wanton destruction of big game.” Kearton was far ahead of his time, says Bulmer, popularising nature for the Victorians in the way that David Attenborough and others have done for modern audiences. “His fascination with recording the world’s wildlife through photography was unique in this period. It focuses on promoting Africa as the playground of the animal rather than the hunter,” she says. Starting in the 1890s, he and his brother Richard acquired a cheap box camera and shot the first-ever pictures of birds’ nests with eggs and made the first recordings of birds in the wild. They progressed to massive “collodion” plateglass cameras, but without zoom lenses or rapid-speed shutters they had to devise ever more extraordinary dummy hides to get as close as possible to nervy wildlife. One solution was to have a taxidermist make a full-sized hollow ox, which they would plant in fields and then crawl inside with the camera lens poking through a hole in its head. Another was a mobile heap of hay and grass that Richard used to hide in; there was a stuffed sheep with a pneumatic camera, artificial rocks, false tree trunks and masks. Together the brothers took enormous risks, abseiling off high sea cliffs, standing in rivers for hours, waiting all night, and climbing the highest trees to film birds in their nests. Attenborough acknowledges the brothers’ influence. In a letter to Bulmer, he said he was “at the age of eight taken to see a film lecture presented by Cherry Kearton. [It] captured my childish imagination and made me dream of travelling to far-off places to film wild animals.” According to the Keartons’ biographer John Bevis, “the world in which Cherry lived was preoccupied with capturing, killing and stuffing animals for display or to complete a collection. Cherry was unique in his desire to photograph animals undisturbed in their natural habitats. He was less zoologist than nature lover, less educator than crusader. His intention was not to produce film made by scientists for scientists and seen by few but scientists … but an alternative to the ubiquitous big game and hunting features.” Cherry Kearton went on to be a war photographer, and died in 1940. “If through my books, still pictures and films the public can gain a wider knowledge of the animal creation, and consequently a deeper sympathy, I shall be satisfied,” he wrote. The exhibition With Nature and a Camera is at the Royal Geographical Society, London, from 14 to 20 December. The Keartons: Inventing Nature Photography, by John Bevis, is published by Uniform Books.In March 2017, heating engineer James Anderson received a call that would change his life. The man on the other end had just been told he needed a new boiler, but wanted a second opinion. Anderson drove from his home in Burnley. When he arrived, he found an elderly man in bed. He needed a hoist to get up, and had carers visiting every day. The man had no hot water, and the kitchen radiator was making a clanking noise. But none of Anderson’s usual fixes worked. “I was scratching my head,” he says, “wondering what was going on with this boiler.” In a last effort, he opened the tank. There was a magazine floating in it. The previous engineer had stuffed it in there so he could make £5,500 installing a new boiler. Anderson was incensed. “This engineer had totally taken advantage of someone who couldn’t fend for himself,” he says. Anderson phoned the engineer’s company and raised hell. They sent someone to install a new boiler, and gave the man £1,000 in compensation. Since that day, Anderson has worked to protect other vulnerable people from exploitative or unaffordable heating bills. He founded Depher, a community interest company (he is in the process of turning it into a registered charity) that provides free or heavily subsidised plumbing and heating services to people on low incomes and other vulnerable groups. Around 30% of Depher’s funding comes from donations, although it’s always a struggle to get enough. The rest comes from Anderson’s own pocket. When he launched Depher, he closed his profitable plumbing and heating business without thinking twice. “I’m 54,” Anderson says. “I’ve been on the holidays, had the nice car and eaten in the fancy restaurants. I don’t need to experience those again. It’s my pleasure and duty to help those who are less well-off.” To date, Depher has helped 19,000 people, at a cost of £1.2m. “He’s just so kind,” says Lynn Shirraf, a pensioner from Burnley. Depher fixed her boiler last week. If she’d had to pay for the repairs, she’d have had to cut back on heating or food. A neighbour told her about Depher. “It makes you feel better about human nature,” she says. “People do care.” Running Depher has taught Anderson about the hidden poverty in his home town. “It made me realise that you can walk past a house,” he says, “and it can look normal. But you don’t know what’s going on inside. Of the people we help, 90% are living on the poverty line without telling anyone.” In December 2019 he visited a young couple with two small sons. “They were freezing cold,” says Anderson. “When the mum was talking to me, her bottom lip was shaking.” Two engineers had already charged £40 each without fixing the problem. The family couldn’t afford more repairs. Anderson fixed the boiler at no charge. “The mum sat there crying,” he remembers. “She said to me, ‘All I want is to keep my children warm.’” These are people in this country, Anderson continues, who don’t count their pounds, but their pennies. Many of them are living on a state pension, or are single parents claiming universal credit (this October the government ended the universal credit uplift of £20 a week.) “The cost of living in this country is horrendous,” says Anderson. “There was one man last week who said, ‘milk used to cost £1.09 in Aldi. This week, it went up to £1.15. Is it going to get to the point where I can’t afford to buy milk for my child?’ That hits home, when someone says that.” Now, with soaring gas prices, he worries how people already struggling will cope. On the day we speak, Anderson has just returned from fixing a pensioner’s boiler. She told him she was already paying an extra £100 a month for gas and electricity, which she can scarcely afford on the state pension. Anderson believes, with an almost religious fervour, in the power of community. “We’ve got a duty as humans,” he says, “to care for the poor, the elderly, the vulnerable – not to ignore them and say it’s someone else’s problem.” When I ask to do something nice for Anderson, he tells me that he wants to donate his treat to his community. He asks whether I can arrange some gift boxes so he can distribute them to people in need. I contacted Lush, which agreed to provide 50 boxes of bath bombs and other treats. Anderson dropped half of them off at a local care home. He plans to distribute the remaining boxes to a women’s refuge. “I don’t mean for this to sound cheesy,” Anderson says seriously, “but it was lush. The residents were looking forward to it all week. They can’t wait to smell beautiful.” He plans to keep one box to raffle to raise funds for Depher. Making something nice happen for his local community “felt beautiful”, Anderson says. “It’s not about getting a reward. It’s about that feeling of humanity you get when people work together. Imagine how much better this country could be, if everyone pulled together.” Want to nominate someone for Guardian angel? Email us – with their permission – and suggest a treat at guardian.angel@theguardian.comIn the trees beside the heather-clad, snow-smattered moorland is an elusive creature that to some conservationists is as mythical as a unicorn: a gamekeeper looking after endangered birds of prey. “Two hen harriers coming in now,” said Gary Taylor, head keeper on the Swinton estate in North Yorkshire. Taylor is sitting in a hide he built himself overlooking one of the country’s best hen harrier roosting sites – in the middle of his boss’s grouse moor. The hen harrier is one of Britain’s most endangered birds because of illegal persecution. England has upland habitat suitable for more than 300 breeding pairs of hen harriers but in 2013 there were none. The raptors take red grouse and conservationists accuse the grouse moor industry of killing hen harriers. But the hen harrier’s prospects are brightening. This year, 24 successful hen harrier nests in England fledged 84 chicks, the highest number since records began in 2002. Nineteen of those nests were on grouse moors. Taylor’s efforts to prove that hen harriers can thrive alongside driven grouse shooting are lauded by Stephen Murphy, one of the country’s top hen harrier experts. “What he’s done for harriers, words can’t describe,” said Murphy, Natural England’s lead adviser for hen harriers, whose studies of satellite-tagged hen harriers showed that illegal persecution was responsible for their low numbers. Since 2019, hen harrier nests on the 8,000 hectare (20,000-acre) estate have produced 23 successful fledglings, with Taylor and his wife placing fresh mice on a feeding post for a male harrier, a tagged bird known as Frank. This “diversionary feeding” helps harriers and reduces their predation of red grouse in breeding season. Meanwhile, Taylor’s control of predators such as crows, foxes, stoats and weasels to protect ground-nesting red grouse also assists the ground-nesting hen harriers. In winter, up to 16 hen harriers roost on the moor and Taylor’s hide overlooking the roost is open to the public. Next year, the estate plans to put a camera beside a harrier nest to beam live pictures to a local pub. “What’s here is almost optimum conditions for hen harriers to breed well,” said Murphy, whose phone tells him there are currently four of England’s 28 satellite-tagged harriers on this one estate. This turnaround for hen harriers is in North Yorkshire – a hotspot for illegal persecution – and on an estate where two satellite-tagged birds were found shot: Betty in 2012 and River in 2019. Murphy first met Taylor when they searched together for Betty. Murphy said Betty’s injuries were not immediately fatal and she could have been shot away from the estate before flying on to it. In both cases the Swinton estate was not accused of or charged with any offence and emphatically rejects any suggestion of wrongdoing. There were 137 confirmed raptor persecution incidents detected in Britain in 2020, the highest ever recorded by the RSPB. Of these, 34% were connected with pheasant or partridge shooting and 28% connected with grouse. According to Murphy, evidence that illegal persecution is lessening on grouse moors is not breeding success (which can be due to a good year for voles, a favourite prey) but the survival of long-lived satellite-tagged birds, such as Sorrel (born 2016) and Dru (born 2017). “What’s incontrovertible is that we’ve got 8 to 10 wild birds breeding on English grouse moors and staying there in winter,” he said. Support for hen harriers from grouse shooting estates is still criticised by many conservationists because it is part of the government’s controversial five-year “brood management” trial. Hen harriers like to nest close to each other, and so a concentration of nests can build up on grouse moors. If a second nest appears near a first, brood management allows landowners to apply to remove chicks, which are reared in captivity and released. This gives grouse operations a “safety valve” so hen harrier populations won’t become so concentrated that grouse numbers decline. The costs of captive-rearing are met by landowners. One nest close to Swinton’s boundary was reared in captivity this year. Nationally, six of eight captive-bred chicks from 2020 survived in the wild this year, a higher survival rate than wild-reared chicks. Katie-Jo Luxton, the RSPB’s director of conservation, said the first step to hen harrier recovery should be the end of illegal persecution. “If brood management is successful and there are more hen harriers, ‘to manage’ it would involve an ever-increasing level of intervention as the perceived conflict with grouse shooting increases,” she said. “Brood management is about forcing hen harriers to fit in with driven grouse shooting. That’s starting in entirely the wrong place. Driven grouse shooting should instead fit around the recovery of hen harriers. And if it can’t, it needs to change.” Mark Cunliffe-Lister, Lord Swinton and chair of the Moorland Association, said he and other moor owners hope to show it’s possible to have a sustainable driven grouse shoot and breeding hen harriers – which could also boost eco-tourism. “We haven’t got there yet but I’m still confident we’re going to get there,” he said. Since 1861, Swinton’s average season produces 5,000 shot grouse; this year it’s barely 500. Cunliffe-Lister and Taylor say that is not because of hen harriers, but due to heather on which grouse feed being destroyed by a pest beetle. A cold wet spring also reduced grouse-breeding success. Taylor is convinced that hen harriers, grouse and people can all prosper. “Hen harriers are part and parcel of what’s on the moor,” he said. “Grouse shooting gets a bad press but it’s responsible for the biggest part of upland conservation. Maintaining habitat and controlling predators benefits so many wild species, not just gamebirds.” • This article was amended on 12 January 2022 to clarify remarks made by Murphy in relation to the injuries he found when he and Taylor recovered the hen harrier named Betty in 2012.Early one morning this fall, the California state assemblywoman Buffy Wicks felt a type of pain she had never experienced before. Wicks, 44, found herself doubled over in pain, barely able to walk or get her daughter ready for school. At her doctor’s shortly after, she learned that she was pregnant and having a miscarriage and would need an emergency abortion. Twenty-four hours later she had the procedure. Wicks shared the deeply personal account of what happened that September morning on Twitter on Thursday, following oral arguments in the most significant abortion rights case heard by the US supreme court since Roe v Wade. Wicks decided to tell her story to illustrate the urgency of easily accessible reproductive care and warn of the risks this care faces if a Mississippi abortion law is upheld by the nation’s highest court, she told the Guardian. “We often debate these policy matters in theory, but in reality people like me experience the outcomes when lawmakers and policymakers make these decisions,” Wicks said. “I think this is a story that is not uncommon,” she said. “I have a platform that I want to use to help further the cause and say: ‘This is my body and I can make my own decisions.’” In her tweets, Wicks described how hard it had been to process what was going on – working through intense emotions while feeling intense pain. She described asking her doctor whether she would have had access to the procedure she was undergoing had she been in Texas, which this year banned abortions once cardiac activity is detected. The doctor told her that even though the procedure would have been legal, given access issues, it could have been very difficult to obtain. “Think about the cruelty involved in making it your aim to make life more difficult for someone in that situation: in great pain, bleeding profusely, barely able to walk, confused about what’s happening to them, unsure about where to go, and then forcing them to endure multi-state drives or frantic rushes to the airport for the next flight to a state where getting the medically necessary healthcare they need is still *legal* &amp; *available*,” she wrote. “And that’s assuming they have the privilege &amp; means to get those options.” Similar issues are at stake with the abortion case in front of the supreme court, Wicks said. On Wednesday, the court heard oral arguments in Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization, which pits the leadership of the state of Mississippi against the state’s last abortion clinic. The state seeks to ban abortion after 15 weeks gestation and is asking the court to overturn Roe v Wade. “When I was coming of age as a young adult, I thought Roe v Wade was the law of the land and that we had overcome oppressive draconian measures. But here we are again,” Wicks said. In the hearings on Wednesday, the majority of the court appeared supportive of the Mississippi rules, with the newest supreme court justice, Amy Coney Barrett, asking whether women could simply “terminate their parental rights” at the end of pregnancy by giving a child up for adoption, instead of seeking an abortion. Under the Mississippi law, Wicks would still have been able to get an abortion, but similar to the situation in Texas, the impact of closing clinics due to restrictions would make it hard for women to access care in their own communities, even in emergency situations like hers. But if the Mississippi law is upheld, women across the nation may have to travel for hours to find a hospital or clinic, which can make abortions inaccessible for low-income women who are in need of care, she added. “I was doubled over in pain at 4am. I had never experienced that, there’s no way I could have gotten on an airplane or driven miles to get care,” she said.Wandering around with the breeze gently brushing my face, the fluffy clouds above me colouring the sky with soft greys and cream-whites, I took in my surroundings. Binoculars at the ready, I swept between the beeches, birches, acers and alders. A clatter dove burst out of a nearby tree, spraying leaves over me. I stared at it disdainfully. Poor souls, nobody seems to like them. Shouldn’t you admire their smoky shades of grey and voracious eyes? And that’s the same with other birds too. Please notice these beautiful creatures. Circumventing a bush, I was surprised to see a robin staring at us. I elbowed my mum and we gazed at it, intrigued. It hopped to the side and watched us with curious eyes. The robins are much braver here. In London they’re more secretive. It’s nice to see nature less cautious. Having caught up with Papa, we entered the wondrous glasshouse. It was hot and stuffy inside. There were pitcher plants, those giant mouths hanging wide open; lilies, minding their own business; fan palms, waving at the visitors; cacti and succulents, bristling menacingly; and rice plants, standing out from the crowd. Nature is so adaptable. Exiting the garden, I thought how lucky I am to exist, to see existence. These delicate and fragile moments may fade before we know it. I do wish we’d heal the scars we’ve created in our crumbling reality. Priyanka, 11 • Read today’s other Young Country Diary: ‘The predator will have its prey’It all started when I was bouncing on the trampoline with my brother Owen. Suddenly we saw three red kites, soaring round and round above us! They were so close, you could see the red on them. Then our little sister, Ffion, came out carrying a woodlouse in the palm of her hand. She had had six pet woodlice, but had lost five somewhere in the house. “Owen, Gwenny, I’ve…” Stopping mid-sentence, she gaped at the sky. She opened her mouth and cried: “Mummy! There are three. Red. Kites. In. Our. Garden!” It was a majestic sight. The birds had black-tipped wings and their tails were in the shape of a fan. One of them looked as though it had been in a scuffle, as it had a few feathers missing from its wings and swooped less elegantly than the rest. Another one, my favourite, had a beautiful red body and a gleaming white head. One flew into a tree. We heard a loud squawk. The red kite came out of the tree holding a chick in its talons. All the time, William – my little brother – had been watching a spider making its web. Whether big or small, a predator will have its prey. Gwennan, nine • Read today’s other Young Country Diary: ‘I still love the clatter dove that sprays me with leaves’It’s the annual dilemma. Do you buy an artificial tree that will give years of service, or do you stick with a real one that will be discarded on 6 January? This year British households are expected to buy as many as 8m real Christmas trees, but with growing concern about the climate crisis, many consumers are wondering if this is the greenest option. “Choosing the most sustainable Christmas tree will vary depending on circumstance,” says the Friends of the Earth senior sustainability analyst, Clare Oxborrow. “For those who already own an artificial tree, it’s best to keep on using that over buying a new one. By reusing the same decorations year on year, unnecessary waste can also be kept to a minimum.” According to the Carbon Trust, a 6.5ft artificial tree is responsible for about 40kg of greenhouse gas emissions – which means you need to reuse it for about 10 Christmases to keep its environmental impact lower than buying a real tree every year, depending on the materials used in the fake tree. Around two-thirds of an artificial tree’s carbon footprint is the plastic it is made from. If you are keen to buy one you could also look out for one made out of recycled materials or a pre-owned one, it suggests. If it is a real tree you want, the British Christmas Tree Growers Association (BCTGA) advises you opt for one grown nearby. Its website, bctga.co.uk, has a useful directory to help you find a company where you live. “Buy a tree from a local grower who has actually grown it on their property,” suggests the BCTGA chairman, Hans Alexandersen. “If they’re grown in some faraway place and are being transported from A to B, you’re putting a lot of mileage on that tree.” In recent years the supply of domestically grown Christmas trees has increased, making it easier to avoid imports. The most popular choice is the Nordmann fir, which is much admired for its thick, bushy branches and soft needles that are slower to drop than a traditional Norway spruce. Renting a tree has become a popular alternative for people who care about their environmental impact but prefer to have a real one at home,says Oxborrow. “Once returned to the vendor after the festive period, trees are replanted so that they can be rented out again next year,” she says. However, she suggests the green fingered explore potted options. “Those with a dab hand for gardening might be better off buying a potted tree and looking after it the whole year round, so it continues to pay off well after its first use.” While rental services can be marginally cheaper than buying a tree outright, Alexandersen is sceptical of a model that sees them clock up extra miles on the road or perish anyway if they are not cared for properly. If a tree is going to be planted outside afterwards it needs to be kept away from heat sources and stay indoors for no longer than a fortnight. His own company, Hans Christmas Andersen, which has farms in Surrey and Kent, cuts down about a 10th of its 800,000 trees each year, with each one felled replaced with a new tree. “We don’t go into a forest and cut trees out of that,” he says. “We have planted these trees for cutting and the environment they are creating for wildlife is amazing.” The BCTGA advises consumers to wait as long as they can before buying what is a “fresh” product. Tree prices vary around the country but against a backdrop of rising living costs, Alexandersen says shoppers should expect to pay about 5% more this year, as growers recoup higher fertiliser, fuel and labour costs. “We have incurred quite a lot of expenses during the year,” he says. On his farms the price of a 6ft Nordmann fir or Norway spruce has increased by £5 to £60 and £35 respectively. “With Brexit and the virus, things have become a little bit more difficult for us to get and we have had to pay more and that also includes on the labour side.” How you dispose of a real tree is actually more significant than where it comes from or how you got it home. If it ends up in landfill the impact on the environment is much worse because of the methane released during decomposition. Most local authorities now offer a collection service for real trees which they shred and use on gardens and parks. If that is not an option some companies will come to your house and grind it into mulch for you. If you have a shredder you can do it yourself. Real, fake or rent? How the costs stack up Fresh trees Costs vary considerably from provider to provider. In Kent, Watts Farm advertises a 6ft locally grown Nordman fir at £48, while at Exe Valley Christmas Trees you will pay £50, plus a delivery charge if you want it brought to your door. The Christmas Forest, which runs sites around London and does deliveries, is charging £70 for a 6ft tree of the same type. Among large retailers, at Homebase a 6-7ft Nordman fir is being advertised for £36.75, while Wilko has the same sized tree on its website at £54. Rented trees At Primrose Vale Farm Shop in Gloucestershire the cost of renting a 6ft tree is £45, plus a refundable deposit of £15, for the period from the first week of December to 9 January. If you want the same tree back next year, the deposit will be held. Christmas on the Hill in north London has sold out of big trees, but can rent you a 3-footer for £36, plus £4 to rent a watering saucer and a £30 deposit. Again you can have the same tree back year after year – so one day it should reach 6ft. Artificial trees You can buy a 6ft plastic tree from B&amp;Q for £22, or spend as much as £184 in the same shop for one that includes 400 LED bulbs with eight light settings. Most retailers offer a selection of different designs across a similar range of prices. Bear in mind, if you are going to use it for the next decade you probably want a classic green tree, rather than something quirky that might become dated. Hilary OsborneEarly in 2010, I moved from a home with a small, tidy back garden in Brighton to a wild smallholding more than 200 metres above sea level in Llandysul in Wales. Concerns about the climate crisis were at the heart of my move: I was living at sea level, near an underground river, and worried about flooding. But more than anything, I longed to live somewhere I could be self-sufficient. After considering the options – Spain (extreme heat) and New Zealand (attractive but too far away) – I decided on Wales. Water shortages were unlikely, I thought, and property and land were affordable. So I left behind my old life to turn my passion for organic homegrown food into a full-time career – writing, running courses, making public speaking. Gardening in this part of west Wales is very different from gardening in Brighton – the land is more suited to livestock than crops, and it has been a steep learning curve. No casual outdoor growing of tomatoes, aubergines, peppers and chillies in this cooler, wetter climate. No protection from the strong winds, no respite from the relentless rain (and, in 2018, a drought). And no fruit trees so high above sea level in a wind-ravaged spot, or so I was told. As a result, I had to adapt all my gardening techniques. Today, I try to replicate the natural world where I can. I encourage weeds and local flora, let plants self-seed, and use wild areas for biodiversity (natural pest control) and protection against the elements. My approach is organic and sustainable, but ultimately it has evolved around a free-spirited instinct, and no following of rules. My experiments have taught me that many traditional gardening practices no longer fit into our changing climate. They create scenarios in which you are fighting, rather than working with, the natural world and the resilience that can be found within it. By letting the natural world take the lead, I have created a garden that is healthier, more productive and lower-maintenance. Here’s how you can start to do the same. Learn to connect Machinery or tools can create a disconnect. My first spring in Wales I bought a rotavator to prepare my veg patch for planting, and watched in horror as it churned everything in its path, earthworms included. I now do my weeding by hand, avoid digging, and leave plant roots in the ground so as not to disturb the soil and microbial activity within. That said, do what feels right. I plant and dig out potatoes, jerusalem artichokes and ocas by hand because it’s fun and they grow better that way for me. Try not to use gloves. Stick your fingers in the soil to see if a plant needs water or not. Look, smell and feel your way. Touching soil is good for your own gut microbiome – research by Bristol University and University College London in 2007 (published in Neuroscience) suggested that coming into contact with soil bacteria (Mycobacterium vaccae) can stimulate the release of serotonin, which is a natural antidepressant and makes you feel better overall. Connect with your local community and neighbours, to barter and share produce, seeds, materials and ideas. Join gardening groups, organic and permaculture associations, even local Facebook groups. Your nearest garden centre can be a mine of useful information. Break rules Question perceived wisdom, and try to think independently. For example, out-of-date seed can often still be germinated, it just needs planting more thickly. Leave plants in the ground for as long as you can. Brassicas such as chard, flat-leaf kale and purple spouting broccoli can be successfully grown on for many years, saving you time, effort and money. I don’t use fertiliser for hungry Mediterranean fruits like tomatoes (which I grow in a polytunnel) because it makes them needy for more, and stops their roots seeking out natural resilience through symbiotic relationships with underground fungi. Instead make your own compost from leaf mould, and boost it with comfrey, nettles, seaweed, chicken poo and borage. Learn from your mistakes When my neat, long row of tomato plants succumbed to blight, I realised that having plants so close together was making it easier for this airborne fungus to spread. Now, with mixed planting, and at more than a metre between similar plants, I don’t have blight, pests or disease. I don’t have to use crop rotation now either. Spend less and get creative Try to work with what you already have. I have turned old windows into a makeshift cold frame, and created planters out of rubbish – from old pallets and wellies to battered Belfast sinks and a neighbour’s tractor tyres (to house comfrey plants). Repair and maintain your tools. Save seed and grow on supermarket leftovers: citrus pips can be grown into houseplants – they will be hybrids but still may eventually bear fruit. Lime leaves can be used in cooking in the interim. Organic ginger and turmeric stems can produce a viable harvest: choose a golfball-sized piece with an eye – the nobbly, protruding bit – and place in a plastic zip bag in your warmest spot. Plant out when the eye goes green and starts trying to shoot up. Plum, apricot and avocado stones can be germinated in compost in spring (don’t expect homegrown avocados, but they make attractive houseplants). Dried peas can be soaked in water and turned into salad sprouts or planted in pots for pick-and-come-again pea shoots over winter. Grow what works best for your space Stop trying to grow high-maintenance plants that don’t naturally flourish in your location and soil type. Look at easier, more resilient alternatives. Avoid anything with exacting watering requirements (for example, sprouts or cauliflower); instead, grow pick-and-come-again leaves such as spinach, chard and kale. For ease of growing, I also favour purple sprouting broccoli over the ordinary kind. I can’t grow tomatoes outside, but I can grow tomatillos, which are very hardy once established. After almost running out of water entirely in the 2018 drought, I rooted the stems of tomatoes in polytunnels to reduce their water requirements (they feed from two places or more, rather than one). Likewise, crystal lemon cucumber flourishes – no matter the weather. Protect your plants naturally I was told that I couldn’t grow fruit trees so high up, which immediately made me determined to do so. I found that planting a row of quicker-growing damson trees slowed the strong winds sufficiently for my apple and pear trees to establish and grow after just two years. Protect your soil all year round with ground cover. In summer, fill any bare patches with plants to help protect against the drying glare of the sun, and to minimise watering. Quick-growing lettuce, herbs and edible flowers like nasturtium, as well as pumpkin and squash, with their large leaves, can be trailed around plants to shelter the ground. Over winter, soil fertility can leach away with lots of rain, so help bind it together with green manures, perennial plants and spent crops left to rot naturally. Mulches and covers also protect against erosion. Favour natural pest control Seed heads, piles of leaf litter, dead branches or stinging nettles all provide a winter haven for beneficial predators such as frogs, toads, newts, ground beetles, hedgehogs, solitary bees, ladybirds and lacewings – as well as providing food for birds. Embrace free planting (polyculture) as our medieval ancestors did – mixing crops together makes it harder for pests to proliferate, and you will have more natural biodiversity. Try companion planting: for example, place strong-smelling plants such as onions or marigolds around carrots to disguise the smell of the foliage and deter carrot fly. Go wild Look to the past and heritage varieties (try Garden Organic’s Heritage Seed Library) for a wide variety of plants saved from extinction. They may offer greater resilience against our changing climate than the smaller pool of modern varieties commonly available. Wild fruit trees, such as plum and crab apple, can grow in the most extreme circumstances, and tend to adapt more readily to local conditions. The Woodland Trust offers a nice range.In some other version of my life, I own a limonaia – a 17th-century Italian lemon house. I’m not greedy; I don’t need the mansion that goes with it. My lemon trees and I could live in the house together, bask in the floor-to-ceiling windows and never get seasonal affective disorder. The stark reality is, my lemons spend the winter at the end of my bed, eking out what they can from two north-facing windows. There is little room anywhere else in the house, so their winter residency is spent endlessly pirouetting as I turn the pot to keep the leaves in good health. At the end of spring, I kick them outside and don’t let them back in again until the first hard frost, usually some point around now. Outdoors, they sit tucked into a corner between the house and the side return, a spot that can dodge a lot of frosts, which means I can afford to wait until the very last minute before I have to bring them in to the reduced light levels of the house. Other than kumquats, most citrus are more resilient to cold than you might expect. They can overwinter very well at around 4C, but it’s the combination of cold and wet that takes them out. Therefore, it makes sense to bring them indoors, unless you have a greenhouse. Ideally, they need a sunny position nowhere near a radiator, as the dry heat will do them no good. Many varieties of lemons will flower year-round, particularly four seasons and eureka, which are two of the easiest to grow. As lemons are self-fertile, as long as you mist the flowers to help them set, there’s a chance of fruit. The lemons themselves can take up to a year to ripen and thus you have to keep on top of watering – too little, or a sudden temperature change, and the fruit (and leaves) will drop off. If there is fruit on the plant, gently squeeze these; if they don’t feel plump, water a little more. The other way is to check the weight of the pot by gently hefting it to its side. If it feels heavy, there is water in the soil; if it feels light, it’s time to water again. Too much water is just as bad as too little, as lemon roots rot easily over winter, particularly if the plant is made to stand in water. The solution is to stand the pot in a large saucer filled with Leca balls or pebbles and make sure the water level is kept just below these. This will increase humidity without drowning the plant. Finally, citrus are very hungry plants and will need feeding all year round. I like Dr Forest’s general-purpose feed (it’s excellent for other houseplants too), which is organic, made here in the UK, and full of good stuff.These courses run year-round and last for a maximum of a day unless otherwise stated. As most aren’t residential, we have suggested nearby accommodation and dining options Winter skills in the Lake District One for those who like a challenge, this day-long course takes place from December to April, with participants climbing to the summit of Helvellyn with a fell-top assessor. You’ll learn basic snow skills for safe winter walking in the UK’s fells and mountains – including how to use an ice axe and crampons – on a strenuous but fun excursion. Vouchers start from £120 for one person joining a group, while private options begin at £250 (lakedistrictweatherline.co.uk). Heart of the Lakes lists over 300 cottages in the region. The two-AA-rosette 1863 restaurant with rooms in Pooley Bridge serves innovative seasonal menus. Writing in west Devon Arvon has been inspiring wordsmiths for more than five decades with its peaceful properties, strong sense of community and creative writing courses – not to mention esteemed guest tutors such as Salman Rushdie and Hilary Mantel. The charity now has three historic writing houses, but Totleigh Barton was its first: this 16th-century Devon manor offers Arvon’s signature blend of residential courses and retreats, covering a variety of genres and experience levels. Five-day options here start at £710, but gift vouchers can be bought for any amount at (arvon.org). Courses and retreats include full-board accommodation Woodland skills in the Cotswolds Split logs, cook over charcoal and discover the historical use of woodlands on this rural adventure- held in a wood once part of Henry VIII’s estate. The experience (£50pp, from April 2022 ) is run by Cotswolds National Landscape, and its diverse repertoire ranges from fossil hunting to scything (cotswoldsaonb.org.uk).10% off gift vouchers if accommodation booked with partner Cotswolds Hideaways. The Weighbridge Inn in Stroud has its own famous “2 in 1” pie, whose secret recipe is passed from landlord to landlord. Coastal foraging in south-west Wales Hosted by the affable Craig Evans, who grew up foraging around the Amman Valley, this course is run on the stunning shorelines of Pembrokeshire and Carmarthenshire. Guests gather an array of edible goodies, from sea vegetables to crustaceans, then cook up their finds as they learn more about the region. Gift vouchers are available for classic or extreme low-tide courses (£80 or £120, coastalforaging.co.uk); the latter explores lower shore areas and may include invertebrates such as corals and sea squirts. Participants also get a local wildlife booklet, plus a personalised video message. Overlooking Saundersfoot in Pembrokeshire Coast national park, the St Brides spa hotel has doubles or twins from £200 B&amp;B. Dine at the Stone Crab for more superb seafood. Gin making in Herefordshire Nestled in the shadow of its rugged namesake, Black Mountains Botanicals was founded by good friends Glyn and Lloyd, who infuse their award-winning blends with natural country flavours. Discover how they do it and distil your own personalised bottle of gin on this entertaining afternoon experience, which also includes a tour of the distillery and tastings aplenty. Gift vouchers are available from £10-£80, or a full-price experience costs £120 or £140 for two sharing (blackmountainsbotanicals.co.uk). Also in Michaelchurch Escley, Bridge Farmhouse B&amp;B has doubles from £95. The Bridge Inn offers self-catering options, including seasonal yurt and camping, and runs a pub nearby Archaeology, nationwide Archaeological digs are usually only for experts, but not at DigVentures, which hosts several crowdfunded UK projects each year, all open to curious laypeople. Shropshire’s Soulton Hall is among the first events confirmed for 2022 which, in July, will investigate the remains of a “tiny castle” found this summer. Discoveries so far include a medieval pilgrim’s ampulla (bottle for holy water). One-day gift vouchers cost £185, with the option to buy longer durations at a discounted rate. (digventures.com).Continue the castle theme at Rowton castle, doubles from £99 B&amp;B. Shrewsbury’s Market Hall offers a wide range of restaurant stalls in lively surroundings. Dry stone walling in North Yorkshire Used to parcel up land since Neolithic times, dry stone walls are an inherent part of the English countryside, and none are prettier than those in the rolling Yorkshire Dales. Two-day courses run by the Yorkshire Dry Stone Walling Guild offer an introduction to this distinctive heritage and take place around the picturesque Harrogate district from April to October (£99, ydswg.co.uk). Crakehall Cottages, next to a working watermill, has options for two (from £400 a week) and six people (from £690), with some shorter stays available. The Bay Horse Inn is a welcoming family-owned pub on the green. Wildlife safari in the Forest of Dean Join wildlife detective Ed Drewitt on this memorable forest adventure, which runs from May to October in 2022 (£50). You might spot the forest’s famous wild boar or “humbug” piglets, affectionately nicknamed for their stripy coats; other possible encounters include fallow deer, foxes and badgers. There are also evening song walks in the ancient woodland, with song thrushes and wood warblers proclaiming their territories before nightfall. The experience is hosted by Tudor Farmhouse hotel and restaurant); gift vouchers from £10, which can also be used for other immersive events such as foraging and stargazing. Add an overnight stay, three-course dinner for two and breakfast with Tudor Farmhouse’s experience package, costing from £199. Horticulture in Kent Where better to learn the secrets of horticulture than Brogdale, home of the National Fruit Collection in the “garden of England”? Set across a farm with more than 4,000 varieties of fruit tree, Brogdale Collections offers a range of seasonal short courses – from gardening and grafting to making cider and elderflower cordial – starting at £35 a head. Gift vouchers can be bought for between £10 and £50 at brogdalecollections.org and can also be used against orchard visits, events and gift shop items. Doubles at Faversham favourite the Quay start at £90 B&amp;B. Macknade Food Hall houses a leading deli and butchery, plus a late-night “food village” on selected days Cookery in Dumfries and Galloway Based in the Scottish “artists’ town” of Kirkcudbright, also known for its busy harbour and quality seafood, the acclaimed Station House Cookery School runs classes on everything from Thai and Turkish cuisine to top-notch fish and chips. Passionate about local provenance, owner Nick and his team even offer visits to sites such as Gledpark, a nearby Unesco-certified venison producer. Half-day classes are £55, full days £110 (stationhousecookeryschool.co.uk). The Selkirk Arms has doubles from £90 B&amp;B and a renowned restaurant; it also runs Kirkcudbright Galleries Cafe, for lighter bitesMulled negroni A tureen of mulled wine will fill a gathering with the most wonderful Christmas smells; sadly, however, the combination of bargain-basement Château de Migraine plus sugar also tends to bring about the worst Christmas hangovers. The mulled negroni, on the other hand, is a cut above on both counts. The negroni (gin, Italian vermouth, Campari) is a strong cocktail that becomes a little too heady when it’s warmed, but you can tame it by diluting it with a similarly coloured herbal tea. I find Pukka’s Elderberry &amp; Echinacea does the job well, but a hibiscus, rose, cranberry or similar tea would also work fine. A small squirt of citrus at the end helps to round out the flavours. Prep 10 min Serves 6 200ml gin 200ml Italian vermouth 200ml Campari 1 orange, sliced into semi-circles 1 lemon, sliced into semi-circles 600ml brewed elderberry tea (or similar) Gently warm the gin, vermouth and Campari in a saucepan with most of the sliced citrus fruit (reserve some to garnish), then, just as the negroni mix begins to bubble, pour in the tea. Stir and serve in mugs garnished with a slice each of orange and lemon. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Pnin’s punch There’s a famous scene in Vladimir Nabokov’s 1957 comic novel Pnin when the novel’s hero, a hapless Russian professor, hosts a party for his American colleagues. It is a rare moment of triumph for Pnin, and one that might have something to do with the punch he serves: “a heady mixture of chilled Châteaud’Yquem, grapefruit juice and maraschino, which the solemn host had already started to stir in a large bowl of brilliant aquamarine glass with a decorative design of swirled ribbing and lily pads.” Zadie Smith and Martin Amis have both written essays centring on this bowl, but, curiously, neither paid much attention to the punch itself: a strange and wonderful creation, provided you balance it out a little. Please do not actually use Château d’Yquem, the most esteemed Bordeaux dessert wine (and £200-plus per bottle), unless you are extremely rich. A less elevated dessert wine will do just fine; I made it with Co-op Jurançon and it was still heavenly; sauternes, monbazillac, riesling auslese, etc, would all work wonderfully, too. In fact, this is a great way of using up the stuff after Christmas dinner. Prep 5 min Serves 6 600ml dessert wine 300ml grapefruit juice (white, ideally) 150ml brandy 60ml maraschino liqueur– I used Luxardo Grapefruit peel (both pink and white, ideally), to decorate 300ml sparkling water Stir the first four ingredients in as beautiful a bowl as you can find, then decorate with the grapefruit twists. Just before serving, cool the mix by adding copious ice, top up with sparkling water, stir and pour into pretty glasses. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Apple pie punch There are few English liquids that are as all-round delicious as fresh pressed apple juice. Here is a way to make it go a bit farther. By all means play around with the spices in the sugar syrup. And, if you are so inclined, a tot of Somerset Cider Brandy wouldn’t go amiss, either. This will make more syrup than you need, but it keeps in the fridge for about a month and is delicious in all manner of mixed drinks, from old fashioneds to milkshakes to homemade lemonade. Prep 12 min Infuse 4 hr+ Serves 6 For the spiced sugar syrup 4 cinnamon sticks 5 green cardamom pods 5 cloves 200g raw cane sugar 100ml water 1 vanilla pod, split (optional) For the drink 750ml good apple juice 75ml spiced sugar syrup (see above and method) 75ml apple cider vinegar 300ml water 2 apples, cut into slices Nutmeg, to finish First make the syrup. Toast the cinnamon, cardamom and cloves in a dry saucepan until they smell fragrant, then add the sugar and water and bring to a boil. Turn down the heat, simmer for three or four minutes, then turn off the heat, drop in the vanilla pod (if using) and cover the pan. Leave the syrup to infuse for four hours (or overnight), then strain and decant. To make the drink, put the apple juice, syrup, vinegar and water in a pan, add the sliced apples and warm up – don’t let it come to a boil, though. Pour into heat-resistant glasses and finish with a grating of nutmeg over the top. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Clarified milk punch The word “alchemy” is bandied about a bit overmuch by craft bartending types, but if any drink is worthy of the term, it is surely this, a concoction first recorded by English housewife Mary Rockett in 1711. The pale, clear liquid that comes out at the end bears scant resemblance to the ingredients that go in, and the taste is quite magical. It was originally an ingenious solution to the problems of shelf life in the pre-refrigeration age: if you deliberately curdle milk, then filter out the curds, you arrive at a stable, transparent whey solution that keeps for months. A lot of early recipes specify that this is a punch “for bottling”, but it’s much more than that – silky-smooth, eminently sippable and crying out for a room full of guests. It’s going to look strange while you make it, but trust the process. Prep 15 min Serves 6 2 lemons, peeled (reserve 6 twists to garnish) and juiced, to get 50ml 50g sugar 300ml dark rum 1 dash absinthe 1 dash Angostura bitters 250ml hot green tea 250ml whole milk Put the lemon peel (take care to avoid the bitter white pith) and sugar in a bowl or jug and muddle (ie, bash) to make a sherbet. Add the rum, absinthe and bitters, then stir until the sugar is fully dissolved (if you like, throw in a few Christmassy spices and leave to infuse overnight). Gently warm the rum mix in a pan, then pour in the hot tea and lemon juice. In a separate pan, bring the milk to a boil, and the moment it starts to froth up, pour it into the rum mixture. It will curdle and look disgusting, but that’s OK. Line a sieve with muslin, then pass the punch mix through it to filter out the curds, along with most of the colour; you’ll probably need to repeat the sieving a few times to achieve perfect clarity. A final pass through a coffee filter should remove any final particles. The finished punch will keep in a sealed jar or bottle in the fridge for a couple of weeks (presuming you aren’t tempted to down it before). Serve over ice in dainty cups and garnish with a twist of lemon (or a maraschino cherry). UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado • Richard Godwin is the author of The Spirits (Square Peg, £16.99), and the cocktail newsletter of the same name.The German government has announced a lockdown for the unvaccinated and is considering making Covid vaccines mandatory, after weeks of record infections in the country and much of German-speaking Europe. In Austria, thousands of people have taken to the streets in recent weeks to protest against a string of measures: from February, the government will be introducing compulsory vaccines for all, with exemption for those unable to receive a jab on medical grounds. Vaccination rates in both Germany and Austria are lagging behind the rest of western Europe, with under 70% of the populations having had two jabs. People from both countries explain what they make of the current situation, and what they think of vaccine mandates and restrictions for the unvaccinated. Max, 26, lives in the German state of Baden Württemberg and has chosen to remain unvaccinated against Covid. “I have a medical condition, an autoimmune disorder, which raises my risk of side effects from the current set of vaccines, and led my GP to recommend that I not take them. We are both closely following the development of alternative vaccines, which may not have this elevated risk.” Max, who says his doctor’s concerns don’t suffice to make him exempt on medical grounds, is exasperated by the restrictions for those in the population who have not been immunised against the virus. “Public health bureaucrats have decided that they know more about my medical circumstances than my own doctor. The personal risk analysis that was once the hallmark of good clinical care is now strongly discouraged by the Robert Koch Institute [Germany’s federal health agency and research institute responsible for disease control and prevention], and doctors are told to make decisions based not on their patients’ needs but on the assessments of bureaucrats. “Because I decided to listen to the honest medical advice of my doctor, I have been subjected to an increasingly insane series of ‘measures’, openly designed to make my life functionally unliveable, until I take a medical intervention that I know is not right for me. “These measures have done absolutely nothing to convince me – they have simply made my life harder and lonelier. I am now barred from public life; I can’t go to the shops, and I am subject to a ridiculous personal curfew that makes it illegal for me to leave the house after 9pm.” Donovan, 27, a geoscientist from Potsdam, Germany who got vaccinated as soon as it was possible and has had his booster jab, is comfortable with restrictions for the unvaccinated, but is feeling very ambivalent about a possible vaccine mandate for the general population. “I don’t like mandates. I’m uncomfortable with any government, anywhere, telling any person what they are obliged to do with their body, and I sincerely hope that, as Austrian ministers have said, the mandate will be a tool for persuasion, rather than an actual mechanism to pressure people into getting vaccinated. “People in this region in particular were required to do things they didn’t want to do for a long time, historically speaking, and I hope that the new coalition government in Germany will uphold every person’s inviolable autonomy over their own body.” Distrust in government is especially rife in east Germany, he says, where the population was spied on and controlled for decades by the former communist regime. “This distrust is a bigger issue in my view than anything else. But I have hope that some people will change their minds.” What exactly a vaccine mandate would mean in practice, however, remains as unclear in Germany as in Austria. “I support measures that significantly reduce the personal freedoms of the unvaccinated, given the risk they pose to society.” “I additionally support vaccine mandates in the care sector, and I would support further measures, like those taken by companies in the USA, which would require unvaccinated individuals to pay higher health insurance or social care contributions. Those of us who are vaccinated should not continue to subsidise the medical costs of the unvaccinated.” In the state of Brandenburg, where he lives, only 61% of people had had two doses of the vaccine when he looked it up about a week ago. “That’s simply not enough. I don’t want anyone to lose their job because they didn’t want to get vaccinated, but I understand that in these extraordinarily difficult times, extraordinarily difficult measures may have to be taken.” Heike*, 68, a pensioner from Munich, echoes Donovan’s views, and feels uneasy about compulsory vaccinations. “I’m fully vaccinated, and just had a booster, but hesitate about vaccines becoming mandatory. We should preserve freedom of choice, but I don’t have a problem with the unvaccinated becoming severely restricted regarding restaurants, cafes, travel, visitors, employment, social events and shopping for anything else but essentials.” The unvaccinated, Heike believes, have soaked up unscientific advice that is clouding their judgment, but a constructive dialogue between pro- and anti-vaccine camps that might convince sceptics to be inoculated no longer seems possible. “People here are very black and white about things. My husband would support it if people would be restrained and forcefully vaccinated. The conversation has become very aggressive.” Many of those refusing to get jabbed favour alternative medicine, Heike thinks. “All my friends who aren’t vaccinated always visit homeopathic doctors. There are horrible consequences as a result of this refusal to get the vaccine – cancer operations are cancelled, for instance. “My friend thought it was OK for people to forge vaccine certificates. These people should be jailed in my view.” Thomas Steiner, 49, a video producer from Vienna, believes a widespread lack of appreciation for science in Austria is one of the root causes of the country’s low vaccine uptake. “I have no idea where this comes from, but Austria, like Germany, is an esoteric hotspot. Alternative medicine and homeopathy are big business here and sold in pharmacies; it’s deeply ingrained. A lot of people say that’s one of the culprits for the situation we have now.” But, he adds, the matter is complex. “The reasons are of course multifaceted, and the other major factor is political: our governing party, ÖVP, announced the end of the Covid crisis on massive billboards this summer, and said from now on it would be a private matter for individuals to deal with. ‘We have beaten the pandemic, fought the crisis. Finally, together again,’ one of these billboards read. That was the message. “In addition, not enough was done to promote vaccines. The rightwing FPÖ party is openly against vaccination. In this political climate, everything is an uphill battle.” Overall, Steiner thinks there is no way around a general vaccine mandate. “We need one to counter our low vaccination rate, like we had in the 70s against smallpox. It won’t be a challenge to get this mandate through the courts. “It’s not what everyone wanted, but here we are.” • Some names have been changedA crossbench peer who led the inquiry into the death of Victoria Climbié has warned that “marked” cuts to social care funding had taken their toll on child protection services that could have saved Arthur Labinjo-Hughes. Herbert Laming said the reduction in funding for social care in the last 10 years meant children like Arthur, whose abuse and death has shocked the nation, were being missed. Arthur had been poisoned, starved and beaten in the weeks before his death. His stepmother, Emma Tustin, was found guilty of his murder while his father, Thomas Hughes, was found guilty of manslaughter. On Friday, Tustin was sentenced to life in prison with a minimum term of 29 years, and Hughes to 21 years. The trial raised serious questions about how his suffering was missed after it was revealed family members had reported concerns to social workers and police prior to his death. Laming, who chaired the 2001 public inquiry into eight-year-old Victoria’s death and was later appointed to review the case of Peter Connelly (known as Baby P), told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme that the lack of funding had led to a “tremendous reduction of preventive services and family support services”. Both Victoria and Baby P had been neglected, abused and killed. Laming said: “The [frontline services] are not able to bring families into a day centre to see how the child reacts to the parents. They’re not able to observe a child with other children and then to see them go back to the adult in their lives, and social workers often find themselves in this day and age out on their own. And we must do something about that.” He said the report he made following the case of Victoria Climbié was “taken very seriously” and that people tried “very hard initially to implement the recommendations”. “They could have been improved but I think the marked reduction in funding of local authorities in the last 10 years has had a real withdrawal from frontline services. And I think it’s become something of a crisis service, rather than a preventive service.” He also said social workers must be properly trained and supported. “I think that the quality of the training of social work needs to be looked at again,” he said. The director of the Association of Child Protection Professionals said Arthur should have been the top priority of local social services. “He wasn’t on a child protection list, he wasn’t one of the children that you would have considered to be a priority,” Wendy Thorogood told Times Radio, adding that lockdown was a factor in why this wasn’t the case. “We have to remember this was under Covid, so he wasn’t actually getting additional oversight from school and education,” she said. “I feel they took probably the assessment he was out happy, playing, a boy being boisterous.” Thorogood suggested social workers didn’t look closely enough at the bruises, and the photographs taken by the child’s grandmother should have been assessed. She added: “The biggest thing is to actually speak with the child and I can’t say whether or not that actually happened. “Equally, it’s a society responsibility, in relation to his cries were so abnormal if we’d had an anonymous call from one of the neighbours that could have given them more power to do the investigation,” she said. Solihull’s Local Child Safeguarding Partnership have launched an independent review into the case. Football clubs Aston Villa and Birmingham City have confirmed they will hold a minute’s applause in the sixth minutes of their games in tribute to Arthur, who was a Birmingham fan. During the trial it emerged that Arthur’s prized football shirts had been torn up in front of him as a punishment.• In their first joint album, À sa guitare (Erato), the French duo of star countertenor Philippe Jaroussky and classical guitarist Thibaut Garcia give their eloquent take on music from the Renaissance to the late 20th century. Drawing on French, Spanish, Italian and English repertoire, their recital bursts with the unexpected: the pure sound of Jaroussky, who always sings in the falsetto register and is best known for his expertise in baroque opera, taking on the four characters of Schubert’s Erlkönig, Garcia’s dextrous ingenuity making you quite forget that his thunderous part was written for piano; the startling segue from a solo guitar piece by the Brazilian Dilermando Reis (1916-77) to Mozart’s elegiac evening song Abendempfindung, K523. There’s much more, from Poulenc and Fauré to Rossini, Lorca, Purcell, Dowland and Britten. I am always dubious about the concept of late-night music, but the pair’s smoky, sensuous version of September by the Parisian singer Barbara has forced a rethink. Purists – do they still exist? – might shudder at this elegant merry-go-round, but for the rest of us this is an album full of pleasures. • The Attacca Quartet, exuberant New Yorkers who play to the highest standard and bring fresh perspectives to the string quartet repertoire, have mixed Renaissance music and 20th-century minimalism on their new album, Of All Joys (Sony). The title, appropriate for a lockdown endeavour, comes from John Downland’s lute song Flow My Tears (Lachrimae): “And tears and sighs and groans my weary days/ Of all joys have deprived” – included here in its softly anguished instrumental version. Close contemporaries of Dowland also feature: the Miserere of Gregorio Allegri, in this arrangement, metamorphosing into a wistful, prolonged contemplation; the madrigal Weep O Mine Eyes by John Bennet newly poignant without the original text or voices. In complement and contrast, Philip Glass’s well-known String Quartet No 3 “Mishima” is the centrepiece, with Arvo Pärt’s Summa to open the disc and, as a hushed adieu, his Fratres. Thoughtful and rewarding throughout. • The British composer Mark-Anthony Turnage (b1960), inventive, fearless, a tireless original, is the subject of this week’s Composer of the Week. He talks to Donald Macleod about growing up in 1980s Britain, football, Thatcher, jazz and more. Monday to Friday, 12pm, BBC Radio 3.Finalists on 2008’s X Factor, JLS – short for Jack the Lad Swing – are one of the show’s most successful acts. Celebrated for their R&amp;B-infused pop and slick dance routines, the band reached No 1 with their first single, Beat Again, while their debut album won multiple Brit and Mobo awards, and went quadruple platinum. They released three more albums and a condom range, before splitting in 2013. Oritsé Williams and Aston Merrygold went on to pursue solo careers in music, Marvin Humes is thriving as a TV and radio host, while JB Gill pivoted to turkey farming in Kent. Their new album, JLS 2.0, came out on 3 December, and they complete their comeback tour on 12 December at Capital’s Jingle Bell Ball at London’s O2. Aston Merrygold It was Marvin’s idea to wear pastel polo shirts. We vibed it out in shorts, Converse and pulled-up socks. That first X Factor audition opened a lot of doors for JLS, fashion-wise, as it was quite forward-thinking at the time. The same thing happened later down the line with the deep V T-shirts. We were always happy to set boyband trends. I wasn’t nervous when we auditioned. I had the mentality of: right, the door’s open, let’s run through it. When we sang our cover of If I Ever Fall in Love, I didn’t really think we’d nailed it. Is any performance ever 100% perfect? No, but we did the job. I’m from Peterborough, but moved to London after school. I was a presenter for the CITV show the Fun Song Factory, then was going from job to job, trying to pay the bills. When Oritsé set up auditions for his new group, it looked like an incredible opportunity. After X Factor finished, we worked hard; if there was any gig, we were playing it. We did loads of club performances, which meant there was lots of alcohol around. At one show, I went to do a backflip and on the way down slipped on a drink someone from the audience had knocked over. I styled it out and picked up the routine, but I could have really hurt my coccyx. In those days, I felt invincible. Now I eat clean, I stretch, I meditate. That goes for all of us – we have to make sure we are in the right space physically and mentally. When you’re on a 30-date tour at 33 years old, doing the same moves you were doing at 18, you can’t be smashing McDonald’s every day. I’m in the best shape I’ve ever been in, but it’s our friendship that makes our career so long-lasting. After 15 years, I’m pretty sure we’re a lot closer than most of the greatest bands in pop history. Marvin Humes We had been together for a year before this audition. X Factor was the last roll of the dice – we’d tried to make it ourselves, but nobody was interested. Doors were shut in our faces. Of course we were nervous, in front of the judges, but we knew we’d put on a good show. When we started, Oritsé was the frontman, but the dynamics of JLS changed over the course of the show. In week four, Simon Cowell pointed at Aston and said: “This is great, but you need to be doing more as the frontman.” Some bands wouldn’t be able to handle that, some would get pissed off, but we were completely fine. We all play our roles. You probably think of Aston as the frontman, but what people don’t see is that Oritsé is the founding member, and always has the great creative ideas. I’m the one who deals with management and PR reps, and JB is the legal guy, looking after the contracts and accounts. It’s not very exciting, but it makes JLS work. As a band, we’ve matured, but the music industry has changed, too. When we first came out it was the era of the stereotypical boyband – Backstreet Boys, Boyzone, Westlife. Very clean and sparkly. Beyond having a hit record, looks were the most important thing. That doesn’t apply so much any more. These days, we are a lot more patient and understanding of each other’s schedules, especially as parents. We’ve gone from bandmates and business partners to family. I’m sure in another 15 years nothing will have changed, but maybe our kids will be running the show. We’ll just be the dad taxis. JB Gill I knew people over the years who’d done X Factor, incredible singers who had only got through the early stages, so we didn’t know which way it was going to go. We weren’t dressed in the smartest outfits, but we looked identifiable as a band, and while we weren’t the best singers technically, the energy we brought was unique. X Factor was a crash course in this industry. Zero to hero in 10 weeks. During that time we did everything that a pop star has to do. It really gave us an insight into what work was necessary and how we needed to do it. Going into the finals, we had everything to play for, the tension was high. Then we did our homecoming gig in Croydon, which is where my family are from. It was the first time I realised just how loved we were. We shut Croydon down! I was thinking, OK, there are thousands of people blocking the roads – something is going on here. As well as JLS, I’ve got my turkey farm. It’s a different discipline for sure – with animals you’ve always got to be there, on Christmas morning and every day in between. There’s no break. Being in JLS can be intense, too: if I go out as an individual, I always get, “Oh, that’s JB from JLS.” It can be difficult to wind down when you’re always on that assignment. But it’s never not been fun. We’ve got a genuine relationship with each other, and what you see is real. Oritsé Williams Before the audition, I had the flu. I tried to do my verse and all that came out was this croaky sound. I said: “Boys, I can’t sing. I’ve got no voice.” I was upset and scared, but the rest of the band said: “You can do this.” On the day, my voice came back to me. So to get singled out by Simon afterwards was a beautiful moment. My boys believed in me and I didn’t let them down. I threw my life into putting this band together. JLS were a manifestation of the energy I was putting into wanting to look after my mother, who has multiple sclerosis, and who I was a carer for. When I was 12, me and my brother came up with an idea: I’d become a successful musician and he would become a doctor, and we would use the money to find a cure for Mum. He graduated as a biomedical scientist, and I formed a band, but we’ve realised the best way we can support her is through love. On X Factor, I was willing to do anything to get to the final – dressing, or having my hair done, in a certain way. I was focused. When it came to the fame side of things, though, the boys adjusted to it a lot better than I did. I struggled. From the first audition to the time I exited X Factor, I watched my mum go from walking with crutches to using a wheelchair. It was impossible for me to get lost in the fame bubble, so I felt very different from the guys. They are still so supportive, and always have been. I’ve lived a lot in a very short space of time, and had some serious character-building experiences. But none of this would have happened if it wasn’t for my unfortunate circumstances. There are 8 billion people in this world, so it’s a miracle I found these guys. I was obsessed with making it work – and it did.As Michael Carrick gallantly stepped aside on Wednesday night, the exit of the old and the arrival of the new was officially signed off. When Ralf Rangnick takes charge of Manchester United for the first time against Crystal Palace early on Sunday afternoon, it will be the latest wave of German coaching influence at the top of the Premier League. Jürgen Klopp’s gutsy propulsion of Liverpool back to prominence has already left an indelible mark on 21st-century English football and Thomas Tuchel, Klopp’s successor at Mainz and then Borussia Dortmund, has been the surprise hit of 2021 in a league that has become an arms race of high-end coaches. Throw in Pep Guardiola, who coached Bayern for three years from 2013, then all of the Premier League’s big four have coaches with relatively recent experience of the sharp end of the Bundesliga. Rangnick, the last of the quartet to arrive, is the starting point of it all, a man who inadvertently shook German football culture in December 1998 when giving a de facto seminar on a tactics board on the Saturday night institution Das Aktuelle Sportstudio, the German equivalent of Match of the Day. The then Ulm coach, midway through whisking a modest club from the third tier to the top flight, purposefully moved coloured and numbered magnets on a whiteboard in front of the attentive presenter Michael Steinbrecher. Such was the innovation in the concepts presented by Rangnick – not least a back four in which one of the centre-backs could act in a libero role – that Steinbrecher felt he had to bullet-point it all for the viewers at the end. Squeezing the space, creating overloads – all part of modern football parlance, but alien to the game’s nomenclature in Germany in the late 90s. The coach was snootily dubbed “the football professor”, yet Rangnick has long since had the last laugh. What he was lampooned for in certain quarters of German football society is what has proved to be his greatest strength: clear, detailed explanations of plan and performance, which have helped countless players hit form and, in some cases, fulfil their potential. Despite the oft-excellent work of the Austrian Ralph Hasenhüttl, who coached RB Leipzig in the two-year spell between Rangnick’s two separate seasons in charge of the first team, the clearest manifestation of the Rangnick credo in the Premier League is Tuchel. Rangnick had made a 27-year-old Tuchel head coach of Stuttgart’s under-15 side in 2000 having met him at Ulm, and later tried to bring him to Hoffenheim to lead the under-23s. Tuchel presumably would have been groomed for eventual ascension to the top job. Gegenpressing might fit the Premier League, where teams have in recent years fought for the right to counterattack, but Tuchel is the best example of why Rangnick’s approach could work for United. That one word, used to death barely a week after the confirmation of Rangnick’s arrival, does not suffice to describe Tuchel’s work. He already showed greater versatility at Borussia Dortmund, where his manner ruffled feathers to an eventually unsustainable degree but where his coaching pedigree was never questioned. Tuchel’s Dortmund could and did press but knew when to circulate the ball at differing tempos, and when to sit and conserve energy. A multi-paced approach would offer less of a jarring about-turn from the Ole Gunnar Solskjær era. “My approach is to bring more balance,” Rangnick emphasised in his introductory press conference, “more control to the game.” Conversation will be part of the approach, with Rangnick’s ability to relate key. A belief that managing is “30% coaching and 70% social competence” – as another from the Rangnick-Tuchel lineage, Bayern’s Julian Nagelsmann, observed in 2016 – is something he shares with Klopp. Tuchel’s own communication skills have moved on from his frequently brusque nature of the past – he “oscillates between perfection and humanity” was how the former Tottenham midfielder Lewis Holtby, who played under him at Mainz, put it – with his downfall at Paris Saint-Germain down to relations at board level rather than in the dressing room. Unlike Tuchel, Klopp was an admirer of Rangnick but never a disciple. He was more influenced by the late Wolfgang Frank, his coach for two spells during his 11 years as a player at Mainz, who had magpied much from Arrigo Sacchi’s all-conquering Milan side of the late 1980s. While these coaches may share similar sources materials going back – Sacchi, Rangnick’s favourite Valeryi Lobanovskyi – their individual interpretations are quite distinct. Then there’s Guardiola, whose experience in the Bundesliga was more of an exchange of ideas than many realise. “He’s clear,” wrote Marti Perarnau in his 2014 book Pep Confidential, “that he doesn’t want Bayern’s game to mimic the way Barça played while he was in charge.” The aggression of Bundesliga football really seduced Guardiola and, in retrospect, marked the league out as his perfect midpoint between coaching in Spain and then in England. Succeeding the treble-winning Jupp Heynckes in 2013, Guardiola knew he was there to add a recognisable style of football to the Bayern brand but never planned to throw the baby out with the bathwater. “Any team that has won four titles [counting the Super Cup] doesn’t need much of an overhaul,” he noted in his introductory press conference. Guardiola wanted to take as much from the German game as he gave to it. During this course of his conversations with his coaching staff and Perarnau in the book’s narrative, his fascination with and admiration for Bundesliga teams’ manner of counterattacking became more and more apparent. Rangnick’s ability to see the bigger picture, having only coached in two of the 10 seasons that have passed since he left Schalke in September 2011, has seen him move permanently to setting the tone, rather than just focusing on the next result. The German idea, across most philosophies, is that process will lead to results, a faith frequently glossed over in the Premier League. Klopp and Tuchel – and hopefully for United, now Rangnick – are showing that process is everything.In a bonanza year for memoirs, Ruth Coker Burks got us off to a strong start with All the Young Men (Trapeze), a clear-eyed and poignant account of her years spent looking after Aids patients in Little Rock, Arkansas, in the 1980s. While visiting a friend in hospital, Burks witnessed a group of nurses drawing straws over who should enter a room labelled “Biohazard”, the ward for men with “that gay disease”. And so she took it upon herself to sit with the dying and bury them when their families wouldn’t. Later, as the scale of fear and prejudice became apparent, she helped patients with food, transport, social security and housing, often at enormous personal cost. Her book, written with Kevin Carr O’Leary, finds light in the darkness as it reveals the love and camaraderie of a hidden community fighting for its life. Sadness and joy also go hand-in-hand in What It Feels Like for a Girl (Penguin), an exuberant account of Paris Lees’s tearaway teenage years in Hucknall, Nottinghamshire, where “the streets are paved wi’ dog shit”. Her gender nonconformity is just one aspect of an adolescence that also features bullying, violence, prostitution, robbery and a spell in a young offenders’ institute. Yet despite the many traumas, Lees finds joy and kinship in the underground club scene and a group of drag queens who cocoon her in love and laughter. Miriam Margolyes’s This Much Is True (John Murray) traces her path from cherished child of an Oxford GP to Bafta-winning actor to chat-show sofa staple, in a raucously indiscreet memoir replete with fruity tales of sexual experimentation, tricky co-stars and Olympic-level farting. And Bob Mortimer’s winningly heartfelt And Away… (Gallery) reveals the brilliant highs and terrible lows of his childhood as the “irritating runt” of four brothers, his initial career as a solicitor and subsequent reinvention as a celebrated comic alongside his partner in crime, Vic Reeves. Themes of identity and belonging underpin Beautiful Country (Viking), Qian Julie Wang’s elegantly affecting account of her move from China to New York where she lived undocumented and under threat of deportation, and Nadia Owusu’s powerful Aftershocks (Sceptre), in which the author recalls a peripatetic childhood as the daughter of a volatile Armenian-American mother and a Ghanaian father, a United Nations official who died when she was 13. Both books tell remarkable stories of displacement, heartache and resilience. 1000 Years of Joys and Sorrows (Bodley Head) is another tale of extraordinary resilience, as the artist Ai Weiwei vividly reflects on his own life and that of his father, who was a poet. Both men fell foul of the Chinese authorities: Ai’s father, Ai Qing, was exiled to a place nicknamed “Little Siberia”, where he lived with his young son in a dug-out pit with a roof made from mud and branches, while Ai himself was imprisoned in 2011 for 11 weeks on spurious tax charges. Lea Ypi’s Free: Coming of Age at the End of History (Penguin) is a beautifully written account of life under a crumbling Stalinist system in Albania and the shock and chaos of what came next. In telling her story and examining the political systems in which she was raised, the author and LSE professor asks tough questions about the nature of freedom. In Maybe I Don’t Belong Here (Bluebird), the actor David Harewood lays bare his struggles with racial injustice and mental illness, and shows how these things are connected. Harewood’s childhood was punctuated by racist abuse; later, as he tried to get his career off the ground, he was bullied by colleagues and critics. At 23, he had a psychotic breakdown during which it took six police officers to restrain him, and was dispatched to a psychiatric ward where, he learns from his hospital records, he was described as a “large black man” and administered drugs at four times the recommended dose. His recollections of his unravelling, treatment and recovery are acutely drawn. Huma Abedin’s electrifying memoir Both/And: A Life in Many Worlds (Simon &amp; Schuster) grapples with her multiple identities as a woman with Indian parents, who was born in Michigan and raised in Saudi Arabia. It is also a brave and unflinching account of her job as aide to Hillary Clinton and her years as the wife of Anthony Weiner, the congressman at the centre of a sexting scandal that landed him in prison, prompted an investigation by child services and ultimately derailed Clinton’s presidential campaign. Of the night Abedin learned her work emails had been discovered on her husband’s laptop, which would lead to the FBI reopening its investigation into Clinton’s handling of classified information, she recalls: “I wrote one line in my notebook. ‘I do not know how I am going to survive this. Help me God.’” The actor Brian Cox lost his father to pancreatic cancer when he was eight years old, his mother battled with mental illness and his childhood was one of almost Dickensian poverty. But you won’t find self-pity in his meandering but amusingly irreverent memoir, Putting the Rabbit in the Hat (Quercus). Instead, we get a whistlestop tour of his working life, during which he takes entertaining pot-shots at Johnny Depp (“overrated”), Steven Seagal (“ludicrous”) and Edward Norton (“a pain in the arse”). Finally, two terrific biographies. Frances Wilson’s smart and scholarly Burning Man: The Ascent of DH Lawrence (Bloomsbury) paints a vivid picture of a brilliant writer who was “censored and worshipped” in his lifetime, and remained furious at the world and at those not sufficiently cognisant of his genius. And Paula Byrne’s The Adventures of Miss Barbara Pym (William Collins), about the British postwar novelist whom Philip Larkin compared to Jane Austen, is a touching and revealing portrait of a flawed romantic and a free spirit. • Browse all the featured books and save up to 15% at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Eight of us sat together in a circle in a wooden shed, an outbuilding at a large country house, somewhere in the south of England. The door was ajar, and spring light flooded the room. “Can anyone name any treatment methods for addiction, other than the 12 steps?” asked a counsellor. “Cognitive behavioural therapy?” offered a patient. “These other methods come and go,” said the counsellor, with a wave of the hand. “But it’s only the 12 steps that truly work.” I later found this to be questionable, to say the least. My 28-day stay in a 12-step rehab receiving treatment for substance misuse was defined by a series of moments in which I was told things that just didn’t sound right. But I wasn’t in a place to argue. On check-in, I was told I have a disease that’s progressive, fatal and incurable, and that I have a one in three chance of dying from it. My life had fallen apart so dramatically over the course of the previous year that I was in desperate need of any solution. The events that led me to rehab are hazy. There was a painful breakup, a redundancy. In October 2015, I was hit by a truck. Signed off work, with my hand in a cast, and tending to a set of difficult emotions, I turned to a coping mechanism I had discovered when I was 15. I had started drinking, then taking recreational drugs with friends to numb the pain I felt as my parents went through a divorce, and the confusion I experienced around being gay. But crystal meth was to prove my nemesis. I’ve tried all the drugs, really. Meth, though, is something else. It has ripped through the gay scene, where it is used in conjunction with sex, in an epidemic known as “chemsex”. What started off as a bit of misguided fun very quickly got out of hand. Now, aged 29, I had made a decision to move back in with my family – temporarily, I assured myself – in order to clean up. Before long, I was in the car outside the local drug recovery service, curled up in a ball, my face pressed against the window. I was dependent on Valium; it helped me carry on functioning, at least for a while. I tried to detox at home, but found myself sobbing, feeling as if I was falling apart. This triggered a return to using crystal meth as an analgesic, and bouts of severe paranoia. When someone finally suggested I might go to the Priory rehab clinic, I was all ears. Encouraged by my despairing family, I picked up the phone. A woman answered. Running through my options, she said it would cost between £10,000 and £28,000 for a month’s stay. I was desperate, so I chose a small facility at the bottom end of the scale, at £13,000. I had an en suite room, and didn’t have to share a dorm. My parents arranged a “soft loan” from an extended family member. A privilege, I know; but one I have to pay back. On the way to the clinic, I had the distinct feeling of being driven to my own funeral. My mum suggested we stop in Chichester for lunch. But I was not in the mood for a jolly meal. Checking in, I became aware that my situation was becoming pathologised. “Have you ever injected?” the doctor asked. “I have,” I replied. Before my mum left, I asked: “Do you think I’ll be allowed a glass of wine with dinner?” The answer was no. Like most rehabs, this one enforced abstinence. I would spend the next 28 days with 25 or so other patients, each on their own seven-, 14- or 28-day journeys. I met some colourful characters, but it was mainly middle-aged alcoholics from the home counties. I was a mess. There was an awful lot of work to do, and I was eager to get on with it. Weekdays consisted of six hours of group therapy. In the evenings, we might have acupuncture or yoga. The food was OK. After a cooked breakfast, we started the day in the living room, lined with bookshelves filled with ornaments. We’d sit on Chesterfield sofas in the glum half-light emanating from the north-facing windows, and share a reading from the Alcoholics Anonymous and Narcotics Anonymous Daily Reflections books, usually centred around big Christian themes expressed through metaphors of eagles swooping or geological features to be overcome. I had asked at check-in if I could have a Qu’ran to go with the Bible next to my bed (I heard it made for a better read, and I had a crush on a Muslim boy), but was told, in no uncertain terms, that the Bible was enough to be getting on with. (When contacted for this article, the Priory said that a Qu’ran is available at the clinic “on request”, adding that the “voluntary 12-step programme we run is open to people of all faiths and none … We fully respect a diversity of religious adherence.”) Group therapy was more of the same. A copy of the 12 steps hung on the wall. Step one read: “We admitted we were powerless over our addiction and that our lives had become unmanageable.” Step three that we “turn our life and our will over to the care of God, as we understood him”. Step four that we make a “searching and fearless moral inventory of ourselves”. And step five that we admit “to God, to ourselves and to another human being the exact nature of our wrongs”. So it went on. This didn’t feel right. I’d spent a lifetime cultivating self-acceptance. Now I was being told that the root of my problems was my own moral failings. And my only salvation from this life-threatening situation was to establish a relationship with God. I sat in that shed and took it in turns with my fellow inpatients to read aloud from worksheets that we completed every night and every morning. We would feed back to one another on the problems we had: broken homes, failed marriages, misspent youth. The counsellors, most of them “12-steppers”, interjected with words of encouragement and examples of when, for them, it had felt as if things were going wrong and then, ultimately, something had provided: a solution appearing from between the clouds. “Working the steps,” was prescribed as the remedy for every problem. I was given shots of vitamin B12 in my backside every night for the first week: useful, apparently, for alcoholics. We all smoked a lot. As one fellow inpatient put it: “I came in with a drink problem, and I’ll leave an ‘alcoholic’ – and a smoker.” The walls of the smoking shed were adorned with messages of support and empty platitudes from our forebears. Here we told tales of our former lives, providing glimpses into the worlds we had left behind. The gallows humour in rehab is immense, I’ll give it that: the one unifying factor of those present was that we had all messed up our lives so severely, or were on the verge of doing so, that the only thing left to do was laugh. I’ll never forget the story one patient told about the time she got so drunk she mistook a household appliance for her boyfriend and snuggled up to it on the floor. She’s dead now, I think. The ancillary staff – nurses-cum-carers-cum-security, some of whom were recovering addicts themselves – smoked with us. They, too, would extol the virtues of the 12 steps. One night, I sat in the shed with a nurse on his night shift. Holding a stick-thin roll-up, he reminisced about the good old days of mental health care when the golden rule, he recounted with a soft chuckle, was: “When in doubt, knock ’em out.” *** “But if I have a disease,” I asked, looking at step one, “why do I admit it? Surely I’m not guilty of anything?” I was willing to kick up a fuss. But it’s amazing how quickly one adapts to a thought system when everyone around you is extolling it. Rehab counsellors are often provided with “12-step facilitation” manuals, instructing them how to counter dissenting patients. In this case, one of the counsellors merely gestured to me to zip my lips and swallow the key. Later, a counsellor would take me aside and tell me that the more questions I asked, “the less this will work”. The experience, generally, was gruelling. Filling out yet more worksheets, I was reminded of a family member rubbing the nose of my childhood kitten in its own shit. “Describe how your using caused you harm,” the worksheet asked. “Describe three times your using led you to break your own moral code.” A lot of the time, stumped for answers, I would shoehorn in anything, hoping the act of confession alone would keep me clean. Accepting a higher power was fundamental to my chances of staying clean, I was told. That “higher power” could be anything. The counsellors advised we “turn our will and our lives over to God” by checking every life decision we ever made with another recovering addict, or a 12-step therapist. This seemed unwieldy. But, as a straight-A student with his life on the line, I was willing to give it a go; I was particularly keen to get this right. *** Despite extensive research, there is very little reputable evidence to show that the 12-step programme works better than other interventions. There have been two Cochrane reviews, the gold standard for assessing medical research, in 2006 and 2020. The first review found no evidence that the method helped recovering alcoholics. In the second review, the results of which superseded the first, AA adherents were slightly more likely to be sober after a year than those following other methods, including cognitive behavioural therapy, but they did no better on a number of other metrics, such as a reduction in the severity of drinking among people who did not find full recovery, and mitigation of the negative side-effects of excessive drinking. In 2017, the Department of Health and Social Care published a report known as The Orange Book, featuring research into how best to treat addiction. It mentions the 12 steps a handful of times, but only as a treatment offered to willing patients as part of a “menu” of other options for them to choose from. I asked Dr Emily Finch, one of the 28 addiction experts who worked on the report, why they received scant mention. “There is very little evidence to show that they work,” she says. “This is not to say they don’t work. The active ingredient for most people in 12 steps is not necessarily about the theory, it’s about things like the social skills it teaches people. It helps people to use their time more productively. I have plenty of patients who say the steps have worked for them, but that’s not borne out necessarily in the scientific evidence.” So how have we ended up in a place where a quasi-religious treatment method is taken as gospel, especially in the US, when it comes to treating addiction? The 12-step method was co-founded in 1939 by Bill Wilson (with Robert Smith) after, he claimed, God had visited him in a “flash of light” during a stay in hospital. The method provided a convenient remedy, in a puritanical society just out of prohibition, for the issue of “problem drinkers”. Based on the principles of the Oxford Group, a fundamentalist Christian organisation of which Wilson – a salesman, with no medical training – was a member, Alcoholics Anonymous, the 12 steps’ first iteration, was at the time labelled “a curious combination of organising propaganda and religious exhortation,” by the American Medical Association. On the AA website, it states: “There is room in AA for people of all shades of belief and non-belief,” adding that while many believe in a God, others are atheist or agnostic. The 12-step model continues to proliferate today, with at least 50 “fellowships” catering to everything from overeating to sex addiction, gambling and procrastination. The idea of addiction being a disease was first introduced in 1960 by a scientist and 12-step adherent, EM Jellinek, bringing the method pseudo-medical respectability. The mismatch between medicalisation and a “spiritual” solution jars, says Maia Szalavitz, author and journalist, who is a former 12-step member. She says: “If you went to treatment for depression, cancer or schizophrenia and someone told you to get on your knees, find a higher power, take moral inventory and make amends, you’d think you’d found a quack.” US addiction specialist Dr Lance Dodes describes the perception that the 12 steps works as a “sampling” bias. “You don’t hear from those who fail,” he says. Dodes estimates the success rate of 12-step fellowships to stand at roughly 5-8%. That means for every person you see at a meeting, there are 18 or 19 who have sat there before, and for whom the method hasn’t worked. Yet 12-step fellowships hold an enduring place in the public consciousness, not least thanks to Marty Mann, an early adherent and PR woman who took the method to Hollywood, where it would feature in films such as Billy Wilder’s 1945 classic The Lost Weekend and many since. Dodes argues that the approach of turning our will and lives over to the care of God, when we should be seeking psychotherapeutic help, has “caused a great deal of harm to a great many people”. The biggest danger for him is the 12-step programme’s insistence that relapse is down to the individual failing to take responsibility. “At 12-step fellowships, they will say, ‘It works if you work it’,” says Dodes who, along with his son Zachary wrote The Sober Truth, aimed at debunking the science of AA. “But if it doesn’t work, whose fault is it? It’s your fault.” He warns that people “lose years, decades of their life to the programme”, and develop additional problems such as OCD. I spoke to at least one former 12-stepper who had left AA after developing severe OCD, something I identify with since trying to live by the unrealistic demands of “the programme”, constantly worried that I might do something “wrong”. Yet 12-step rehabs continue to thrive. Addiction rates are soaring. In a review into drug treatment services, Dame Carol Black warned that publicly provided drug recovery services are “on their knees”, while drug-related deaths in England and Wales are at an all-time high. Across England, many local authorities have seen their budgets for addiction services slashed since 2015 as councils struggle to balance the books. The Priory defends the use of the 12-step model in its clinics. “The 12-step set of guiding principles is recognised around the world, and has been used successfully for more than 80 years to help millions overcome problems including drug and alcohol addiction,” a hospital spokesperson tells me. “It is simply wrong to suggest that it leads to frequent relapse. It is recognised, however, that recovery from addiction can be difficult and, sadly, relapses can happen for some. We have robust aftercare groups and these show that the programmes do work for many people.” Today, there are 118 private residential substance misuse services in England registered with the Care Quality Commission (CQC). A spokesperson for the CQC told me: “Providers must make sure that they obtain consent lawfully … Staff should provide sufficient information about treatment options and risks, and ensure service-users have capacity to make an informed decision.” Yet this is exactly what I feel I did not do. Informed consent involves patients being provided with a variety of treatment options, along with information about expected outcomes, in order for them to choose what they feel is best, and right, for them. Not to do so makes for ineffectual treatment. A spokesperson for the Priory says: “Patients are entitled to question all or any element of the programme, or indeed discharge themselves from treatment and find an alternative which they feel is more appropriate to their needs and beliefs.” While roughly half of the rehabs in the UK offer only 12-step treatment, the other half more closely follow the guidance of The Orange Book, and the principle of informed consent, by providing patients with a range of therapeutic options. That isn’t to say these institutions should be immune to criticism. Until 2014, the sector was unregulated: anyone could set up a “rehab”. In 2017 the CQC issued a report outlining serious concerns with the industry. It warned that 49 out of 68 clinics inspected contravened the Health and Social Care Act 2o12. One rehab, not run by the Priory, was struck off when it was found to be unaware of how to support clients through an opiate or alcohol detox. The Priory points out that the clinic I attended has a CQC rating of “good”, and that 86.5% of its healthcare sites in the UK are rated as good or outstanding. It adds that it will “take on board” my concerns about the treatment I received “in order to improve the patient experience at the clinic”. Ironically, many in the 12-step community shun rehabs, complaining they charge for something that should be “given freely”. “Rehabs are the definition of a rip-off,” says Szalavitz, “paying for what you can get at 12-step meetings for free.” *** I stayed clean for 13 months after I left rehab. I followed the advice I had received there to a T. I checked in with the counsellors by phone and stuck to the schedule I had made: five 12-step meetings a week. I did a “90 in 90”: attending a 12-step meeting every day for the first three months. By the end, I could no longer see the wood for the trees: I had internalised “the programme”. I drove to rehab every Wednesday for aftercare. Before long, I noticed those I had been in with dropping away. After eight months, I attended an aftercare session and realised that only three of the 25 I shared time with there were still in attendance. It wasn’t long before the cracks started to show for me, too. I had moved back to London, into a flat I shared with a friend. Before long, I was closeted in my room, reluctant to see people for fear of a relapse. I continued to attend meetings; I prayed, at the suggestion of a Narcotics Anonymous mentor. But I also became pious and controlling. The undiagnosed eating disorder I had as a teenager came back. I cut out sugar, wheat and dairy. I became fastidious about exercise. Life was joyless. And all the while, I disappeared further down a dark rabbit hole, hoping that a “spiritual awakening”, as promised by the programme, was just around the next bend. As my old life fell away, I entered a very dark place. After a three-week spell in which thoughts of killing myself looped in my head, I told the mentor that I was suicidal. He told me this showed my step two – the requirement to find faith in a “higher power” – wasn’t strong enough. I needed to reinvest myself in the programme, attend more meetings. I felt broken. But worse, I felt alone. I remember thinking at the time that if I did kill myself, and my parents asked what had gone wrong – perhaps of the rehab centre – they would have been told: “It was the disease that got him.” Rather than kill myself, I went on a bender. First wine, then crystal meth. I was conscious of two things: that I had promised myself I would never drink or take drugs again; and that since leaving rehab, I had thought only of recovery – the 12-steps; what I was doing right, what I was doing wrong. I bounced in and out of 12-step meetings for a year after that. Finally, I started seeing a therapist and focused on the issues that had led to me using in the first place. I told her I felt I was “in recovery from recovery”; I took antidepressants for the first time in my life. I went through a period of great cognitive dissonance as I off-boarded the faulty thinking instilled in me by 12-step programmes. The damage done to my life during that period is immense: personal finances, friendships, employment prospects all went through a trapdoor. As a gay man, I feel the idea of being “diseased” was particularly difficult for me to take on board. I had grown up with the threat of HIV, and knowing that even after being legalised, homosexuality had been classified as a mental disorder until 1987. As well as the audacity of diagnosing people with a life-threatening disease that I don’t believe exists, I feel that the treatment I received stood in the way of accessing care that suited me. If I had been provided with genuine choice as a patient, I would have saved myself an awful lot of time and money. I’ve had to work through the trauma of my rehab experience: the unwieldy, dispassionate way the method of the 12 steps was delivered to me, and the apparent insistence that it was the only way I could live. • In the UK, Action on Addiction is available on 0300 330 0659. In the US, SAMHSA’s national helpline is at 800-662-4357. In Australia, the National Alcohol and Other Drug Hotline is at 1800 250 015; families and friends can seek help at Family Drug Support Australia at 1300 368 186. • This article was amended on 6 and 9 December 2021. An earlier version said there was very little reputable evidence to show that the 12-step programme works; this should have said there was very little reputable evidence to show the programme works better than other interventions. It was also revised to make clear that the Cochrane review of 2020 superseded the findings of the 2006 review.In A Pianist Under the Influence, his short, probing ebook about Robert Schumann (1810-1856), the American pianist Jonathan Biss makes an observation so absurdly obvious (once someone else has made it) that you are stopped in your tracks: Schumann “knows the meaning of solitude and can translate it into sound”. For Biss, as for many other top musicians – the cellist Steven Isserlis and the pianists Mitsuko Uchida and Stephen Hough among them – Schumann provokes a singular, protective love, as if for a troubled child possessed of rare, awkward genius. His humanity and fragility course through every note and each unsettled rhythm that he wrote. Biss captures those fleeting shifts without any gothic horror or excess, only clear-eyed, generous insight. Thus when the British tenor Mark Padmore, introducing their all-Schumann recital at Milton Court, urged his audience to “listen to the pianist, not to me”, he was not merely being modest. Schumann’s songs place the voice in the middle. The piano part twists above and below, inner melodies and counterpoint at times so self-contained it is almost a matter of indifference whether the singer joins in with this ongoing reverie. Or so it seems, except that Padmore, in the colour, dynamic range, nuance and drama of his performance, sometimes straining to its very limits, demands that you do, indeed, listen. As with all the finest Lieder singers, he can yoke his own experience – four decades, performing all kinds of repertoire – to the demands of the music, from simple longing to anguish. The main works were two well-known cycles written in Schumann’s “year of song”, 1840: Liederkreis, Op 24 and Dichterliebe, Op 48 (in the full, 20-song version). Between these, the duo performed the mysterious Sechs Gedichte und Requiem (1850), Op 90, fragmentary and melancholy settings of poems by Nikolaus Lenau – like Schumann a depressive, as well as a sufferer from syphilis. Soon Schumann, his mind unravelling, would be in the asylum at Endenich outside Bonn, close to death and describing himself as an “honorary member of heaven”. As his earthly interpreters, Padmore and Biss gave us more than a glance at those terrible and inevitable siblings, agony and ecstasy.Press conferences will not define the career of Tiger Woods save, perhaps, the reference point provided by “Hello world” on the eve of his professional debut in 1996. For so many years thereafter, appearances by Woods before the media felt like an ordeal. Great moments arrived inside ropes, not via soundbite. That tetchiness has long since evaporated. The later stages of his career have witnessed a more relatable and amenable side. Even if, it must be said, the 15-times major winner never has any apparent interest in being a journalist’s friend. Woods is just willing or able to play the game a little better than before. Tuesday in the Bahamas was significant as Woods was facing questions for the first time since he cheated death on a February morning in California. There was a widespread expectation Woods would never play competitively again. Instead, in the latest remarkable chapter of a career less ordinary, the 45-year-old is eyeing a comeback. It may well come alongside his son, Charlie, in Orlando this month. There would be a legitimate fear Woods does not know when to stop had he not won the 2019 Masters, two years after he had been plastered all over news channels when dishevelled and disoriented at the time of a DUI arrest. At Albany, in late 2017, Woods said he had never watched that footage. On the same site, four years on, Woods explained how he deliberately avoided coverage of his car crash when confined to a hospital bed. It seems a form of coping mechanism for one so famous, whereby nobody else’s perspective matters. Woods spoke for close to 40 minutes – a marathon, in context – but no sooner had cameras shut off than tittering began around the one subject he had no desire to address. Namely: what precisely happened on 23 February on Hawthorne Boulevard. Woods curtly referred a questioner towards the police report. Subject closed. The trouble for anybody looking to piece together events is the lack of clarity provided by the authorities. Woods, who was travelling at more than 80mph in a 45mph zone, hit a central reservation before crossing two oncoming lanes and uprooting a tree. Despite being in Los Angeles, he believed he was in Florida when first interviewed by police. Woods was not subject to any charge or sanction. Beyond that, we have been left to draw our own conclusions; detectives cited “privacy issues” when refusing to release further information. Woods had looked out of sorts when interviewed on television the afternoon before the crash, adding to the whispers. And yet the notion that the world somehow has to know the intricacies of what took place is ludicrous and ghoulish. Crucially – and via good fortune – nobody else was hurt or affected by what occurred with Woods’s SUV. If Woods has no wish to publicly elaborate on a horrendous, near-death experience then it seems strange there would be a demand for anything else. Incredible talent with a club in hand should not spare anybody behavioural assessment. However, there is a line at which Woods’s achievement and sporting contribution should afford him at least some leeway. Scraping through the wreckage of a car smash as he attempts to prolong tournament involvement serves no real purpose. Woods is well aware he lives his life under a glare not afforded to many others. It has been this way since his childhood. No one can reach Woods’s status without camera time. Personal and professional struggles have played out under intense focus. His impressive foundation will benefit hugely from the latest staging of the Hero World Challenge here. His very presence at Albany, including to hit range shots, created a buzz among the leading players in the game, many of whom now class Woods as a close friend. Intrigue around one of the most fascinating sporting figures is perfectly fair. Grasping for minutiae around an accident that left two children fearing they might never see their father again, though, feels a tasteless step too far.Bow selector The latest instalment in the all-encompassing Marvel Cinematic-and-high-end-streaming-TV Universe is the series Hawkeye, recently debuting on Disney+. It stars Jeremy Renner as the eponymous hero, as seen in many Marvel films. Fellow archer Kate Bishop, played by Hailee Steinfeld, joins him for the ride. Next stop, Marvel’s modern pentathlon? Into the Renner-verse When not acting, Renner likes a side hustle. There’s an occasional music career – a full-length album landed in 2020. He’s also said to have a lucrative house-flipping hobby, and who could forget his foray into tech with bespoke social networking app Jeremy Renner Official? Despite its cult status, the app – which has inspired a podcast investigation – was shuttered after two years. Milkshake brings all the boys to my app An in no way sinister-sounding company called Escapex built Renner-world and specialised in direct-to-fan social media apps for celebrities and influencers of varying degrees of actual fame, from Kelis to Tommy Chong, via Enrique Iglesias. Though the company seems to have gone quiet of late. And then there’s … Hancock Many may fondly recall when, in 2018, Matt Hancock became the first MP to release his own social network for constituents, called Matt Hancock MP. It’s been an eventful few years for him, having been health secretary during what a Commons committee report called “one of the most important public health failures the United Kingdom has ever experienced” until his resignation in June after breaching social distancing guidance with his close adviser. Michael Winterbottom is turning the government’s handling of the pandemic into a TV drama called This Sceptred Isle. Andrew Buchan (The Crown) will play Hancock; Kenneth Branagh is Boris Johnson. Bran management This year saw the release of Branagh’s black-and-white, semi-autobiographical Troubles drama Belfast (tagline: “I’d like an Oscar”). In 2011, Branagh directed Thor, the fourth film in the comic-book hero series. Alongside its array of stars was a cameo from Renner as Hawkeye, setting up his emergence as a major character in the ever-evolving world. The sun never sets on the Marvel Universe. Pairing notes Watch Renner joins previous collaborator Taylor Sheridan (Wind River) for new crime series Mayor of Kingstown (nothing to do with Easttown), though a UK release is TBC. Drink While there isn’t an official range of Marvel booze (yet), there is no shortage of themed cocktails online: the Hawkeye riffs on the Black Hawk with bourbon, sloe gin, apple brandy, lemon juice. Hits the spot.If you’re a regular listener of the New York Times podcast The Daily, you would have heard an ad for ExxonMobil’s carbon capture investments more than once in November. The ad – which coincided with the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow – told listeners that carbon capture technology could remove more than 90% of CO2 emissions from “carbon-intensive industries” and that the company was working to “deploy this technology at scale”. It gave the sense of an oil company tackling the climate crisis with technology that could solve it – and quickly. Similar ads have run on NPR podcasts, including Invisibilia and Up First. The American Petroleum Institute has also run ads in podcasts, including on Vox’s Ezra Klein Show (Klein has since left for the New York Times), highlighting that it is “producing more oil and gas while reducing emissions”. The fossil fuels industry’s sudden interest in podcasts coincides with its recent embrace of social media and newsletter advertising and may well be driven in part by a key difference in the regulation of these “newer” media, regulated by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), versus legacy print, TV and radio media, which are regulated by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). While the FCC actively regulates advertising, the FTC works differently. It generally won’t investigate anything until a complaint is made and even then an investigation is not guaranteed. The FTC has had “green guides” for environmental marketing claims in place for environmental claims for more than 30 years, but the first complaint ever filed against an oil company for greenwashing came in 2021 against Chevron. The action is still pending. The challenge with the FTC’s guidelines, including the green guides, is that they tend to be product based and specific: your product is either made with recycled materials or not, you either take back and recycle packaging or you don’t. All of which leaves podcast and newsletter publishers and social media platforms to develop their own guidelines and factchecking processes. This is made harder by the industry’s advertising strategy – oil companies almost never advertise their products, opting instead to advertise ideas, particularly the idea that they’re working hard to address the climate crisis. ExxonMobil’s ad in The Daily, for example, emphasizes its work to scale up carbon capture as a climate solution. Yet the company currently captures less than 1% of its emissions, according to a report by the activist hedge fund Engine No 1, and uses some of the captured CO2 to extract more fossil fuels through a process called enhanced oil recovery. The ad’s statement that carbon capture can remove 90% of emissions also has some important caveats. The figure is a baseline target for carbon capture projects and refers to the emissions captured at a single industrial site rather than all industrial emissions. According to the International Energy Agency, the world’s carbon capture and storage (CCS) projects can currently capture approximately 0.1% of annual global emissions. “ExxonMobil has long acknowledged that climate change is real and poses serious risks,” said an ExxonMobil spokesperson, Todd Spitler. He said figures from the Center for Climate and Energy Solutions show that “CCS can capture more than 90% of emissions from power plants and industrial facilities”. He added that ExxonMobil had captured more than 120m tons of CO2 in total, which he said accounted for 40% of all globally captured carbon since 1970. According to the company’s April 2021 report, Exxon’s total CO2 emissions for 2020 alone from direct operations and its supply chain were more than 650m tons. “All advertising must meet our advertising acceptability guidelines,” said a New York Times spokesperson, Nicole Taylor. “This prohibits advertising that is intentionally misleading, deceptive, or contains false information. Ads submitted to the New York Times are reviewed by an advertising standards team and are subject to factchecking.” Yet, Exxon’s misleading claims about carbon capture passed this filter. Taylor didn’t say whether the Exxon ad went through the company’s factchecking process, just that ads “are subject” to factchecking. So either the ad passed, or it wasn’t checked closely in the first place. NPR also says it has processes in place to vet digital ads. “The digital guidelines were developed to protect the non-commercial spirit of NPR with some additional flexibility on language beyond the strict limits imposed by the FCC for broadcast sponsor recognition,” said an NPR spokesperson, Isabel Lara. It’s unsurprising that Exxon’s ad passed media companies’ filters, said John Cook, research fellow at the Climate Change Communication Research Hub at Monash University, Australia, and an adviser to Facebook on climate disinformation. That’s because it deploys a tactic often used by oil companies called “paltering”, he said, the use of truthful statements to convey a misleading impression. “It requires background knowledge to spot it, so it’s tough,” Cook said. “They can run an ad that’s 100% accurate statements. Exxon is investing in algae – that’s 100% true – then they can do a lot to convey the impression that they’re environmentally friendly without conveying that they’re spending more on advertising than on algae tech. So it’s very hard for factcheckers or social media guidelines to catch that because the companies can say ‘What? Everything is true.’” Unless the New York Times’ advertising team has a knowledgable climate expert reviewing Exxon’s ads, it’s unlikely that a misleading ad would be rejected. “The problem with self-regulation is that if it’s against a publisher’s or platform’s financial interests to impose restrictions then they’re less likely to do so,” Cook said. This doesn’t necessarily mean a ban on fossil fuel ads is the only way to get on top of greenwashing, Cook said. “I probably would lean towards the solution being more based on the content rather than the source,” he said. “But also if the source has a track record of misinforming that should come with penalties.” The problem is catching the problem to begin with, because greenwashing doesn’t fit the usual mold. “Their greenwashing won’t be flagged as misinformation in the first place,” Cook said. “So what’s in place now for identifying misinformation in ads is not really a framework for identifying greenwashing.”Details of how police attempted to criminalise British families whose children were trafficked to Islamic State (IS) in Syria are revealed in a series of testimonies that show how grieving relatives were initially treated as suspects and then abandoned by the authorities. One described being “treated like a criminal” and later realising that police were only interested in acquiring intelligence on IS instead of trying to help find their loved one. Another told how their home had been raided after they approached police for help to track down a missing relative. Their experiences were revealed in a parliamentary session last week that was closed to the media at the request of the families, due to concern they would be misrepresented and harassed. However, four of the families that gave evidence have agreed to share their experiences with the Observer anonymously to shed light on their treatment by the authorities and how their daughters have been left stranded in Syrian refugee camps. One woman revealed how she had cooperated with police when her sister went missing only to learn officers had had no intention of tracking her down. “We thought the police were there to help us. Over time, we could see the police and the authorities weren’t talking to us to help us, but only to get information. Once they had their information, they washed their hands of us.” She added: “We were never offered any support. I felt I had to prove I was anti-extremist to them; I felt I was always under suspicion.” A member of another family said: “I was interrogated as if I was a suspect, and once they had decided I wasn’t, they didn’t really want anything to do with me. It became really difficult to get in touch with them.” Their testimonies follow a report from legal charity Reprieve that found two-thirds of British women detained in north-east Syria were coerced or trafficked to the region, often lured there after being groomed on dating sites, before being sexually exploited. The report found that many girls were under 18 when they travelled to IS territory and have since suffered exploitation, forced marriage, rape and domestic servitude. They include a British girl who was trafficked to Syria aged 12, then raped and impregnated by an IS fighter. One of the most high-profile British cases of children joining IS involves three London schoolgirls, Kadiza Sultana, 16, and Amira Abase and Shamima Begum, both 15. The latter’s lawyer says there is “overwhelming evidence” Begum was trafficked. The family testimony was given to the all-party parliamentary group on trafficked Britons in Syria, which will release a report in the new year. Only about 20 British families are currently stranded in north-eastern Syria, yet the Home Office refuses to consider repatriating women and children. It has even removed the citizenship of most, including Begum. The UK government’s stance is at odds with that of other European states, and the US has called on western countries to take responsibility for their citizens and bring them home. Andrew Mitchell, former international development secretary and chair of the all-party parliamentary group, said: “If the government would only listen to these families, it would surely realise the inhumanity and sheer wrongheadedness of abandoning British citizens in desert detention camps. “This terrible policy is affecting ordinary law-abiding families and fraying the fabric of our multicultural society. Whether from a security perspective or a moral one, the case for repatriation could not be more clear.” Former Foreign Office minister Baroness Warsi said: “Many of us in parliament are very concerned by what is happening here, particularly in relation to the precedent that it sets.” All of the families who gave testimony expressed anger over how the UK government had ditched the principle of innocent until proven guilty in relation to their children, a decision they said compromised the UK’s international standing. One said: “Normally, it is western governments that talk about human rights and trafficking. However, when it is my family who have been abused and trafficked, they have decided not even to investigate their cases. They are considered guilty just for being in Syria.” They added: “Women and children are being punished without a trial. I don’t know why Britain has decided to abandon its principles in my family’s case.” Another family member said: “I felt really betrayed and [she] felt confused as to why her country had abandoned her. I’ve now lost faith in the people who are supposed to help and protect us. We don’t have our rights any longer.” Reprieve’s data indicates that British families in north-eastern Syria include around 19 women and 38 children; more than half of the children are five years old or younger. The UK government has stripped citizenship from at least 20 of the adults, including Begum. That stance appears peculiar, say experts, when viewed against the fact that only 40 or so of the 400 Britons who have returned to the UK after travelling to Syria or Iraq to join terrorist organisations have been prosecuted. Maya Foa, the director of Reprieve, said the families in the camps had “been stripped of all rights, presumed guilty without a trial, subjected to violence, and abandoned by the government”. She said that the government “appeared to be seeking to inflict maximum harm on this group – which is mostly British children – to make some kind of political point”, adding that this was “dangerous for our security as well as the interests of justice”. Reprieve’s research into the British trafficking victims is based on extensive work in the Syrian camps, while the Home Office has made no apparent attempt to visit the camps or evaluate if the women were exploited. The UK government has defended its position, saying it views the British families as a potential national security threat. One of the families said it was laughable that their loved one could be considered a threat. “[She] is so frail and has been abused. She is not a threat. She is really scared and vulnerable,” they said. Another added that their sister was effectively incarcerated the moment she arrived in Syria, saying: “She was imprisoned in every way; it was a cage from the moment she was there.” The families’ evidence has sharpened the focus on how the UK authorities failed to protect at-risk women and girls from being trafficked to Syria in the first place. In particular, their testimony raises questions over the police’s heavy-handed approach of opting to view vulnerable young women and children as terrorists rather than as a safeguarding issue. “All I want to ask the government is: you had every opportunity to protect her and failed, how can you now wash your hands of her?” said one. After listening to their testimony, Warsi told participants in the session that the stripping of citizenship is of particular concern to her. “It is important for me to be involved in this, because it could be me, it could be a descendant of my family.” She added: “I served as the first Muslim in the cabinet in this country, and this country is the only place that my family before and after me would consider home. This is a point of principle that goes beyond you and your families, but your families are cases which illustrate this principle.” Conditions in the Kurdish-controlled refugee camps are dire – described by the World Health Organization as “deplorable and unbearable”. According to Save the Children, during the first eight months of 2021, 163 people died in Camp al-Hol, including 62 children. There have been at least 81 murders this year. In August last year, eight children under five years old died in a single week. One family member told the parliamentary inquiry: “The children are growing up surrounded by threats of violence and danger from things like frequent tent fires.” Another added that her grandchildren were “suffering” in the camps: “The children are still young. I don’t want them to be brought up in unsafe camps, with no access to medical facilities or education.”Environmental campaigners will this week ask the high court to rule that the government’s fossil fuel strategy is unlawful, in a case that could undermine the UK’s claim to be leading the fight against climate change. The campaigners will argue that the government is effectively subsidising oil and gas production with billions of pounds in handouts, which conflicts with its legal duty to achieve net zero emissions by 2050. Pressure group Paid to Pollute says oil and gas companies received billions of pounds in tax relief for new oil and gas exploration, and billions more towards decommissioning costs between 2016 and 2020. The group says this amounts to fossil fuel subsidies. “Public money is supporting businesses that contribute to the climate crisis instead of solving it,” said Kairin van Sweeden, one of three activists who will appear in court. “We have to challenge this deadly use of the public purse. If the Oil and Gas Authority won’t use common sense, perhaps it’ll listen to the courts.” The hearing comes as controversy mounts over the UK oil and gas industry’s attempts to gain approval for more than a dozen new schemes, even though scientists say new investment in oil and gas projects must stop if governments are to tackle the climate crisis. Earlier this year, John Gummer, chairman of the Climate Change Committee, told MSPs in Holyrood the “justification for any new oil and gas exploration or production has to be very, very, very strong and I cannot say I’ve so far seen any such evidence”. Last week, one of the most controversial projects, the Cambo oilfield off Shetland, was abandoned by Shell, plunging the future of oil exploration in the area into doubt. Climate campaigners hailed this as the beginning of the end for the North Sea industry. Greenpeace said the damage from Cambo would have been the equivalent of running 18 coal-fired power stations for a year. “It’s vital that the UK demonstrates leadership and shows how countries can transition away from oil and gas while reskilling workers and creating thousands of well-paid jobs in the process,” said another claimant, Mikaela Loach. “All of this starts with the government pulling the plug on the millions it gives to big polluters.” This view was backed by Jeremy Cox, a former oil refinery worker and the third claimant in the action. “Using public money to subsidise continued extraction and support a declining industry is the exact opposite of what this government should be doing.” A government spokesperson said the UK did not pay any fossil fuel subsidies: “No other significant oil and gas-producing nation has gone as far as the UK in supporting the sector’s gradual transition to a low-carbon future, as demonstrated by our North Sea transition deal. “While we are backing the UK’s transition to green energy, there will be ongoing but diminishing need for oil and gas over the coming years, as recognised by the independent Climate Change Committee.”A review of hate crime legislation is expected to ask the government to consider criminalising public sexual harassment after a years-long campaign by women’s rights organisations and lawyers. The Law Commission, the body that recommends legal changes, will make the proposal as part of its review into the law in relation to hate crime, which was ordered three years ago by the then-home secretary, Sajid Javid, and is expected to be released next week. A new offence of public sexual harassment could be introduced,but misogyny was not likely to be made a hate crime because of concerns it would be ineffective, a Whitehall source told the Daily Telegraph. Making lewd comments, pressing against someone in a sexual way on public transport, cornering someone, catcalling and persistent sexual propositioning could all be covered by the changes to the law if they are brought in. Those campaigning for a change in the law welcomed the news. “The principle behind what I drafted is about the fundamental right that women and girls have equal access to public spaces,” said Dexter Dias, a human rights lawyer who has been working for the last three years to draft a bill to criminalise street sexual harassment with the youth-led campaign group Our Streets Now, children’s charity Plan International UK and the barrister Dr Charlotte Proudman. “This is about sexual offences and intrusion and is about the rights of women and girls to have full access to civil society and public spaces,” he said. It appeared the Law Commission would define public sexual harassment as harassment that was sexual, had the intent to degrade or humiliate, and that took place in public. While working on the draft bill, Dias said his teenage daughters had told him people would not care about girls being harassed in the street because it happens all the time. They told him they experienced unwanted sexual conduct virtually every week on the way to and from school and the shops. “I didn’t know that it had become so normalised and that it’s become regarded as a normal part of the experience of being a young woman in Britain today,” he said. “That is morally wrong. We’re going to make it a criminal offence and change this now.” The co-founder of Our Streets Now, Maya Tutton, told LBC radio that the girls the organisation worked with also thought sexual harassment was normal. “We in society have told them that is normal because we have not drawn a line in the sand, and we have not introduced legislation and I think that’s what this law is really about,” she said. “We need to, as a country and as a society, stand up and say, no more and that this behaviour is illegal, it will be prosecuted and we will not continue to allow it and this horrendous behaviour to be the way in which girls grow up in this country.” Proudman said on Twitter it was the “best news” and signalled a big step forward for the campaign. “Years of work worth every second. This will protect so many girls &amp; women.” She said it would have to be in the public interest to prosecute. “It could be someone shouting degrading, humiliating comments with lewd language to a woman walking down the street that makes them feel unsafe,” she said. The issue of crimes against women has come under fierce scrutiny since Sarah Everard’s kidnap, rape and murder by the serving Metropolitan police officer Wayne Couzens. The home secretary, Priti Patel, vowed to tackle violence against women and girls earlier in the year. In a strategy document published by the Home Office in July, she said: “We are looking carefully at where there may be gaps in existing law and how a specific offence for public sexual harassment could address those.” Indecent exposure was made a sexual crime almost 20 years ago, although as the case of Couzens underlined, such incidents, even when reported to the police, are often not taken seriously. It was reported in October that Boris Johnson was against plans to bring in new laws claiming there was abundant existing legislation. This caused disquiet throughout the Home Office. A Home Office spokesperson said: “The government asked the Law Commission to conduct a wide-ranging review into hate crime to explore how to make current legislation more effective, and if additional protected characteristics should be added to the hate crime legislation.” They said they would respond to the Law Commission recommendations once they have been published. The Law Commission has also been approached for a comment.Now is no time for nostalgia. On Sunday, Steven Gerrard hosts one of the managers under whom he played at Liverpool, as Brendan Rodgers takes Leicester to Villa Park. Next Saturday he will return to Anfield as an opposing manager. But the point of moving into management after playing is to avoid being defined by the past and Gerrard’s focus will be on showing who he is as a manager and what his Aston Villa team could become. Which is not to say history should be denied. Gerrard’s experiences inevitably influence his approach. It was interesting on Friday to hear him acknowledge learning from Rodgers. “I tried to take a lot of things away from Brendan,” said Gerrard. “He was a really good man-manager with the way he spoke to players and dealt with them. That was really impressive. “More importantly, on the training pitch his delivery was really slick. There was good organisation about his sessions and the way he used to set his team up. I was really impressed with his player-to-coach relationship.” Gerrard also spoke about how his year in charge of Liverpool’s under-18s gave him the confidence to pursue a managerial career at senior level, as well as the time to build the support staff he took to Rangers and Villa. That includes not just his assistants, Garry McAllister and Michael Beale, but also Tom Culshaw (technical coach), Scott Mason (lead analyst) and Jordan Milsom (head of fitness and conditioning). “I decided to go in as a coach at Liverpool’s academy as I knew I would need pitch confidence,” Gerrard said. “I needed to put the hours in in terms of leading a team, setting sessions up, finding a way of playing, a philosophy and identify that I wanted. To do that away from the cameras where I could make mistakes and grow. “That was the key and important time for me to get to the position I am in now. I also needed time to find staff members I wanted to come on the journey with me.” They have made a good start at Villa, winning their first two matches and giving Manchester City a scare on Wednesday before succumbing to a 2-1 defeat. There are signs the upturn is down to Gerrard’s methods rather than just a novelty boost. The most obvious improvement may be the hardest to sustain. Before Gerrard’s arrival most observers would have said the two areas of the team he should aim to upgrade in January were central midfield and left-back (even though Matt Targett was very good last season before struggling this term) but the performances of Targett and Marvelous Nakamba in three matches under Gerrard have suggested that might not be so urgent. Targett has been so good he could be badly missed if injury forces him to sit out the Leicester match and Nakamba has been on a mission to ridicule the notion Villa are soft in the middle, emerging as a surprisingly dominant enforcer while winning twice as many tackles per match on average (4.6 v 2.3) than he did before Gerrard’s arrival. That has been mirrored throughout the team, with Villa winning an average of 21.7 tackles per match under Gerrard compared with 14.1 this season under Dean Smith. Gerrard’s shape seems to have made it easier for Villa to sustain their intensity. He has tightened up a side that had become loose. Villa have had less of the ball than they did earlier in the season, but have had more control, marshalling their opponents when not in possession and launching dangerous counters as soon as they win it back. Most excitingly, there is evidence that Gerrard has figured out how to get the best out of Emi Buendía, who has mostly disappointed since joining from Norwich for a record fee in the summer as part of the post-Jack Grealish remodelling of Villa’s attack. The Argentinian delivered his best performance for Villa on Wednesday. The muscle injury Leon Bailey suffered in that match is a blow, but the template is still applicable, with Buendía and another attacker deployed as playmakers behind and either side of a central striker rather than as wide men. “It’s not a case of being over-narrow, it’s a case of getting our talent close to the goal and more involved in the game,” says Gerrard. “We want the personnel moving forward to be adaptable, so sometimes the width will come from the full-backs and sometimes it will come from the No 7 or 11. What our system does is give us the chance to be adaptive to what we need to do to hurt teams. “I’ve certainly got the personnel to do that here. We played with two No 10s in the previous three games and that gives Emi the chance to play in his favourite position and be involved in the game, closer to the goal and in areas of the pitch where he can be creative. “He’s certainly producing in terms of what area of the pitch we want him in and being that creative force for us. It’s really exciting to have him. Us as a staff and our identity and philosophy will suit good attacking players.”This year, sisters Angela Muhwezi-Hall and Deborah Gladney from Wichita, Kansas, became the first Black women entrepreneurs in the state to raise $1m in seed funding for QuickHire, an app that serves as a “career discovery platform” for frontline service economy workers. “It is really cool,” says Gladney “We pride ourselves on being underserved founders who are serving underserved workers in an underserved geographic region. We’re hoping to shed light on opportunities can arise outside of traditional areas. If we can help remove barriers for people, even by being the first or just being able to have people come alongside us, that is what we’re all about.” As with so many innovative tech startups, the story of QuickHire begins with an a-ha moment. A few years ago, Muhwezi-Hall was working as an educational adviser in Los Angeles when a high-schooler approached her for help finding a job. She quickly learned that seeking and applying for work in blue-collar industries hadn’t changed much since Muhwezi-Hall’s own high school years a decade earlier. More often than not, young jobseekers still needed to scan their neighborhood businesses for “hiring” signs, enter the business, and fill out a paper application. Not long afterwards, Muhwezi-Hall approached her sister with the seed of an idea: what if the two of them started a business that made it easier to apply for jobs? “We sat on it for quite some time, but we’d always go back to it. Like, ‘it would be so great if people could apply by swiping,’” recalls Muhwezi-Hall. This April, QuickHire officially launched with Gladney and Muhwezi-Hall as, respectively, CEO and COO. With its current emphasis on the retail, restaurant and hospitality industries, the app went live just in time to help local businesses find enthusiastic workers amid a nationwide labor shortage. So far, QuickHire has attracted more than 12,000 jobseekers and listings from 70 local businesses. “We really pride ourselves on making sure that we connect the right people to the right jobs, and making it very efficient,” says Muhwezi-Hall. “So we were able to find success pretty early on, on the employer side. Some of our first employers, actually, are now joining our team because they really loved their experience with QuickHire and think that what we’re doing is important.” QuickHire’s mission to extend opportunities to underserved workers is a personal one for its sister-founders. As the youngest of five children born to Ugandan immigrants in the midwest, the sisters spent their formative years in a number of “little small towns in Kansas”, says Muhwezi-Hall, where they were often “the only person of color in a room”. “It prepared us for being in this tech world,” says Muhwezi-Hall. “We had that work ethic that our parents ingrained in us, to make sure that we don’t take anything for granted, make sure that we put our best foot forward, so that people see why we are at the table and why we deserve to be there.” Gladney notes that their parents are excited about the doors that QuickHire could open up for other immigrant families, children of immigrants and Black women founders in Kansas. “I think that that is what brings them a lot of pride, that we’re able to impact and have an influence on a mission that’s bigger than us,” she says. The sisters are also tremendously proud of each other. “I think it’s just amazing to see the growth in each other through this journey,” says Muhwezi-Hall. “I’ve always said that Deborah is a phenomenal leader. It’s amazing to be able to watch your sister become the CEO that you always knew was there, knowing that she’s got this.” Gladney agrees, and says that co-founding a company with her sister is a professional advantage. “Even though it’s our first time building a company,” she says, “Angie and I have been building together all of our lives, just in other ways.”In a blurb on the cover of Mark Meadows’ new book, Donald Trump calls the former congressman a “great chief of staff – as good as it gets” and predicts “a great future together”. The former president has also promoted the book to his followers. Now the book is in the public domain, however, the former president reportedly thinks it is “garbage” and that Meadows was “fucking stupid” to write it. Influential members of the House committee investigating the deadly Capitol attack, meanwhile, have said Meadows may have undermined his own defence when seeking to block their inquiries. The Chief’s Chief will be published next week. This week, the Guardian broke the news that according to Meadows, Trump tested positive for Covid three days before the first presidential debate with Joe Biden in September last year. Meadows also details how that test, like another which came back negative, was covered up. Trump eventually announced a positive test on 2 October, the day he was admitted to hospital in Maryland. The White House said that positive result was announced within an hour. This week, amid huge controversy over whether Trump had endangered not only Biden but the White House press corps, debate staff, the families of fallen US service members, businessmen and more, Trump called the Guardian report “fake news” – a judgment with which Meadows, bizarrely, agreed. But outlets including the New York Times and the Washington Post confirmed the cover-up. Late on Friday, the Daily Beast cited three anonymous sources as saying Trump had spent “an inordinate amount of the past few days privately railing against Meadows, the revelation in the memoir, and, of course, the extensive media coverage of the matter”. Trump, the Beast said, was now “aggressively scolding” his former chief of staff – whose book is filled with effusive expressions of loyalty – and had said he did not know the “garbage” about the positive test would be included in Meadows’ memoir. A source close to the ex-president, the Beast said, said he “bemoaned that Meadows had been so – in Trump’s succinct phrasing – ‘fucking stupid’ with his book”. The Beast also reported that Meadows was horrified by the turn of events. “He thought Trump was going to love it,” the website quoted a source as saying. Meadows may not love what may be coming his way from the House committee investigating the Capitol attack – also as a result of his book. The Guardian obtained Meadows’ book the same day he agreed to cooperate with the panel, under threat of a charge of contempt of Congress. But though Meadows’ discussion of 6 January is highly selective and seeks to play down the attack – which as the Guardian first reported he claims was carried out by a “handful of fanatics” – it could yet prove important. Like other Trump aides and Trump himself, Meadows has claimed executive privilege, covering communications between a president and his staff, shields him from scrutiny by the select committee. Adam Schiff of California, the chair of the House intelligence committee and a member of the 6 January panel, told Politico: “It’s … very possible that by discussing the events of 6 January in his book … [Meadows is] waiving any claim of privilege. “So, it’d be very difficult for him to maintain ‘I can’t speak about events to you, but I can speak about them in my book.’” Jamie Raskin of Maryland, another Democrat on the panel, said: “You can’t assert a privilege that you have waived by virtue of your other actions.” Bennie Thompson of Mississippi, the committee chair, told reporters he had seen coverage of Meadows’ memoir. “Some of what we plan to ask him is in the excerpts of the book,” Thompson said.In a black tracksuit and retro shades, her dreadlocks swept back in a white bandana, rapper Little Simz looks every inch the classic north London bar-spitter – the sort of MC whose skills were honed in youthful battles, but who, at 27, knows that her true opposition is not some MC in the next postcode. Simz’s opening salvo tonight, Introvert, takes laser-guided aim against endemic inequality and stacked odds, at mothers endlessly burying sons. Powerful and revelatory, it’s work on a par with that of east London’s Kano. An entire career could go by in this righteous vein. But over the course of the next hour and three-quarters, Simz’s compact MC persona unfolds like a concertina, blown open by the epic sweep of strings and the earthy funk of bass. Halfway through her generous, versatile set, the performer born Simbiatu Ajikawo changes into roomier attire, arranging her hair into architectural forms not entirely unlike the cover of her most recent album, the groundbreaking Sometimes I Might Be Introvert – easily one of the best albums of the year. In putting her hair up, Simz is actually letting her hair down, rapping about her Nigerian heritage, her troubled relationships and her ambivalence to fame. Four albums and several mixtapes and EPs into an independent and, until recently, self-managed recording career, Simz is star of mic and screen – that’s her in the recent Drake-fuelled reboot of Top Boy. But she is an artist with a distaste for handshakes and small talk. Sometimes I Might Be Introvert is about many things – Black pride, female pride – but it is most often about how Simz came to understand and redeploy her introversion. Tonight, there are Simz tracks that go hard – minimal, grandstanding grime cuts and staccato, trap-influenced flexes. Between her last album, 2019’s Grey Area, and last September’s album, she released a 2020 lockdown EP called Drop 6 whose rhythmic cut Might Bang, Might Not found her fronting furiously. “I am the force that we speak of/ What’s a wave to a tsunami?/ True, my drip enormous/ Your tap running out, talk about awkward,” she sneers tonight. Her rubbery track Speed, from SIMBI, rivals Stormzy’s Vossi Bop for bouncy menace; Simz tops it off with an eardrum-searing, one-note keyboard solo. Earlier this year, she rebooted an old track, Venom, for the Venom: Let There Be Carnage film soundtrack and it promptly went viral on TikTok. It’s one of the highlights of the set, a fusillade of vengeful, rapid-fire syllables directed at those who “don’t like pussy in power”. But Simz’s more dilatory songs come paired with 70s soul fusions, with violin filigree and daubs of jazz, thanks to an eloquent five-strong band all dressed in grey hoodies. Every so often they will join her in some little coordinated dance steps. Despite Sometimes I Might be Introvert’s title, Simz is a full-beam entertainer, whipping up the demonstrative Glasgow crowd, basking in the cresting waves of cheers. As the album makes clear, her introversion lies in hating “surface” behaviour, and protecting her energy with ample alone-time. Like the Ivor Novello award-winning Grey Area, SIMBI was produced by Simz’s childhood friend, the notoriously camera-shy Dean “Inflo” Cover, whose white-hot CV includes a Mercury-winning album by Michael Kiwanuka, his own superlative outfit Sault and, most recently, parts of Adele’s 30. Powered by a 40-piece orchestra recorded at Abbey Road and soulful hooks that sound like samples but are compositions in their own right, SIMBI also features the voice of The Crown actor Emma Corrin. Her cut-glass diction (in playback tonight) encourages or goads Simz by turns, framing a nuanced concept album about the power in knowing yourself: “SIMBI” is short for Simbiatu. Tonight, all these strings, horns and backing vocals are reproduced electronically. It’s slightly regrettable, but someone surely will find a budget for that full-fat show soon. The band, though, provide ample ebullience, coming in like a film score, but able to transport the crowd to west Africa for the Afrobeat-laden Point and Kill. There are, perhaps, a couple too many bittersweet or pensive moments mid-set. But that is more than made up for by tracks such as Standing Ovation, which recalls 00s-era Jay-Z as opulently produced by the young Kanye West. Part autobiography, part motivational speech, in it Simz balances demands for her achievements to be recognised with an eloquent and impassioned salute to all the forces ranged against external and internal oppression – a shoutout to all “the spiritual teachers, the doers and the doulas”; to “the divine healers and the everyday low-paid believers”.Ask not what your country can do for you, ask how many kids you can have for your country Looks like those “hysterical” women were right after all. For the past few years anyone worried that civil rights in America would be gutted by a right-leaning supreme court has been dismissed as a fearmonger. The supreme court was above partisan politics, we were told. Upstanding “carpool dad” Brett Kavanaugh had no interest in reversing Roe v Wade, we were told. The fact that People of Praise, the Christian community where Amy Coney Barrett previously served as a “handmaid” (their term for a female leader) was virulently anti-abortion and would expel members for gay sex wouldn’t affect her decisions on the supreme court, we were told. We were told, as was always obvious, a pack of lies. On Wednesday, the US supreme court considered the most important abortion case in a generation. Its final ruling, due in June 2022, could overturn Roe v Wade and put an end to the constitutional right to an abortion in the US. If that happens, and it seems an increasing possibility that it will, more than 65 million US women would immediately lose access to an abortion in their home state, thanks to “trigger laws” 20 states have in place. But don’t worry, Justice Barrett has said, forcing women to give birth isn’t barbaric at all: if you don’t want to be a mother you can just put the kid up for adoption! Easy peasy. The rightwing assault on US reproductive rights isn’t taking place in a void. Countries around the world are escalating attempts to coerce women into having children. A new report, Welcome to Gilead, by a UK-based charity called Population Matters, warns that women’s rights around the world are under attack “because of a pervasive, political push for women to have more children, no matter the cost”. The percentage of countries with pro-natalist policies grew from 10% in 1976 to 28% in 2015, according to UN data cited by the report. Pro-natalist policies, of course, can be a good thing. No one is arguing with policies that make it easier to have children, such as affordable childcare and parental leave. The problem, as the report notes, is the fact that “a growing number of politicians are embracing a new, de facto coercive strategy to boost birth rates: making it difficult for people to access sexual and reproductive healthcare.” Poland, for example, enacted a near-total abortion ban last October. Now, according to the Associated Press, women’s rights activists are worried the government is trying to track every pregnancy in a national database that could be used to help prosecute women whose pregnancies don’t end in a live birth. The Polish parliament is also hearing a proposal to create a “Family and Demographic Institute” that could restrict divorces in an attempt to increase Poland’s birthrate. The head of the institute would have access to pregnancy data and have the power to approve a divorce. Welcome to Gilead, indeed! A number of factors are feeding into global pro-natalism policies. There’s good old-fashioned misogyny, of course. But as the Population Matters director, Robin Maynard, has noted: “Coercive pro-natalism is not simply a manifestation of patriarchy or misogyny but can be a product of political and economic forces entirely indifferent to women, for whom they exist simply as productive or non-productive wombs.” There’s capitalism’s need for cannon fodder, for example: it can be hard to grow your economy if there isn’t a steady supply of cheap labour. And ethnonationalism is also fueling pro-natalism: Hungary’s populist prime minister, Viktor Orbán, has repeatedly invoked the far right’s “great replacement” theory to push “procreation, not immigration”. Orbán has promised that women who have four or more children will never pay income tax again and stated: “We want Hungarian children. Migration for us is surrender.” In Turkey, President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, who has gutted abortion rights, has said that he believes “a woman is above all else a mother” and condemned attempts to promote birth control as “unpatriotic”. Once again, what’s happening in the US isn’t happening in a vacuum: it’s part of a global assault on women’s rights. Earlier this year, former US vice-president Mike Pence told a summit on demographics in Budapest that “plummeting birth rates” represent “a crisis that strikes at the very heart of civilization”. “It is our hope and our prayer that in the coming days, a new conservative majority on the supreme court of the United States will take action to restore the sanctity of life at the center of American law,” Pence said. The right has been planning for this moment for a very long time. They are coming for your “non-productive wombs” and they’re not going to stop there. People are buying prosthetic testicles for their dogs Celebrities like Kim Kardashian and Jake Gyllenhaal have had Neuticles, a brand of prosthetic animal testicles implanted into their neutered dogs. And they’re not the only ones buying the things: balls are big business, according to Mel Magazine. Proximity to green space may help with PMS, study finds A first-of-its-kind study looking at women in Norway and Sweden found that those who lived in neighbourhoods with more green space are less likely to experience PMS symptoms than those living in less green neighbourhoods. Taliban release decree saying women must consent to marriage Very gracious of them. Gender inequality key driver of toxic culture in Australian parliament A landmark report by Australia’s sex discrimination commissioner found one in three staffers interviewed had been sexually harassed. Eighty-four per cent of people who experienced sexual harassment did not seek support or advice. The report found power imbalances to be “one of the primary drivers of misconduct”. The main perpetrators of violence against female MPs in Africa are male MPs A new study by the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) and the African Parliamentary Union (APU) has uncovered “an insidious epidemic of sexism in parliaments in Africa.” Women interviewed reported that the majority of abuse comes from male parliamentarians, often from a rival political party. “When young women and girls read about these stories, some of them may fear getting into spaces of influence,” said the Ugandan MP Winnie Kiiza in an interview with Quartz. “Until we challenge the patriarchal system, then the men will continue stopping women from participating in politics.” The escalating costs of being single in America “American society is structurally antagonistic toward single and solo-living people,” Vox writes. Elizabeth Holmes’s bizarre schedules have been entered into evidence “I am never a minute late,” she writes in a schedule made public in her ongoing fraud trial. “I show no excitement calm, direct, pointed … ALL ABOUT BUSINESS.”  I’m going to be chatting about female leadership in a Guardian Live on Tuesday  I’ll be chatting to the Guardian journalist Sirin Kale; Labour MP Nadia Whittome, co-founder of Black in AI; and computer scientist Timnit Gebru, who has just launched an institute to document AI’s harms on marginalized groups. Get your tickets here. The week in pint-riarchy While many of us drank rather more than normal during lockdown, the Aussies took things to the extreme. Australians have been named the heaviest drinkers in the world after spending more time drunk in 2020 than any other nation. The UK came in fifth place with the US just slightly ahead as the fourth drunkest country in the world.After more than 20 years in the city, the author of The Flower Fix knows a bunch of great places for eating and exploring Food Marmadukes cafe has a sustainable and independent ethos, with farm-to-table food. Its Old Sorting Office venue is a converted Royal Mail depot, beautifully reimagined in a Scandi-inspired design. I usually walk there from my shop, along Sharrowvale Road and through Nether Edge. Its salads have been a long-lasting love of mine: my current favourite is the broccolini with lime and mint. It’s a perfect place to meet friends for lunch or soften the blow of the day’s administrative tasks with a coffee or three and sometimes even a massive slice of cheesecake. Inspiration I could not have wished for a more bountiful source of natural inspiration than Sheffield Botanical Gardens, south-west of the city centre. The gardens are home to magnificent Grade II-listed Paxton glass pavilions, some of the earliest curvilinear glazed structures ever built. An impressive 18,060 panels of glass shape this beautiful 90-metre-long glasshouse. The gardens are surrounded by old stone walls that absorb the clattering sounds of the outside world. There’s a huge variety of plants and always something new to discover with every season. I first visited the gardens when I was studying fine art and remember discovering the magic of hellebores. They really stood out to me as they flower in winter. Neighbourhood Nether Edge is a spacious and leafy area with Victorian houses, indie shops and cafes. It’s the kind of place where you can get lost discovering vintage stores and eateries in the lime tree-lined streets. Whether it’s Italian coffee, organic produce, natural wines, a rare record you’ve been searching for, or a friendly place to get a key cut, you’ll probably find what you’re looking for here. Bench, a neighbourhood bistro and bar, serves up incredible locally sourced small-plate combinations and seasonal cocktails. Dropping down to Abbeydale Road you’ll find the eclectic mix of shops and warehouses that make up the Antiques Quarter. Thrift shops aplenty, a herbarium, the best bakery around (Forge Bakehouse) and – shameless plug alert – a decent flower shop too: Swallows and Damsons. Green space Sheffield is on the border of the Peak District and, with next to no effort, you can submerge yourself in its wilderness. Wyming Brook, on the western edge of Sheffield, has dramatic views of the Rivelin reservoirs and the city beyond. It is a deeply tranquil forest filled with moss-covered trees, small, trickling waterfalls and magical wooden bridges that crisscross the valley. There are ancient and enormous larch, pine and redwood trees – look out for crossbills, dippers and redstarts. There are many incredible walks and wild swims to be had here. Nightlife You might accidentally miss the entrance to the Picture House Social if you didn’t know it was there, but tucked away underneath a 1920s cinema is an underworld of fun. Walk through the rainbow mural doors and down the winding staircase and you’ll find a vibrant bar, set in dark wood, a spacious low-lit speakeasy. As you explore its warren of interconnected spaces you’ll discover a more playful side. An Italian-inspired street food canteen, a games room filled with ping pong tables and 70s-style gigantic shuffleboards in the shuffle shack room – the game is said to be 15% skill and 85% strategy. There’s also a mini cinema. Stay Boutique hotel Brocco on the Park (doubles from £145 room-only) is on the edge of one of Sheffield’s most popular green spaces, Endcliffe Park. The eight-bedroom Edwardian villa has a wonderful kitchen serving up seasonal “smorgasbord small plates” all day long. It feels homely but also luxuriously designed.I always felt like the second fiddle to my older brother Marcel, who I thought was impossibly brilliant and mature and seemed to be reading more or less from the womb, although I’m two years younger, so I wouldn’t have known that first-hand. I was the sideshow: the funny one, the ridiculous one my grandparents said was “good with my hands”, which at five or six I embraced. It was only as I got older I realised it meant, “might not want to stay in school past 14 or 15”. From childhood I’ve always found anxiety in the most unlikely places. Aged six I remember watching maypole dancers skipping around and braiding these ribbons into beautiful patterns at my south London primary school and even though I was still in the infants and wouldn’t be doing it for years, I thought, “I’m never going to be able to fucking dance around a maypole.” All through my life I’ve tended to experience future events in a negative way. It’s always been a source of looming discomfiture. When I hit nine or 10, my parents thought I wasn’t learning enough so they sent me to a prep school, which felt like a throwback to the 1930s. The school seemed to pride itself on being old-fashioned and still used corporal punishment. Pupils were hit on the hand with a ruler, spanked on the bum with a plimsoll, or slapped on their thighs with a bare hand. I wasn’t a frequent transgressor, but it did happen a few times because I was an unintentional rulebreaker. I wasn’t intrinsically naughty, but in the act of attempting to amuse my friends I sometimes ran foul of the authorities. I arrived at the place I’m at in life by accident. My programmes are down to hard work, having the right collaborators, but also just being in the right place at the right time. It’s not something I aspired to be or ever expected and I’m reluctant to get too comfortable in the role of whatever it is that I am. For me, it’s healthy to recognise how much of what I’ve done is down to good fortune. I’m superstitious. The minute I believe I’ve got it cracked, that’s when it will come crashing down. I try to remind myself to relax and see the bigger picture and experience life as something more than a process of alleviating your existential insecurity by achieving professional success. The pandemic has been a moment to pause and reset. I’ve had a sense of resetting my place in the world, with respect to my family and my work. I’ve been at home much more than normal, and for all the stress and the arguments and everyone getting very frayed at the edges, it’s felt like a blessing. My status in our family is equivalent to the mice under our floorboards. If there’s an argument going and my wife Nancy is talking to one of my kids and I weigh in, the kids’ response will usually be: “Shut up Dad, no one asked you.” What I’d love my obituary to say is: “The world of television is in mourning as news comes that esteemed documentary maker Louis Theroux died in the arms of his wife Nancy Strang on holiday in Crete while eating a slap-up meal of Korean delicacies including snails, fava and copious amounts of retsina.” What it will probably say is: “Forgotten BBC2 journalist, Louis Theroux, the man who failed to get to the truth about Jimmy Savile, died while crossing the road.” Theroux The Keyhole is published by Macmillan at £20. Buy a copy for £17.40 at guardianbookshop.comChristmas is meant to be a time filled with joy, but for many families it can underline divisions between parents, children or siblings and bring unresolved tensions to the surface. This year adds a particular issue to that dynamic – whether or not individual family members are vaccinated. Olivia, 23, Manchester My mother is in her 60s and has been an anti-vaxxer all her life. I wasn’t vaccinated for anything until I was an adult. My parents are divorced and I’ve got three siblings. Both my sisters are also unvaccinated but my brother and my father are vaccinated like me. My mother is worried about meeting up with her vaccinated children at Christmas. She thinks our vaccines could “shed” into her body, which is ridiculous. And my father, who is 59, doesn’t want to host his unvaccinated children indoors at Christmas. He wants all of us to exchange gifts with him outdoors and have a PCR test beforehand. My two unvaccinated siblings and I eventually decided that the three of us would spend Christmas together at my sister’s house. My vaccinated brother will spend it with his kids but drop in and see us. He’s had Covid, so feels invincible, and I am young and healthy and vaccinated, so feel my personal risk is low. We will all do lateral flow tests before we meet up, and none of us has any pre-existing medical conditions. On one level, I’m glad I’m not spending Christmas with my parents, because all the discussions about the vaccine and Covid can be a bit overwhelming. It will be nice to spend it with my siblings. But at the same time, I think it is a shame – and both my parents are upset about it, particularly my dad. He really wants all his children to be vaccinated and for us all to have Christmas dinner together. Emma, 30, Hertfordshire Neither my father, who is a well-educated professional with a chronic health condition, nor my stepmother, who works for the NHS, are vaccinated. They are both in their 60s. I am going to meet up with them at Christmas for the bare minimum of time – just an hour or so – for the sake of maintaining a normal relationship. If it was any other day, I wouldn’t be seeing them, but because it’s Christmas, I feel an obligation to do so. I’ve had dozens of conversations with my dad, trying to convince him to have the vaccine. I’ve also written him long emails, questioning the source data of the articles he sends me. He gets his information from Facebook and Telegram groups, from people like David Icke and Piers Corbyn, and from random websites selling herbal remedies. My brother isn’t going to visit my dad this year like he usually does. We will visit him last, after first going to see my mother and my in-laws, who are vulnerable – we have had to plan it like that. The reason I’m seeing him is to keep the peace and because I don’t want our relationship to die. But my dad and my seven-year-old daughter adore each other, and I worry that when they see each other, she will give him Covid. I have almost come to accept that he will get ill and die, before it’s happened. There are loads of cases at her school. I wish there was more acceptance that it is OK to change your mind about the vaccine; that actually a decision you made a year ago doesn’t have to be one you continue to stick to. It would make my year if my dad said: on reflection, I was wrong about the risks, or I really want to see my son, and I’m going to get vaccinated. That would be the ultimate Christmas present. Angela, 58, Cornwall I have multiple sclerosis and am fully vaccinated but my husband, who is in his 60s and has several chronic health conditions, is unvaccinated. He won’t even wear a mask. He won’t get tested for Covid either, so this means that at Christmas we can’t go and visit his father, who is in his 90s and lives in a care home. They haven’t seen each other for two years. I have had lots of very long protracted arguments with my husband about the vaccine. I sent him articles from the Guardian and the Observer, and for many months I tried to persuade him that he was wrong. But I have given up completely now. I’m tired of it all. I tell him I don’t want to know his theories, and ignore him when he talks to me about it. My mother, who is 89, is coming to stay with us at Christmas. Even though she’s fully vaccinated, I’m very nervous about it. Her view is: she’s lived through the war: she can survive my husband. I find the situation very distressing and frustrating. It’s also exhausting – I find I am constantly veering between feeling angry with my husband and worrying that he will catch Covid. Some names and details have been changed to protect the identities of the intervieweesThe concept of a Christmas without champagne, wine or whisky is counterintuitive to many. But this festive season, growing numbers of Britons are eschewing alcohol and gearing up for a teetotal – or at least partially so – celebration, according to retailers. Sales in the no- and low-alcohol category, also known as “NoLo”, are expected to grow by 17% in the UK this year, reports IWSR Drinks Market Analysis, and will hit almost 19 million cases and a value of $741m (£558m). Meanwhile, Sainsbury’s, Waitrose and Tesco all report that sales of NoLo drinks have seen huge rises year on year, a trend they expect to continue in the run-up to Christmas, amid a rise in “mindful drinking”. Low-alcohol wine, cider and beer have all seen increases in popularity but the biggest rise is in alcohol-free spirits. Tesco, which expects around a quarter of UK adults to drink only no- and low-alcohol drinks this Christmas, said sales of NoLo spirits have soared by 106% since the beginning of the year; Sainsbury’s said it had seen a 91% year-on-year increase. Nichola Joyce, no- and low-alcohol buyer at Waitrose, where sales in the category overall have grown by 24% compared to last year, said she expects the pattern to continue. “Especially over the festive season as people are looking for ways to embrace moderation and a flexitarian approach to their drink choices.” Laura Willoughby, founder of mindful drinking community Club Soda, said the shift towards non-alcoholic drinks is driven by availability of a wide variety of options, improved taste and drinking habits moving in the direction of either abstinence or, in most cases, more moderation. “No longer do people say [of a no-alcohol drink] ‘that tastes really terrible – I would rather have a soda’,” she said. “They will now go ‘actually, this is a really good alcohol-free beer’ or ‘this is a really good grownup kombucha champagne bottle’. “The producers have focused on presentation, taste and creating what feels like an adult drinking moment.” She believes that this Christmas many people are planning to cut back on alcoholic drinks because they want to “be present” with friends and family amid the pandemic and because it’s important to protect their mental health “at a time of year which we all know can be a little bit stressful and we often get upset at a time that’s supposed to be fun and enjoyable”. She added “People are going ‘Well, maybe if I drink a little bit less I can spend the time as I want and not end up in an argument. I’ll be a lot calmer, a lot more relaxed and a lot happier.’” When Willoughby started Club Soda in 2015 as a Facebook group she felt, she says, “like a lone voice”, but now she is seeing a “cross-generational shift that I think has pushed this market harder and faster in the UK than it has been in other parts of the world”. Later this month she is launching what is believed to be the UK’s first alcohol-free off-licence in central London. The pop-up shop will stock more than 60 brands including Everleaf non-alcoholic aperitifs and beers by Lucky Saint and Adnams, and will host classes on cocktails, wine and beer. Russell Kirkham, customer marketing director of spirits company Quintessential Brands, whose products include a no alcohol gin &amp; tonic by Bloom, said the category has been a “hotbed of innovation” in recent years, but that beer has remained the most popular with shoppers, meaning it still has huge potential to grow in other areas. “Whilst health and wellness is important to these consumers, that doesn’t mean they don’t want to socialise – they just want to socialise without drinking alcohol on occasion, or at least drink less alcohol when socialising.” A 2018 UCL study, which analysed thousands of 16- to 24-year-olds over 10 years, found that increasing numbers of young people did not drink alcohol at all and reported significant decreases in the number of young people who drank above recommended limits or binged. “Our research found that this trend was notable among younger and not older adults, representing a generational shift in drinking habits,” said the study’s lead author, Dr Linda Ng Fat. “The trend was widespread among young adults, occurring across social and demographic groups, suggesting that the shift is cultural, and drinking may be less of a popular activity than it was for older generations.” But she added that the rise in popularity of no- and low-alcohol products could be a sign that the attitudes of young people are catching on more widely. However, she warned there is evidence to suggest that harmful drinking may have increased during the pandemic, amid an increase in alcohol-related liver disease and deaths among those seeking treatment for alcohol misuse. “Therefore a trend for no- or lower-alcohol consumption, especially for these at-risk groups, should be welcomed.”There were the usual flashes of class from Chelsea, but there was none of their trademark control. Slumped in his seat on the bench, Thomas Tuchel could not believe what he was watching. Chelsea’s defence had been pushed to the limit by West Ham and, by the end of a barmy encounter, he must have been wondering if his team have what it takes to outlast Manchester City and Liverpool at the top of the Premier League. Twice Chelsea led; twice they were pegged back because of sloppy defending. Riding high in fourth place, West Ham were immense. Declan Rice was imperious, Jarrod Bowen’s endeavour was rewarded with a fine goal and it summed up a wildly entertaining game when Arthur Masuaku sent a fluke winner past Édouard Mendy, who had handed West Ham their first equaliser by conceding a foolish penalty. This was an ordeal for Chelsea’s goalkeeper. He had toiled with the ball at his feet and the Senegal international was badly at fault when a mis-hit cross from Masuaku, who rarely looks like he knows what he is going to do next, flew inside the near post to put West Ham 3-2 up with three minutes left. Chelsea, who have won two of their last five league games, could have few complaints when the final whistle blew. Mason Mount scored a stunner on the stroke of half-time, but too many of Tuchel’s players were below par. There were jittery displays in central defence from Andreas Christensen, Thiago Silva and Antonio Rüdiger, who could not contain Michail Antonio, and the other worry for Tuchel is that Chelsea did not create much, even after introducing Romelu Lukaku for the injured Kai Havertz at half-time. An immobile presence in attack, Lukaku never looked like scoring for the first time since 14 September. West Ham shackled the £97.5m striker, even though they were forced into two defensive rejigs after losing Kurt Zouma and Ben Johnson to injury. A resilient side, who were winless in three games, fought for everything. They were built in the image of their manager, who continues to make a mockery of claims that he was past his best. West Ham have progressed at an astonishing rate under David Moyes and, having seen off Liverpool and Tottenham at home this season, their push for Champions League qualification has even more momentum after beating the European champions. West Ham, who saw Craig Dawson and Issa Diop rise to the occasion in central defence, refused to be cowed by Chelsea’s quality. Moyes had sent them out with instructions to stifle before striking on the break and the visitors looked uncomfortable from the start, their frustration clear when Jorginho was booked for dissent after a firm but fair challenge from Rice went unpunished in the 23rd minute. Chelsea were ineffective despite monopolising possession. Hakim Ziyech wasted an early opening, but the breakthrough came from a set-piece, the marking from West Ham abysmal when Mount swung in a corner and Silva nodded past Lukasz Fabianski in the 29th minute. West Ham, who sacrificed flair by switching to a back three, came roaring back. Vladimir Coufal, outstanding at right wing-back, forced Silva to clear off the line and another opportunity arrived when Jorginho played a short backpass to Mendy, who tried to dribble past Bowen before clumsily chopping the energetic forward down. It was an atrocious error from Mendy, who has struggled lately, and Manuel Lanzini coolly tucked the penalty away. Chelsea soon woke up, pouncing when Rice played Tomas Soucek into trouble. Ruben Loftus-Cheek, starting again in midfield with N’Golo Kanté and Mateo Kovacic injured, found Ziyech on the left and the winger lifted a diagonal pass to Mount, who waited for the ball to drop before opening up his right foot and directing a super volley inside the near post. It was a special goal, although it did not help West Ham that Johnson was down injured as the move progressed. The left wing-back had to make way for Masuaku and there was another stoppage when Havertz went down after being caught by Zouma, who was not holding back against his old team. West Ham needed more of that aggression. They pushed again after 56 minutes, Coufal beating Marcos Alonso to a loose ball. The left wing-back was punished when Coufal found Bowen, who spanked home a left-foot shot from 20 yards. It was the first time Chelsea had conceded twice in a game all season. But they had also made errors against Watford and Manchester United. They lack focus at the moment and although Tuchel responded by introducing Callum Hudson-Odoi and Christian Pulisic, the second half passed by without Chelsea creating anything of substance. West Ham, who moved Rice into defence after Zouma went off, were the likelier winners. Bowen missed an open goal after a barnstorming run from Antonio, but there was still time for Masuaku to score his first goal in the Premier League. Mendy completely lost the flight of the ball when Masuaku’s mis-hit cross swerved towards his near post and although Chelsea desperately tried to force an equaliser, their title chances had taken another huge dent.Adjoa Andoh was born in Bristol in 1963 and grew up in Wickwar, Gloucestershire. A veteran stage actor, she starred in His Dark Materials at the National Theatre and in the title role of an all-women of colour production of Richard II at the Globe in 2019. On TV, Andoh plays Lady Danbury in Bridgerton, which returns next year, and she will appear in season two of The Witcher on Netflix from 17 December. She lives in south London with her husband, the novelist Howard Cunnell, and their three children. 1. Fiction Address Book by Neil Bartlett For his new novel, Neil Bartlett has made a sort of party game: see if you can remember every address you’ve ever lived at, and the journey to the front door of each one. There are seven different characters in the book, each travelling home – including a doctor who reflects on a formative sexual experience while he’s dealing with the pandemic, and a pregnant woman in the 1960s who ends up with a queer neighbour. It’s a beautiful, hopeful exploration of how we strive to find a place to be safe. 2. Nonfiction The Body Keeps the Score by Bessel van der Kolk Bessel van der Kolk is a psychiatrist who works with PTSD, and in this book he’s exploring the ways in which a person’s trauma can rewire their brain and change how they experience the world. He’s basically saying that trauma affects the body as well as the mind, and until you address it bodily as well as psychically, the trauma is not worked through effectively. You have to deal with it in a holistic way. I think it’s a terrific, practical, thoughtful book. 3. Theatre Brixton House, London SW9 I’ve lived in Brixton since 1984 and I’ve always said the area would be self-sufficient if only we had a theatre. Now we’re getting Brixton House, opening on Coldharbour Lane next spring. It’s going to have two theatres as well as studios and a cafe. Rather brilliantly the rigs have been made so that disabled technicians can use them, and they’ve configured the spaces so neurodivergent artists can work freely. For the general public, they’re mindful of pricing things so that local people can afford them. I’m beyond excited about it. 4. Film First Cow (dir: Kelly Reichardt) I loved this film. It’s set in the wilds of Oregon in the 1820s and it shows a friendship between two young men – one American, one Chinese – that is gentle, quiet and reflective. The fact that, in the middle of the gold rush, their fortune turns on one of them being a great pastry chef is just fantastic. It’s beautifully judged and paced – I love the slowness of it – and Toby Jones puts in a lovely turn as the Chief Factor, who owns the first cow in the area. 5. Podcast The Amplify Project I’m really not a podcast person – I’m a bit cassette generation – but I’m enjoying this new series in which black writers talk to each other about their work. So far we’ve had the novelists Diana Evans and Alex Wheatle, the poet Nick Makoha, and the great memoirist Colin Grant. In the latest episode, the writers Patricia Cumper and Pauline Walker talk to novelist Hafsa Zayyan about winning the #Merky Books new writers’ prize. It’s a really interesting podcast. 6. Art Yinka Shonibare There’s a great four-minute film on the Stephen Friedman gallery website where Yinka discusses his recent exhibition there, African Spirits of Modernism. He talks about the intersection between African art and western modernism of the 1920s, and also about his own postcolonial hybrid character as an artist of Nigerian heritage working in Britain. We’ve been told that African art was primitive, but actually it’s incredibly sophisticated. The whole conversation feels utterly of the moment. 7. Photography Cephas Williams: Portrait of Black Britain, Bluewater This is the latest show by photographer Cephas Williams reflecting on black people in this country who are just doing ordinary stuff – they’re not rap artists or drug dealers. Williams was originally commissioned by the Manchester international festival; now the 220 portraits are showing at Bluewater, where, coincidentally, Williams was hoiked out during the summer by security, who falsely assumed that he’d stolen something. So it’s a little bit like, here I am, the non-thief, returning with a photographic exhibition to put in your shopping centre.Olivia Rodrigo claimed the top two positions on Spotify’s most-streamed songs list in the UK this year, with just one surprise, given her ubiquity – that the Paramore-esque Good 4 U edged out Drivers License, which is an affront to advocates for the correct use of apostrophes. While other streaming services are available, it is Spotify that has the end-of-year list sewn up; as one internet wag wisely noted, it is the only service to show off about how much it is tracking you and make it seem like fun. A few years ago, Netflix posted a tweet that read: “To the 53 people who’ve watched A Christmas Prince every day for the past 18 days: who hurt you?” At the time, it was controversial for being creepy and judgmental. Now, most of us not only shrug off big tech companies knowing what we’ve been doing and when, but help them to promote it. Spotify’s annual Unwrapped, a personalised animation that shows what subscribers have been listening to, arrives with the advent calendars. That’s about three weeks after everyone has put up their Christmas trees. I’ve always found the performative aspect of these lists a bit unsettling, like a teenager listening to music on phone speakers so that everyone knows about their love for rap music with lots of swearing in it. What I listen to is basically mortifying: There Are Worse Things I Could Do from the Grease soundtrack, on repeat, so I can sing along at top volume and daydream about an amateur production that would take a 39-year-old Rizzo (to be fair, Stockard Channing was 33 when she played her in the film). I know, in theory, that there is no such thing as a guilty pleasure, but is it dignified to shout about repeat-listening to Monster by Kanye in order to perfect the Nicki Minaj rap? This year, I have seen more memes about Spotify Unwrapped than actual lists; either everyone’s pandemic streaming was too exposing to be made public or people don’t see themselves reflected in it. Shared accounts, hacked accounts, the radio, the record player – all mean Spotify Unwrapped is a funhouse mirror, not quite what it says it is. And I am convinced, convinced, that it invents genres in order to encourage people to post “wtf is chamber psych lol random”. Or maybe the only thing that needs unwrapping is my tinfoil hat. Bryan Adams: snapping pit stops for Pirelli Rock star/photographer Bryan Adams has shot this year’s Pirelli calendar. Since 1964, the tyre company has been recruiting star photographers and famous people, usually women, to what has become a prestigious project. The theme of this year’s instalment is On the Road and it features a number of musicians, from Cher to St Vincent to Rita Ora, posed as if to “capture the life of an artist on tour”. The calendar used to be notoriously nudity-heavy, but the only topless shot I could see this year was Iggy Pop’s. In my days as a music journalist, I spent plenty of time “on the road” and was excited to see it reflected in Adams’s pictures. Perhaps Cher would be captured turning up at a remote services at midnight, only to find that everything except a lone WHSmith was closed and that it would be Monster Munch for dinner, again. Perhaps Rita Ora might be seen wondering if that sticky feeling on her skin, a mix of cheap, warm beer and drummer’s sweat, would ever go away? It’s not a spoiler to say that if this calendar were a road, it would be the M6 toll: clean, elite and full of rich people. Ellen White: joy all round, but the score’s not the goal As a relative newcomer to being a football fan, I was shocked to discover that winning 20-0 did not feel as good as I might have anticipated it would a few years ago. The statistics involved in England’s drubbing of Latvia in Tuesday’s World Cup qualifying match are, to use the technical term, a bit silly: four hat tricks, 85.6% possession for England, 31 shots on target and seven more goals than England’s previous best score of 13-0. Even the manager, Sarina Wiegman, suggested this might be an indication of the need for pre-qualifiers. “In every country you want to develop the women’s game but I don’t think it’s good that the scores now are so high,” she said. Amid all that, though, it was deservedly Ellen White’s evening. The Manchester City forward equalled Kelly Smith’s record of 46 goals for England in the sixth minute and had bettered it in the ninth. (Smith sent her a congratulatory message on Twitter: “So many nations now across the world fear playing against you,” she said.) White ended the match with a new record of 48 goals, putting her on a level with Gary Lineker and Harry Kane[Correct according to https://www.englandstats.com/player.php?pid=1207], behind only Bobby Charlton and Wayne Rooney. Cause for celebration, obviously, and on the pitch the joy was there for all to see, though off the pitch White’s humility was profound. “We move on and don’t mention it again,” she said. It’s clear now that smashing Rooney’s record is a possibility: at 32, you sense there are many more goals left in her yet, though don’t expect her to be shouting about it. • This article was amended on 4 December 2021. A picture captioned “Ellen White” was actually of Lauren Hemp. This has been replaced with a picture of White. • Rebecca Nicholson is an Observer columnistWhether it’s down to Squid Game or kawaii culture, fascination with Korea and Japan is fuelling a boom in learning east Asian languages. Japanese is the fastest growing language to be learned in the UK this year on the online platform Duolingo, and Korean is the fourth fastest. Most of the interest is driven by cultural issues, the firm said in its 2021 Duolingo language report, which will be published tomorrow and analyses how the 20 million downloads of its platform are used. Established elements of Japanese popular culture, such as Pokémon and video games, have been joined by a global surge in the popularity of anime such as Dragon Ball and My Hero Academia. Duolingo said that 26% of language learners had been influenced by key cultural moments, such as the Tokyo Olympics and Euro 2020, and by TV shows such as Squid Game, which saw a 76% rise in Korean learners after it launched in September. A third of learners said they had chosen to watch a film or TV programme in another language. Globally, Japanese overtook Italian to become the fifth most popular language in 2021. Jun Jinushi, executive director of the Japan National Tourism Organisation’s London office, said that the numbers of people travelling from the UK to Japan had been at an all-time high before the pandemic hit. “We have certainly felt the growing interest in Japan and Japanese culture over the past few years,” he said, citing the Rugby World Cup in 2019, and TV shows such as Joanna Lumley’s Japan, James May: Our Man in Japan and Tom Daley Goes Global. “There may also be something to be said for the ubiquity of Japanese food on UK menus, and a generation of children who fell in love with Japanese pop culture now coming of age and reappreciating the country and language that gave them the likes of Pokémon, Super Mario, and Studio Ghibli.” Spanish, French, German, English and Italian are the most popular languages on Duolingo in the UK, followed by Japanese and Welsh, the fastest growing language last year. Welsh remains popular, according to Colin Watkins, UK country manager at the firm. “We’re almost at two million learners, which I expect we will pass before Christmas,” he said. “The increasing popularity of Asian languages, driven by the interest in Asian culture, point to a fundamental change in learner motivations and a real shift in what the UK wants to learn.”Some movies grab the audience; strap it down, force it to gorge, like a multiplex theatre full of foie gras geese. The oeuvre of Mike Mills is not like that. Watching his films – gently unobtrusive when it comes to plot but rich with emotional texture – can be like looking at a painting in a gallery. You can, if you choose, walk away taking virtually nothing from the experience. Or you can delve deep and discover whole worlds within. His latest, C’mon C’mon, is perhaps his most stripped-back to date. Centred on an impromptu road trip across America that explores the bond between an uncle, radio journalist Johnny (Joaquin Phoenix), and his nephew Jesse (Woody Norman), the film is shot in black and white. It’s an aesthetic decision that brings a muted melancholy to the exuberant, palm-studded skyline of California, and tones down the carnivalesque drama of New Orleans, the better to draw the audience into the quiet heart of the film. This is a movie about listening – really listening – to what other people have to say. Johnny’s work involves interviewing kids, tapping into their hopes and fears for the future. Jesse, an eccentric, endearingly odd nine-year-old, refuses to be recorded but immerses himself in the sounds around him. And through a series of late-night phone calls, Johnny and Viv (Gaby Hoffmann), Jesse’s mother, reopen the lines of communication that were felled after the death of their mother. Appropriately, sound and music are key; the soundtrack is uninhibited and eclectic, veering from opera to Lee Scratch Perry to Lou Reed’s pre-Velvets novelty track The Ostrich. But the film’s main assets are three extraordinary performances: Phoenix, rumpled and emotionally untucked as Johnny; Hoffman, loving and hurting fiercely as Viv; and Woody Norman, delivering one of the most remarkable performances, by a child or otherwise, of the year.Robert Holman, the playwright’s playwright who was revered for his finely crafted, hugely insightful and humane dramas, has died at the age of 69. His death, on Friday night, was announced by the agency Casarotto Ramsay &amp; Associates who called him “an extraordinary playwright and an extraordinary human being”. Among the many theatre-makers to pay tribute on social media was David Greig, who celebrated Holman for his “quiet, finely wrought work” exploring “the human ache for connection”. Greig wrote that Holman was “overlooked in his time” but was “a much-loved influence and mentor. His integrity and poetry set a fine example. He will be missed.” Holman’s publisher, Nick Hern Books, praised his “beautiful, masterful plays, which influenced a whole generation of writers”. Holman’s theatre career spanned some 50 years and more than 20 plays. Born into a Quaker family in 1952, he grew up in the market town of Guisborough, North Yorkshire. His first plays were staged in the 1970s at venues including the Soho Poly, Cockpit and Royal Court in London, where he moved at the age of 19. He wrote plays in the hours before and after his day job selling newspapers at Paddington station. “All my plays are a mixture of memory and imagination,” he wrote, “and they have mostly used landscapes that I know well. I was born and brought up on a farm on the moors in North Yorkshire. Middlesbrough and the Tees Estuary, with the chemical and steel industry close by, were 20 miles away.” German Skerries, directed by Holman’s frequent collaborator Chris Parr at the Bush theatre in London in 1977, won the George Devine award for most promising playwright. The play, which keenly observes birdwatchers from different generations, had an admired revival at the Orange Tree theatre in Richmond in 2016, shortly after the closure of the Redcar steelworks on Teesside, which provides its backdrop. The Orange Tree’s artistic director, Paul Miller, paid tribute on Saturday, saying that Holman embodied George Eliot’s ideal of a “keen vision and feeling of all ordinary human life”. Holman, he added, was “a very English artist: the plays are rooted in real life yet suggest other worlds and realities”. The playwright Caitlin Magnall-Kearns was also among those paying tribute and called Holman “a master of the understated and unsaid”. After productions at the Traverse in Edinburgh (Rooting) and the Royal Court (Other Worlds and The Overgrown Path), as well as one for the Royal Shakespeare Company (Today), Holman returned in 1986 to the Bush with a trilogy set in the 1940s and 80s about lives changed by war. Its title, Making Noise Quietly, which also inspired the name of a 2003 retrospective at Manchester’s Royal Exchange, could be said to sum up his exquisitely powerful plays, which subtly draw the audience in with their attention to detail and sincere observation – and can truly startle too. “I think the connections the audience make are up to them,” said Holman of the three short dramas. “The plays are just pieces of energy which by a stroke of good luck sometimes add up to more than they are.” Making Noise Quietly’s revivals included one at the Donmar in London by director Peter Gill in 2012. Seven years later it became a film directed by Dominic Dromgoole, who had staged it in the West End in 1999, and starring Matthew Tennyson, who appeared in the Donmar production. A Breakfast of Eels, presented at the Print Room in London in 2015, was written specifically for Tennyson and another actor, Andrew Sheridan. It won best new play at the Off West End Theatre Awards the following year. Holman and Tennyson returned to the Print Room (now renamed the Coronet) earlier this year with a new play, The Lodger. Holman also wrote for television and radio and was a resident dramatist at the National Theatre and with the Royal Shakespeare Company. If the plays are often marked by their hope, grace, tenderness and compassion, Holman explained that his dramas “are not driven by a single ideology or an idea, there is no right or wrong in them, or one easy explanation. They are about what you want them to be about, and this changes.” His other plays included Across Oka (at the RSC, 1988), Holes in the Skin (Chichester’s Minerva theatre, 2003), Jonah and Otto (Royal Exchange, 2008) and A Thousand Stars Explode in the Sky (Lyric Hammersmith, 2010). The last of these, a family drama about the end of the universe, was co-written with David Eldridge and Simon Stephens, who had both become friends and devoted admirers of his plays. “With brilliant, quiet determination and faith he looks at a world which is contradictory, violent, morally uncertain and unsettled,” wrote Stephens in 2008. “Some have found this boldness and this faith unsettling. Perhaps this is the reason why he is not more celebrated than he is. It certainly makes it difficult to simplify, summarise or even describe his plays. They are too organic or surprising for that. It has thrilled the audiences I have shared his plays with, though. I think it will continue to do so. If you are new to his plays, I envy you. You’re about to embark, in my opinion, on something rather extraordinary.”Four days after the ordeal of giving evidence about an alleged campaign of bullying and harassment against her by a fellow jockey, Bryony Frost received a rapturous reception from the packed grandstands at Sandown Park on Saturday as she was led back to unsaddle after winning the Grade One Tingle Creek Chase on the 12-1 chance, Greaneteen. The hearing into Frost’s formal complaint against Robbie Dunne, which he denies, will continue on Tuesday. For now, though, Frost can reflect on another fine ride at the highest level, which brought the sixth Grade One success of her career. Greaneteen was a 5-1 chance on Friday but drifted to double-figure odds before the off in the face of strong support for Willie Mullins’s Chacun Pour Soi, who set off as the 8-13 favourite. For the second time in two trips to Britain, however, Chacun Pour Soi left his supporters out of pocket, making a couple of jumping errors before fading from three out. Greaneteen, by contrast, was always travelling smoothly and his rider sent him into the lead between the final two fences. A fine jump at the last extended his lead and though he drifted left on the run to the line, he was running on again for his rider in the half-furlong, beating Hitman – a stable companion at the Paul Nicholls yard – by five-and-a-half lengths. “I can’t tell you what it means,” Frost said. “I was nearly in tears coming in. To feel the support of everyone here is huge, I could hardly talk to Alice [Plunkett, of ITV Racing] coming in because I wanted to appreciate everybody. “When I landed after the last I thought somebody was going to come and get me. I could hear them and the crowd and I thought ‘Oh my God. Someone has to get me’. He jumped and he travelled and It’s absolutely brilliant. “Being on the back of a horse is the most blissful place you can be. You get to go out there and you jump and gallop and enjoy yourself. You let your thoughts go to the side and there’s no other place like it, when you’re gunning for him and he’s gunning for you and you leave everything out there and ride and aim for that winning post.” Nicholls has spent the past 10 days self-isolating after testing positive for Covid-19. “It has been the worst 10 days of my life,” he said, “but it is nice to come back to this. “It has been a difficult week for Bryony but she has handled it well and I don’t think any of us would like to be in that position. But when you come back in and ride a Grade One winner, that says everything about how professional she is.”On a summer’s day in 2015, Joshua Jones put on his suit and headed to his gleaming office block overlooking the Thames in London. It was the trainee accountant’s day off, but he was in turmoil after gambling away most of his monthly pay and an annual bonus. He told a friend he needed to “pop into the office”. He took the lift to the top floor of the block in the early evening and jumped to his death. He was 23. Martin Jones, 72, Joshua’s father, said: “To people who worked with him, he was the life and soul of the party, but he was living a double life as a gambler. He felt despair that he could not control the addiction.” On Wednesday, in Westminster, Jones’s parents will meet other families in their position, relatives of 18 young people who lost their lives while struggling with devastating gambling addictions. It will be the largest gathering in the UK of people bereaved by gambling, and the families will call on the government for independent investigations into deaths linked to the betting industry. A Public Health England study published in September estimated that there are more than 409 suicides a year in England associated with problem gambling. It is the first time an official estimate has been made of the number of deaths. Liz and Charles Ritchie founded the Gambling with Lives charity after their son, Jack, took his life in 2017 because of a gambling addiction. They have been campaigning for the government to acknowledge the scale of the problem. The charity is organising this week’s event. “When Jack died, we were seeking out and finding other families who had lost a child,” his father said. “We started to ask how many people were dying. And nobody could tell us.” The Ritchies did their own research and estimated that there were between 250 and 650 gambling-related suicides in the UK each year. They have welcomed the official report, which confirms their estimate of hundreds of lives lost each year. Many of the families of those who died say that since the liberalisation of gambling laws in 2005, it is almost impossible for an addict to avoid gaming ads on social media, sponsorships deals emblazoned across the country’s football stadiums, free bets and promotional emails. Even the Gambling Commission, which is tasked with regulating betting firms and safeguarding consumers, argues it is “normal” to gamble. Jones, who lives near Swindon, said last week he considered many of those who had died felt the same shame and hopelessness that he believes led to his son’s death. Joshua, who was a talented trombone player and a keen hockey player, had started gambling while in sixth form and had become hooked on online sites such as PokerStars, the online poker cardroom. He wrote on one online forum: “I’ve just been consumed by gambling. I’m scared for my sanity. I just can’t imagine ever doing anything else other than playing poker for a living. I can’t see a way out but am slowly aware I’m digging a hole.” His father said he would like to see new laws similar to health and safety legislation to ensure every death involving gambling was investigated: “It’s scandalous these deaths are not being properly investigated. The Gambling Commission, the betting firms and the government all hold up their hands and say, ‘We did nothing wrong’. Every death should be investigated, and lessons learned to promote better public health policy.” Based on the Public Health England annual estimate of suicides associated with problem gambling, there are likely to have been more than 2,450 deaths linked to problem gambling in the years since Joshua Jones died in July 2015. Gambling with Lives says it is only aware of two of these deaths having been investigated by the Gambling Commission. One of the regulator’s licensing objectives is to “protect children and other vulnerable persons from being harmed or exploited by gambling”. One of the deaths investigated was Jones’s. The regulator found no betting firm had breached regulations. The other was into the death of Chris Bruney in April 2017 after he was given VIP status by the betting website winner.co.uk, which is operated by PT Entertainment Services. The VIP schemes offer bonuses, promotions and rewards for regular gambling. The Gambling Commission found that the company had violated the rules for awarding VIP status to a client. PT Entertainment Services was not required to pay the £3.5m in financial sanctions because it had surrendered its licence. After an outcry, its parent company, Playtech, apologised for the failings and agreed to pay more than £5m to charity over five years. Ritchie said: “What Gambling with Lives has done very successfully is made clear the link between suicides and gambling, and the scale of those deaths. It’s just criminal that all these hundreds of people are dying and nothing is being learned.” The charity wants a new system for recording deaths involving problem gambling and an independent inquiry into each of them. The government is reviewing the gambling laws, and a white paper is due in the next few months. Gambling with Lives is also calling for a range of measures to help prevent future deaths and social harms, including a ban on gambling advertising, including sports sponsorship; an end to all VIP schemes for gamblers; and a new duty of care for betting firms. Since Joshua’s death, other lives lost include Philip Tomlinson, 29, from Manchester, who took his life in July 2017 after suffering for years from a gambling disorder; Kimberley Wadsworth, 32, from Ilkley, West Yorkshire, who died in June 2018 after a gambling spree; and Luke Ashton, 40, who took his life last April after he started gambling again during lockdown. Annie Ashton, 40, from Leicester, Luke Ashton’s widow, said last week she had never realised the dangers of gambling until her husband’s death. She said: “I don’t gamble, but never thought there was any harm in it. I don’t understand now how it can be linked to fun when on the flip side there is this devastation that’s caused all these deaths. “ The Gambling Commission was unable to say how many deaths linked to gambling it had investigated, but said operators were required to notify it of cases in which clients had killed themselves. Cases were investigated wherever there was a suspected link to gambling. It said: “Any loss of life connected with gambling harm is one too many, and we are absolutely committed to protecting the safety of the public and players. As regulator of the industry, we will continue to hold licence-holders fully accountable, take enforcement action and make sure operators are interacting with customers to identify early signs of harm.” The industry body the Betting and Gaming Council said: “Any suicide is a terrible tragedy. Thirty million people in the UK enjoy a bet each year, and the overwhelming majority do so safely. We are continuing to promote safer gambling measures.” • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. The charity Mind is available on 0300 123 3393. In the US, Mental Health America is available on 800-273-8255. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 or chat for support. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgA homeowner in Maryland tried to fight a snake infestation with coal, only to burn their own house down, causing more than $1m in damage. Nobody was injured. Montgomery county fire and rescue officials notified the public about the blaze right after it happened on 23 November, describing a conflagration that left a “large two-three-story single family house with heavy fire throughout structure and roof collapse”. About 75 firefighters responded. Conditions were “dark and cold” – around -4C (25F) – as they battled the flames. More than a week later, the department’s public information officer revealed more details. The cause was “accidental”, they said, specifically the “homeowner using smoke to manage snake infestation”. Authorities believe the chosen heat source for the attempted serpent eradication was coals, which were located “too close to combustibles”. The fire’s area of origin was described as “basement, walls/floor”. While uncommon, there have been other incidents in the US in which homeowners accidentally set fire to their homes while battling pests. In 2017, a man destroyed most of his Georgia home when trying to “burn bees out of their nest”, the Associated Press reported. The Humane Society of the United States says firefighters have repeatedly faced dangers from retrieving snakes, including an April 2013 incident in Thornton, Colorado. Then, firefighters removed “more than 1,000 snakes and other reptiles from the basement of a home that was engulfed in flames”. Some of the creatures were described as aggressive, with some getting loose. The house was the location of Boas and Balls, a business selling snakes such as ball pythons and boa constrictors. In Maryland, fire officials said: “Status of snakes undetermined.”That’s all for today. Thanks for following along with us and be sure to check out today’s game report here. “Today was surely not missing chances for any of us,” Nepomniachtchi says. “It was a very, very balanced game and I believe it was just boring.” The challenger is asked about his habit of walking away from the board toward his antechamber during the games at an unusually high frequency relative to other players. What is he doing back there? According to Nepomniachtchi, it’s a pandemic habit. “Sitting on the sofa basically and watching the screen,” he says. “It reminds me of playing during the [Covid-19 pandemic]. It’s very similar: you’re sitting in front of your screen and you try to think. So maybe it’s even more familiar right now than playing regularly over the board.” Carlsen says today’s game evoked memories of his 2013 title match against Vishy Anand. “Obviously I remembered my first match against Vishy when I broke through and won the fifth game and then I managed to sort of gradually equalize with black in the sixth and eventually win,” he says. I was slightly hoping that we could follow a similar scenario but a draw is obviously a very nice result.” Did Nepomniachtchi’s opening choice surprise him? “No, it was the usual. Obviously white is slightly better but as long as you can not see a clear way to increase the advantage it’s usually going to go that way.” Asked to assess the state of the match, Carlsen says: “Obviously with yesterday’s result it’s going pretty well. But it’s a long way to go, half the match still. But I’ve made my breakthrough so the state is good.” Asked whether yesterday’s (er, today’s) taxing Game 6 affected his opening choice for today, Nepomniachtchi keeps it short: “Absolutely not.” Then he adds: “Also by the way it was quite a new experience to play two games in the same day.” He goes on to make a sidelong complaint about the 16.30 local start time, chosen for convenience of other time zones. When asked to assess the state of the match at the midpoint, Nepomniachtchi says: “It’s not going too well because in general I’ve had some quite promising positions. And yesterday was some kind of a collapse which prevented me from grabbing the b4 pawn twice in a row. Yesterday’s game was kind of poor from both sides, I believe, especially during the time trouble. Otherwise I think it’s pretty much sensible and it’s very much fighting.” “It was fine,” says Carlsen when asked if he’s satisfied with today’s result. “It was kind of the usual that he was a little bit better and I had to gradually equalize. I think I did that OK. Probably his only chance there at the end was to play Rac1 instead of Rec1 and then trade e4 for c7. I thought he was was a little bit better. But very, very little and unrealistic that he can play for a win I thought. Gradually I’d equalize there as well.” Carlsen admits his energy was low today after Friday’s epic eight-hour win: “I couldn’t really sleep yesterday. I was way too excited. But all the way today I was thinking, ‘I’m tired but it’s probably a lot worse for him.’” Asked if he expected Nepomniachtchi to play a sharper game next time he plays with white, Carlsen says: “I kind of expected him to play a bit carefully again today seeing as you don’t want tilt after a game like yesterday. I don’t know if it’s going to change very soon but at some point obviously it has to.” And after Nepomniachtchi plays 41. Ra7, the players shake hands. It’s a draw after 41 moves and 2hr 30min. Perhaps a wasteful opportunity for the Russian challenger: he’s still down a point in the match and Carlsen has more games with the white pieces. But who can blame him after having to come back so soon after yesterday’s eight-hour crucible? Carlsen leads 4-3 in the best-of-14-games match with seven contests remaining. The rooks have come off, the queens have come off. We should be finished here momentarily: 33. g3 h5 34. Kg2 Kg7 35. Ra5 Kf6 36. Rb5 Kg7 37. Ra5 Kf6 38. Rb5 Kg7 39. Ra5 Kf6 40. Ra6+ Kg7 ... This one is fizzling out fast. The moves are flying on the board now: 25. Nxe5 Rxe5 26. Rxe5 Qxe5 27. Qc3 Qxc3 28. bxc3 Rc8 29. Ra5 Rxc3 30. Rxb5 Rc1+ 31. Kh2 Rc3 32. h4 g6 ... The simplification continues with 23. ... Bxc5 24. Rxc5 Nxe5. More to come shortly with a draw looking ever more likely. Nepomniachtchi looks off to the side and shakes his head after 21. e5 Qf5 22. dxc5 dxc5 23. Bxc5. It looks like we’re headed for a draw today. Nepomniachtchi plays 20. Rec1 after nearly 18 minutes. Carlsen takes 97 seconds before responding with 20. ... c5. According to the Norwegian supercomputer Sesse, the position is dead even. “Today’s game is as though the previous game didn’t happen,” Dutch grandmaster Anish Giri says on Chess24’s broadcast. “Neither side adjusted their strategy at all, which makes a lot of sense because they didn’t have time to adjust. They finished very late and there was no rest day.” Carlsen plays the committal 17. ... exd4 after nearly nine minutes, giving up his stronghold in the center. Nepomniachtchi considers his options for seven minutes before recapturing with his c-pawn (18. cxd4). Carlsen then quickly initiates the bishop exchange before pushing his knight to the side (18. ... Bxb3 19. Qxb3 Ng6). Nepomniachtchi plays 17. d4 and Carlsen has gone into the think tank. He’s spent more than seven minutes pondering his response and has gone more than 20 minutes behind his opponent on time. “I think the opening has gone well for Ian,” says American grandmaster Fabiano Caruana on Chess.com’s broadcast. “It’s not a very large advantage but it is pressure and he’s up on the clock. This is a bit of an opening success. But we saw it last time he was white that he got an advantage but he wasn’t able to pursue it in the most accurate way. “So this is only the start of it. Although he might have won the opening battle in some small way, he still needs to outplay Magnus from this position. Which is really difficult because this is magnus’s territory. Ruy Lopez positions, he’s been playing at the top level, and at the world championship level, for over a decade.” Nepomniachtchi inspects the position for nearly 10 minutes before playing 16. Be3. Carlsen responds with 16. ... Be6 after exactly six minutes. Carlsen has taken more than 20 minutes pondering his response to 15. c3. “I’m not sure if I would say if this is an opening success for Ian,” commentator Jon Kristian Haarr says on Chess24’s broadcast. “It seems to me that Magnus has equalized. But then again, it depends again on what Ian wants to get out of this game. He has a very solid position and is by no meams this game over or a draw or anything.” Ultimately, Carlsen retreats his knight with 15. ... Ne7. Early days, but he’s fallen 20 minutes behind Nepomniachtchi on time. We’re under way after a technical snafu! After the players blitz out their opening moves into an anti-Marshall variation of the closed Ruy Lopez (1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3), the players continue with 7. ... O-O 8. a4 Rb8 9. axb5 axb5 10. h3 d6 11. d3 h6 12. Nc3. Carlsen, playing as black today, has his first lengthy think of the day, taking nearly 13 minutes before deciding on 12. ... Re8, before 13. Nd5 Bf8 14. Nxf6+ Qxf6 15. c3 leave us in the current position. Here’s the live action from Game 7 Here’s Bryan’s report from Friday’s unforgettable sixth game in Dubai.Founded by a Danish karate champion, the smoothie chain Joe &amp; the Juice has blitzed its way on to British high streets, where its pastel-pink outlets and drinks with names such as Sex Me Up have cut a distinctive dash. Having grown from one juice bar in Copenhagen in 2002 to 300 outlets around the world, the chain is planning to double in size in the next few years, and is rumoured to be plotting a stock market listing. Top of its list is the UK, where it plans to add up to 20 outlets next year on top of the 54 already open, making Britain the biggest market for Joe &amp; the Juice worldwide. Despite its rapid growth, it remains a fraction of the size of rivals such as Pret a Manger, which has more than 300 outlets, despite closing 30 during the pandemic; Starbucks, which has more than 1,000; and Costa, with more than 2,000. The pandemic may have crushed some cafe chains, but Joe &amp; the Juice only permanently closed 10 outlets and has been able to secure many new sites as rents have fallen and rivals downscaled. However, chief executive Thomas Nørøxe says the group has been forced to dream up a menu of creative ideas to attract and retain staff in the battle for workers that has followed Brexit and the pandemic. “We need 15 new people every week – and we are not really getting them now,” he says. Five of its London outlets are being temporarily closed because of staff shortages. Expansion in the north of England is also being held back by the speed at which young people can be hired and trained up. Nørøxe says the company is offering perks including international travel, yoga nights, and “showoff” competitions where staff can win prizes for cocktail-waiter-style tricks with juicers and ice cubes. Also on the cards for the UK is a clearer career path towards higher earnings, with business training and regular bonuses for hitting company targets. “Probably in the past we were reliant on a lot of Europeans working hard and having fun times in London. Now everything is shifting,” Nørøxe says. Joe &amp; the Juice’s experience in the Nordic countries, where pay has long been higher than the UK, has helped equip it for the tougher recruitment market emerging in the hospitality industry here. The business has also become an accredited employer under a government visa scheme which will enable it to bring in 20 bar managers to help train British staff to fuel its expansion. The plan bolsters an existing programme under which trainees can opt to get experience at juice bars around the world, with discounted accommodation in “Joe houses” rented out by the company. Even if young people can be found to fuel the business, does the UK really need more coffee shops – even those with freshly made juices with snappy names, porridge and toasted sandwiches? With a Sex Me up apple, passion fruit and ginger drink costing £5.90, it isn’t cheap and cheerful either. Founder Kaspar Basse had big ambitions for his brand, taking inspiration from Starbucks. Those dreams have been supercharged with backing from private equity groups Valedo Partners and General Atlantic in 2013 and 2016. However, city centre cafes reliant on commuter traffic have taken a battering through the pandemic, and the apparently longer-term shift to working from home, at least part-time, is likely to make it harder for many such places to survive. Latest accounts at Companies House show pre-tax losses at the UK business widened to £3.7m in 2019 from £1.2m a year before, despite a 27% rise in sales to almost £24m. Nørøxe says Joe &amp; the Juice was partly protected in the pandemic by its focus on affluent neighbourhoods in the UK, such as Richmond, Chiswick and Chelsea in London. Those outlets continue to enjoy trade well ahead of pre-pandemic levels – up by a fifth on 2019 – as non-commuters pop in for a break from the home office. Nørøxe says that, at least before the Omicron variant appeared, sales were back to 2019 levels in London commuter centres such as Cannon Street and Canary Wharf. Since July, the UK business has rebounded, exceeding 2019 sales levels for the year to date by September. “Cities are coming back in a different way to the old days,” he says. Part of that change will be digital services that link your local coffee shop to your phone. Like some other venues, Joe &amp; the Juice launched an app which enables customers to make an order from home so it is ready when they arrive, while its delivery service now accounts for 20% of UK sales, having only started just before the pandemic. A subscription service is being tested and is likely to be on the way next year. An IPO had been on the cards before Covid; showing the group has a winning formula will be essential in achieving a public listing. Nørøxe admits there is heavy competition – but also optimism – from several of the chain’s rivals about the future for cafes in the post-Covid world. “The fight for new sites is definitely here,” he says.In the darkest days of the pandemic, with the industry she represented on its knees and no light at the end of the tunnel, the boss of UK Hospitality, Kate Nicholls, went to see a therapist. She had been acting as an “emotional sponge”, soaking up the anguish of tens of thousands of pubs, bars and restaurants fearing oblivion, while trying to shield her team, particularly the younger members, from the ravages of a uniquely stressful event. “There were times when it was really quite bleak,” she says. “Particularly when you got to October and November last year. We were in tears: there was that sense of frustration that businesses are open but not able to trade and you could see it all sliding away from you again.” During tense negotiations with the government, banks and insurers about financial support for the sector, she simply ploughed on. It has been in the quieter moments that the pent-up effect of relentless pressure has made itself known. “You can slightly fall apart,” she says. “I’ll probably crash when we come out of it.” While she insists her relationship with ministers has always been cordial and collaborative, dealing with the absurdities of politics has taken its toll. “Things like scotch eggs and the 10pm curfew,” she says, referring to the period in late 2020 when politicians cobbled together compromises about what time venues should close and whether the pub snack constituted a substantial meal . “For some reason there was a break in communication where the government didn’t come out effectively to ask the industry how we could work to [reopen safely]. And after that we’re forever playing catch-up.” Restrictions on socialising have eased, allowing punters to return in droves, but more pain could be on the horizon without meaningful support. Last week, the worst fears of Nicholls and her members arose, as concerns about the Omicron Covid-19 variant prompted a flurry of Christmas party cancellations. “We’ve lost 10% of the industry during Covid,” she says. “I think you could see business failures as big again.” Her warning is founded not so much on Omicron, but on concerns such as the £10.5bn of debt built up by venues during the pandemic, including £2bn of rent debt that landlords will not defer forever. Meanwhile, costs are running hot, with soaring utility bills and higher costs for food and drink. The crunch comes at the end of March, when the 66% relief on business rates comes to an end and VAT on hospitality returns to 20% from 12.5%. “We’re going to have to put up prices, but if you put a tax increase through at the same time, you will kill a lot of these businesses,” says Nicholls. “Many are running on fumes.” She will be pressing the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, to extend both measures at his spring budget, which comes weeks before one of the year’s four “quarter days” – the point at which rents come due and businesses that cannot pay them often go to the wall. “They [the government] have the opportunity to put a larger proportion of the sector into that vulnerable and failing business category, or they have the opportunity to accelerate the recovery and get the economy moving.” Nicholls has been wrestling with the effects of Covid-19 for longer than most. She was holding industry meetings about it in January last year, as her members started reporting how bad things were getting in their overseas outposts. She was also one of the first people in the UK to catch the disease, in March. Like many sufferers, she lost her sense of taste and smell. But that gave rise to a much more unusual symptom. Nicholls has synaesthesia, a rare neurological trait that causes one’s senses to overlap, meaning she can taste and smell words. “The word Facebook to me tastes like the smell of baby powder,” she says, while the word Northumberland tastes like petrichor, the smell of rain on dry earth. Since she caught Covid, however, her synaesthesia has all but disappeared. Her connection to her roots in north-east England is something she has not lost, however, and she retains her Durham accent. That was where she grew up, the child of teachers, and was educated at the local comprehensive before reading English at Cambridge – the first in her family to go to university. She went on to gain experience of the industry she now represents, pulling pints as a student and serving meals at the restaurant chain TGI Fridays in her first job, with hospitality firm Whitbread. The 51-year-old lobbyist is also well versed in politics. In her early career she worked for Conservative politicians in the House of Commons and European parliament, where she claims to have “saved the prawn cocktail crisp” from Brussels bureaucrats concerned about food additives. Asked whether the Tory party remains the “party of business”, she recalls the so-called “prawn cocktail offensive” of the 1990s, when Labour sought to woo industry luminaries via catered meetings. Has Boris Johnson’s party lost that mantle now, via his infamous “fuck business” comment regarding Brexit and, more recently, a fumbling performance at the annual CBI speech? Nicholls merely says: “I think at times, business gets taken for granted by political parties.” At least now she feels hospitality is no longer being singled out as a hotbed of Covid-19 transmission and the government has grasped her message about the mitigating impact of measures such as ventilation and sanitation in keeping customers safe. “It’s really good to have the politicians endorsing that because that’s what you need to maintain that consumer confidence.” She has learned to stop fearing condemnation from those who see efforts to keep venues open as a disregard for the danger of Covid. “All I can do is stay true and authentic to what the industry needs and wants, and just keep focused on that. I’m not an epidemiologist.” * * * CV Age 51 Family Civil servant husband and two daughters, 19 and 16. Education Comprehensive school before reading English at Cambridge, then postgraduate competition law and an MBA, both while working. Pay “We are not-for-profit so I’m not going to go there publicly, if that’s OK.” Last holiday December 2020 in the Arctic circle, hunting the Northern Lights and doing a husky safari. Best advice you’ve been given “‘Lift as you climb’. This is something I’ve tried to do throughout, particularly being a woman in several male-dominated industries. It came from one of my first bosses at Whitbread, who always emphasised the importance of being helpful and supportive to everyone.” Biggest career mistake “I kept too much of a professional demeanour and lost out to someone else on my first chief executive job because people didn’t know the real me.” Word she overuses “I don’t think I have one but probably something like ‘synergy’ or ‘passionate.’” How she relaxes Reading – “at least two books a week”. She challenged herself to read all 20 of her Christmas-present books before the end of lockdown. “Needless to say, I had to buy more.”Birmingham-born, Leeds-raised Micah Richards, 33, signed for Manchester City aged 14, made his first-team debut at 17 and captained the side at 19. He won the Premier League, the FA Cup, the League Cup and was the youngest defender ever called up to the England squad, going on to earn 13 international caps. He also played for Aston Villa and Fiorentina. After early retirement at the age of 31 due to knee injuries, he became a football pundit. He covered this summer’s Euros for the BBC, where his warm exuberance in the studio and on social media made Richards the standout pundit. Did the Euros make 2021 a vintage year for you? Definitely. It was my first international tournament as a pundit. You get sent this big booklet to swot up on all the teams. I thought: “Right, I’ve been with the BBC a while, I’m on Match of the Day, I’m one of the big boys now.” But for my first few matches, I got teams such as Russia and Slovakia. It’s a privilege to work on the Euros but I don’t watch Russian football. I don’t know these players. There’s a Swiss striker called Breel Embolo and I must’ve said his name wrong every single time! But I don’t go on TV thinking I know it all. I represent the fans on screen. You can’t laugh and joke all the time, but football is supposed to be fun. I loved every minute. Did it recapture the spirit of Euro 96? Exactly that. There was such a buzz around and it always helps when England do well. By the time we got to the knockout stages, everyone was like: “Hang on, it actually could be coming home.” It was great how it united the country. To lose on penalties was devastating, but look how far they’d come. How tense were you during the penalty shootout? I couldn’t even watch. On my way into Wembley, a fan asked for my prediction. I said: “1-1 and it’ll go to penalties.” He said: “Who’ll win?” I just looked at him and raised my eyebrows. Because I know Roberto Mancini so well [Italy’s boss managed Richards at Man City], I knew he’d shut up shop after they equalised. And when it comes to penalties, I just fancied Italy. It was so cruel. I never dared take a penalty In my playing career. I did once in a pre-season friendly and that was nerve-racking enough. Imagine taking one in a Euros final. Did you score it? Mate, I think it’s still coming down from space. What was your favourite match of the tournament? England v Germany by far. It had the best atmosphere of any international game I’ve ever been to. I’ve never heard Wembley so loud. What do you think of the England manager, Gareth Southgate? Brilliant. He understands exactly what we need. Society today is very divided and OK, Gareth might not be a master tactician like Mancini yet, but he’s fostered such a sense of cohesion and togetherness. Which players particularly impressed you? Jordan Pickford gets a lot of stick, but he was superb. Kyle Walker was outstanding in a couple of different positions. Declan Rice and Kalvin Phillips in midfield were absolute engines. And up front, Raheem Sterling stepped up in the big moments and answered his critics. They were the spine of the team. And honourable mention goes to Luke Shaw for scoring in a Euros final, just a few years after badly breaking his leg. What did you make of fans’ behaviour on the day of the final? I had to get to Wembley three hours before kick-off and trying to get into the stadium was a nightmare. I had to fight my way through about 30,000 people. I actually caught Covid that day. When I saw the footage later, I was like: “This is supposed to be a celebration. Why are you spoiling it?” Women and kids were getting pushed to the ground. Some of the scenes were disgusting. How about the fallout with the racism that followed England’s exit? I don’t know if it’s because I’m black, but I could see it coming. When the guys missed those penalties, I was scared to look at Twitter. The team are from different backgrounds, they gave absolutely everything and got us to the final, but when they missed one penalty, they were no longer English? It was so disheartening. I just felt low. We’re not talking about a few, we’re talking thousands of abusive messages. That was tough to take. But it will make them stronger and when they do win something, it’ll be even sweeter. What’s the answer to racism in sport? Education – not just in sport but throughout society. Accept what you said is wrong, apologise, learn and move forward. It takes 30 seconds to Google why certain terms are offensive. Some of these people are intelligent, they just use it selectively. Honest, difficult conversations are the key. You busted out a bit of Nice &amp; Slow by Usher in the BBC studio at half-time during Sweden v Slovakia. Why? Joleon Lescott [former City teammate] texted me saying: “Why the hell are you on the Euros singing Usher?” I replied: “It just felt the right time to do it.” I’m still waiting for gig offers to flood in. I love to bring positive energy to the party. Even if I’m criticising someone, I do it with a smile. Who are the best- and worst-dressed pundits? Gary Neville’s the worst by far. He looks awful in everything. Jamie Redknapp is best dressed by a country mile. Ian Wright’s got a bit of style too. You have a hilarious relationship with Roy Keane. How did that develop? People are often scared of Roy because he’s an absolute legend and takes no prisoners. So I decided just to disagree with whatever he said. I prodded him, poked him and didn’t back down. I think he liked the way I held my own. Ever since then, it’s been brilliant. We’re lucky to have him at a time when Manchester United aren’t doing so well, because he’s so passionate about the club. He’s one of the nicest people I’ve met in broadcasting. So he’s a pussycat underneath? I’m not being quoted calling him a pussycat. But he’s a diamond, he really is. Your BBC Sport colleague Dan Walker is doing Strictly Come Dancing. Would you fancy that? Dan’s doing a decent job. I couldn’t do Latin and ballroom. I’m more R&amp;B. Popping and locking. A bit more street. What kept you sane during the lockdowns? Working out and watching box sets. I binged every season of Suits and Prison Break, both for the second time. I liked the mental challenge of it. My friend who’s Muslim said in April that he didn’t think I could handle fasting for Ramadan, so I did it for a whole month, just to prove him wrong. And look at the size of me. I’m single-minded like that. Will you make any new year’s resolutions? I want to give something back and try to make a difference. Use my profile to help people who are struggling. I donate money to charity, but I want to devote more time to it too. What are your hopes for the 2022 World Cup? In the past three years, England have reached the World Cup semis and the Euros final, so we’ve got to back ourselves. With a decent draw and a little luck, who knows? We’ve got a good chance. I can say that with my heart now, rather than just in hope. Micah Richards is a pundit for BBC Sport, Sky Sports and CBSFormed to give musical voice to The Lost Words, Robert Macfarlane and Jackie Morris’s bestselling meditations on British wildlife, this collective of folk alumni triumphed with 2019’s album of the same name, not least in performance, with a streamed concert at London’s Natural History Museum this year enjoying a global audience of 55,000. Their follow-up, inspired by Macfarlane and Morris’s recent The Lost Spells, proves equally captivating, setting its 15 subjects – Swifts, Barn Owl, Bramble and the like – to a serendipitous blend of guitar, harp, woodwind, kora and more. The playing is assured – Rachel Newton’s harp and Beth Porter’s cello deserve special mention – but it’s the group’s collective vocals that ace it. Masterfully produced by Andy Bell, their voices swell in inclusive choral harmony, with unforced high notes from Hebridean singer Julie Fowlis. The assorted flora and creatures evoked by Macfarlane’s words underpin the album. Lau’s Kris Drever brings a visceral quality to the Fox spell – “Red is your art, red your animal heart” – while the Gorse spell cleverly fuses plant and human nature – “prickly, cussed, hard to handle”. Morris’s charming, meticulous watercolours complete a magical piece of chamber folk that will speak to all ages.Walking into artist and designer Sarah Arnett’s home, you could be forgiven for thinking you had entered an exotic wonderland. Sarah, who lives here with partner Matthew, is influenced by a cornucopia of references, from the iconic boutique Biba to the flora and fauna of Zimbabwe where she spent much of her childhood. Her artwork and illustrations can be seen on fine art prints, homewares, wallpapers and textiles, as well as on custom murals in hotels and private homes. Although Sarah bought the spacious garden flat in Hove 25 years ago, when it felt “so far away from Brighton and really grown up”, the main transformation has taken place over the past 18 months. When her son Samson, now at university, was younger, he had free rein to paint on the walls, but now most of those walls have been removed to create a luxurious, fantasy home, perfect for entertaining. The renovation was completed over two stages, each lasting around six weeks. During the first lockdown of 2020, they removed a central chimney breast, a “wasted” hallway and Samson’s old bedroom to create one huge living space and kitchen. Leaving time “for the project to evolve”, the bedroom and the bathroom were reconfigured by removing a corridor a year later. Sarah is quick to praise the builder for listening to her ideas and talking her out of others (she wanted a central palm tree-style pillar in the living area, resembling those in the Royal Pavilion, but it would have created an obstacle around which to navigate the long dining table). Matthew and Sarah hold a regular “dress fancy” party, Fever Club, in various Brighton locations and at the city’s fringe festival. Desperately missing the scene and their friends during the pandemic, she reimagined their home with her distinctive fabric and wallpaper designs of layered exotic wildlife mixed with deco architectural forms. Dreamed up during the first lockdown, a mural in the main living area provides a backdrop, featuring a trompe l’oeil fireplace bathed in light – “all my designs have a light source, suns or moons” – surrounded by Siamese cats, snakes, fish and a pair of Dali-esque red lips (“I just imagined being surrounded by friends on this stage”). The effect is certainly theatrical with the opulent detailed designs on the walls and curtains, and the vintage Murano chandeliers from Vinterior, popping out from the black above the picture rails and on the ceiling. A yellow Habitat sofa shows off Sarah’s chenille cushions, while an original bentwood rocker has been rescued from a skip and re-covered. But Sarah admits that she rarely sits down to relax as she’s either working or entertaining at the table or cooking and, during the week, Matthew is often away with his motorbike business in Kent, Ride DMC Motorcycles. Double doors leading to the outside courtyard are guarded on either side by two “door bitches”, lion-tailed macaque monkeys inspired by Sarah’s time living in Kerala. Sarah works with wall covering company Tektura to create wallpapers under the name Modern Love and relished the opportunity to work in her own home. “If you’re going to show off your own work, don’t compromise,” she says. The art on the walls is brought to life with 3D pieces, such as the bust of a clown and a pair of fairground carousel horses, with “a few pieces that look like they are jumping out of the wallpaper”. Sarah loves going to Ardingly Antiques Fair where she recently picked up a stunning art nouveau floor lamp. The glamorous black and copper kitchen area provides the backstage. Sarah wanted the corner space “to glow like a cocktail bar” and MPM Engineering were commissioned to make the bespoke kitchen. “I grew up with copper in Africa – it’s such a wonderful warm metal with a positive glow. It also gave me the chance to indulge in buying vintage copper kitchen pieces and I’m now collecting jelly moulds. I’ve always loved all the copper in the Royal Pavilion kitchen.” She prefers open-plan shelving so that everything that is functional is also on show. Essential white goods are hidden behind a curtain and the black Range Master stove complements the look. “I love cooking when friends are around and you can drag it out as long as you want with it all in one room. Also, there’s plenty of space to dance.” In between the main living space and bedroom, there is a small jewel of a bathroom, which offers a pause from the patterns. The gold scalloped Fired Earth tiles and the Brilliant Green painted walls from Little Greene are combined with pink accents. The bedroom is a cocoon adorned with palms and birds of paradise. “I like sleeping outside and, as the bedroom was so tiny, I wanted to expand the views to the garden”, so the two exterior walls have been fitted with black Crittall French doors. By night, these are shrouded in sumptuous drapes pattern-matched to the bespoke walls and, in the bedroom, a ceiling mural crowned by a vintage pink glass chandelier. “My designs are about the essence of the memory – not creating a real life version – it’s always about fantasy. I can get lost in drawing all the detail, so patterned and chaotic, but to me it’s calming and restful.” saraharnett.co.ukCraig Cheney sits slumped in his chair, with a look of dejection in place of his usually cheery demeanour. Bristol’s deputy mayor, who is also chair of the city council’s finance committee, needs to save £23m from next year’s budget – on top of almost £100m of cuts three years ago – to balance the books. “We have ways of swallowing our own smoke if the only problem is inflation, but there are so many other extra costs that we need to cope with,” says the former business consultant turned Labour councillor. “It’s tough.” It could have been worse. Until Rishi Sunak’s autumn budget, the gap in Bristol’s finances for next year was £41m, about 10% of the city’s day-to-day spending. In Liverpool, deputy mayor Jane Corbett needs to find £34m of savings before next March’s deadline to present a balanced budget. “We are living on parcels of money from the government,” says the long-time councillor, “and while we are grateful for the support we have had through the pandemic, our budgets for adult social care and children’s social care just cannot cope with rising demand.” Like many other shire authorities, Lancashire council has also launched a search for savings, in its case of £43m. Thurrock in Essex, a Conservative-run unitary authority, is looking to cut one in four jobs and sell assets, including the Thameside theatre in Grays, to save £34m by 2024. Nottingham, which this year charged the highest Band D council tax to offset a large deficit, is battling to save £28m next year and avoid closing six children’s centres, with the loss of 91 jobs. They are among hundreds of councils, run by the Tories or Labour, that are now wondering how to reconcile the chancellor’s message that austerity is over with shortfalls across the public sector that run into billions of pounds. During the pandemic, the government has offered local authorities a financial lifeline. But since the spring and the end of the third lockdown, ministers have focused their generosity on capital spending, as part of a loosely defined agenda to level up the regions. Locked up in various pots, including the towns fund and the “levelling-up” fund, is more than £8bn that councils can bid for if they are able to show tangible benefits from giving high streets and housing estates a facelift. On the other hand, cash for statutory services, which must be kept separate from capital funds, is largely exhausted, at a time when rising prices and cuts to welfare payments are putting extra pressure on low-income households. In the budget, about £1.6bn a year extra was promised to councils for the three years from 2022, though a proportion of this extra cash will come from a maximum annual 3% increase in council tax. This means the average household bill could rise to £2,074 by 2024-25, from £1,898 today. Before the autumn budget, Sunak vowed: “What we’re going to see is absolutely no return to austerity. People are going to see very strong investment in public services.” Michael Gove, secretary of state at the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities (DLUHC), is currently locked in a battle with Sunak for more funds, but sources close to No 11 do not expect Gove to emerge waving a big cheque. They say the chancellor is resisting any increase in the three-year settlement agreed with Whitehall departments, pushing an announcement due last week towards Christmas or possibly the new year. “The view from councils was that a big hitter had arrived in the shape of Michael Gove, but his silence is making people uneasy,” says Jonathan Carr-West, head of thinktank the Local Government Information Unit. Jayne Kirkham, a Labour member of Conservative-controlled Cornwall council, is angry that the county has been “short-changed by the government”. Cornwall is one of the poorest regions in Europe and before Brexit was a beneficiary of EU social funds. It had been due £100m a year over the next seven years from Brussels. Having originally promised to replace the EU money lost to councils, the government instead opted to distribute cash through a new shared prosperity fund to “reduce inequalities between communities”. Cornwall has so far secured just £1m from this. Capital funds for building roads and hospitals don’t, however, pay public sector wages. Before next April, Cornwall council plans to cut 410 posts, about 10% of all council jobs, as part of a draft scheme to close a £55m gap in the 2022-23 annual budget. Councillors will consider the plan at a meeting this week. The Conservatives swept to power in Truro at elections in May this year after all six of Cornwall’s Westminster constituencies went blue on the coat-tails of Boris Johnson’s 2019 victory. Kirkham says a mix of service reductions – including the closure of four swimming pools – a 3% council tax rise and a drive to outsource more operations to the private sector and charities will prove damaging. “There simply needs to be more government money,” she says. “A 1% increase in council tax raises only £3m in Cornwall, so it is hard to see how the council can avoid increasing it by as much as it is allowed.” Proposals include cutting social worker jobs, despite Cornwall’s new administration admitting that both children’s and adult care services face a surge in cases. A report by the Institute for Fiscal Studies earlier this year showed that local authorities were the biggest losers from government austerity measures, suffering budget cuts between 2010 and 2020 of 40% once inflation was taken into account. Corbett, who represents a Liverpool ward that ranks among the most deprived in the country, says that for her city those measures amounted to £450m in lost income. Now it “lives on central government handouts” that last a few months before they run out. “When you find out in October that £6m is available to support the most vulnerable through the winter – and the money was only signed off a fortnight ago, yet must all be spent by March 2022 – you can see how difficult it is to plan and deliver services at the moment.” Any improvements can only follow planning, and that is difficult when the government has yet to make its mind up on several important questions: the proportion of business rates that councils will be able to keep; how the system for funding local government will be agreed; and the results of a fair funding review. The DLUHC said councils had benefited from more than £12bn over the past 18 months, “with more than £6bn available to spend as they see fit”. It added: “We have been clear that councils must not put taxpayers’ money at excessive risk and that local people will continue to have the final say on council tax, with the ability to veto excessive rises.” Bristol is regarded as one of the Britain’s most desirable cities, and its population is increasing. But several districts inside the city boundaries rank among the poorest in the country, with a high proportion of families that need council services. “We get lumped into the wealthier south of the country, which means Bristol’s specific issues go unrecognised,” says deputy mayor Cheney. He has selected nine out of 47 high streets and parades of shops for financial support, to prevent a collapse in the number of retailers. But his capacity to do any more is constrained while business tax revenues are down and the government postpones giving details of how any extra funds will be distributed. “We want to consult over the choices we will need to make,” he adds, “but that’s not possible, not when so much is undecided.”So Jack Dorsey has stepped down as the CEO of Twitter. This means that the company has had four CEOs in its 15 years of existence, with Dorsey occupying the role twice, but in all that time it’s had only one business model, which may largely explain his departure. There are interesting parallels between Dorsey’s relationship with the company he co-founded and Steve Jobs’s with Apple, for both were ousted at one stage by their board colleagues and were then brought back to rescue said colleagues from their incompetence. And the parallels don’t stop there. During their sojourns in the wilderness, both men founded successful new companies, in Dorsey’s case the payments firm Square, in Jobs’s case the computer firm NeXT Inc, after which he went on to transform the Lucasfilm graphics company into Pixar. For both men, these were profitable periods of exile: Square is now valued at $100bn; Jobs sold Pixar to Disney for $7.4bn and got a seat on the Disney board. Which only goes to show that sometimes being fired is the best thing that can happen to a visionary. The idea that became Twitter came from Dorsey’s brainwave in 2006 that if one could broadcast one’s SMS messages then that would be quite a thing. It was an instant hit, not least because most people already knew about text messaging and so the new service hit the ground running. In short order it morphed into a global wire service for ordinary people and, in the 2016 US presidential election, into a megaphone for a particularly adept and unscrupulous user of the medium. So why is the guy who created this astonishing service stepping down? The proximate reason is that he’s being hassled by a couple of wealthy “activist” investors who can’t understand a) how Dorsey could be both CEO of Twitter and of Square (good question, IMHO); and b) why a service that has become such a central part of the networked public sphere isn’t attracting more users or making more money. The number of monthly active users (MAU) on Twitter has been pretty stagnant for a while, and although its annual revenues ($3.72bn in 2020) might seem substantial to those who live in the real world, in the reality distortion field of Silicon Valley they are viewed as small change. As one way of placating these impatient activists, Dorsey gave each of them a seat on the company’s board in return for substantial injections of capital. But it’s clear that what they are pushing for is a change in Twitter’s business model. Like the other social network companies, Twitter makes its money from advertising, but because it doesn’t have any direct user-to-advertiser link, most of the advertising is brand, rather than product, related. Which means that much of the advertising that crops up in one’s Twitter feed is basically virtue-signalling by corporate brands. It’s not clear how this can be changed without radically changing the nature of Twitter, thereby losing its uniqueness. The veteran tech analyst Ben Thompson had an interesting way of putting this in his newsletter the other day by comparing Twitter with Instagram. Both follow a broadcast model but their respective default media are different: for Twitter it’s text, for Instagram it’s photographs. The implications of this are vast, argues Thompson. “Sure, you may follow your friends on both, but on Twitter you will also follow news-breakers, analysts, insightful anons, joke tellers and shit posters. The goal is to mainline information and Twitter’s speed and information density are unparalleled by anything in the world. On Instagram, though, you might follow brands and influencers and your chief interaction with your friends are stories about their Turkey Day exploits. It’s about aspiration, not information, and the former makes a lot more sense for effective advertising.” Putting it another way, the mental states of users are different on the two platforms. Instagram is a way of combating boredom, endlessly scrolling in the hope of finding something interesting. A user in that frame of mind is more likely to be tempted by the prospect of an impulsive purchase. Twitter users, however, are not bored. Instead, they’re combative, annoyed, outraged or looking for a fight or a joke. Often, my Twitter feed brings to mind a story I once heard from a Scottish comedian about Sauchiehall Street on Friday nights in the old days: he described a scene in which one drunk has grabbed another by the lapels, banging his head against the wall and shouting: “For the 20th time, Jimmy, there are 31 islands in the Greek archipelago.” As Dorsey headed for the exit the other day, he dropped a delightfully wicked thought. “There’s a lot of talk about the importance of a company being ‘founder-led’. Ultimately, I believe that’s severely limiting and a single point of failure.” The funny thing is that while that may or may not apply to Twitter, that idea of “a single point of failure” very definitely does apply to another social network. And Mark Zuckerberg isn’t going anywhere, not even if the wretches on his board of directors thought it was time for him to spend more time with his money. What I’ve been reading Keep it civilised Is Society Coming Apart? is an instructive Guardian Long Read by the Harvard historian Jill Lepore. Future uncertain Learning from Machine Learning is a terrific, wise essay by David Weinberger on Aeon. Does not compute How AI Is Reinventing What Computers Are is an insightful piece in MIT Tech Review by Will Douglas Heaven. The usual caveat – for “AI” read “machine learning” – applies, but otherwise it’s spot on.They began heading for the shopping mall exit when they saw the police. One of the four gang members, a local rapper called Lelo whose music videos venerate handguns and violence, turned to exchange pleasantries with Mike, an officer with the Swedish police. Lelo and Mike have history. During a recent riot outside the mall that prompted a killing that could easily have led to another six, Lelo was among 32 arrested. In his subsequent court appearance, Mike had to intervene as Lelo’s posturing threatened to boil over. “Now we get along, say a few words to each other. It’s important because you don’t know when you’re going to bump into them next. Here, everyone knows everyone,” Mike smiled. Here is Hjällbo, a grid of tower blocks and faded flats on the outskirts of Gothenburg. Hjällbo is also dominated by the city’s most brutal criminal network, an organisation that openly challenges the state and whose gangland lifestyle not only threatens to reshape Swedish politics but also to undermine its democracy. Once one of the most peaceful countries in Europe, Sweden is plagued by the worst rates of deadly gun violence in Europe, 10 times higher than Germany. Its problems offer a warning of what can happen when integration fails. As Sweden searches for solutions to its surge in gangland violence, an obvious question emerges: how did one of the world’s most open societies incubate such a vicious subculture? Five miles south of Hjällbo’s shopping mall, the threat facing Sweden is evident on the laptop of Erik Nord, the urbane head of Gothenburg police. Sitting in his office overlooking the city’s bustling port, the 60-year-old presses “play” on a video. CCTV in a barber’s tracks several men getting haircuts. Two figures dressed in black enter. In English, one says, “stand back.” The intruders point handguns at a man’s head. Nine shots, over three seconds, are recorded by the CCTV audio. The gunmen leave. Moments later, their target rolls off a chair and hits the floor with a thud. A former homicide detective, Nord revels in catching murderers. Of the 10 killings in his city this year, nine are solved. July’s barbershop assassination is the exception. Nord believes he knows who ordered it, but the execution was probably perpetrated by young men eager for status in Gothenburg’s underworld. Money was not the motivation. Nord believes they probably got as little as 30,000 kronor (£2,500) for the daylight hit. Status, a promotion in a gang hierarchy, is the ceiling of ambition for some of the 1,000 criminals affiliated to Gothenburg’s 10 or so gangs. Police worry that there is little to distract Hjällbo’s youngsters from gravitating towards the area’s notorious criminal network. Mike describes seven-year-olds whistling warnings to drug dealers when he approaches. Decent money can eventually be earned as a lookout – fledgling steps in a criminal career. Hjällbo’s young gang recruits exist in an environment of exclusion; failing schools, joblessness and poverty. Integration into mainstream Swedish society appears minimal at best. Hjällbo’s 9,000 residents are almost all immigrants: nearly three-quarters of them were born abroad. For Hjällbo’s teenagers who provide a conveyor belt of gang recruits, the nearby city barely exists. Anna Byström of Young East, which helps vulnerable youngsters in locales such as Hjällbo, was struck how during a visit to London, pockets of deprivation sat beside relative wealth. By contrast, Hjällbo’s segregation is complete, cut off from Gothenburg by forest and hills. “Some of the youths think that the city centre or the seaside doesn’t belong to them,” said Byström. Many Gothenburgers view Hjällbo as a ghetto, a parallel society they will never experience for themselves. One of Lelo’s most popular tracks is aptly titled Ghettobarn. Its video, featuring Lelo in a bulletproof vest, is mostly filmed in a basement with Hjällbo City sprayed on a wall. Alongside is the outline of a handgun. An unsubtle threat, it is meant to be taken seriously. Hjällbo is the turf of the Ali Khan criminal network, Gothenburg’s most ruthless gang. Originating in Lebanon, the clan has fostered a reputation for retaliation. Murder, extortion and extreme violence are linked to family members. So aggressive is the network that Ulf Merlander, police superintendent for north-east Gothenburg, admits rivals are privately pleased because its violence shifts the focus from them. His officers only began patrolling Hjällbo relatively recently. Five years ago, faced with hostility from Ali Khan members and a silenced community, police entered for specific operations and quickly retreated. Now they patrol in pairs around the clock. As dark fell, the Observer joined two officers on a mission in Hjällbo, shouting hej to young people returning from football practice, monitoring the central square where dealers like to operate until the early hours. The officers knew they were being closely watched. “If anything happens, from out of nowhere you can be surrounded by 25 or so,” said Mike’s colleague Mia. Mike said the gangs tried to intimidate: “They might mention they know who you are, what time you leave at night from the station. The key is to stay calm and talk with them.” The risks are real. Earlier that day a Gothenburg court heard details in the trial of a 17-year-old accused of killing a police officer in the city in July. On the patrol went, towards Skolspåret, back to the car park where Ali Khan affiliates usually hang out. Hjällbo seemed quiet. “It might seem peaceful but below the surface there is violence. Just because you can’t see it, doesn’t mean it’s not there,” Mia said. Many fear that violence has become normalised in Hjällbo. Merlander, who controls a vast area where up to 500 known criminals operate, believes thuggery is woven into the community’s fabric. “We have a lot of domestic violence, violence in schools. Kids are seeing guys shooting and stabbing. They see violence everywhere.” To try to quantify the issue, Byström’s group commissioned research into youngsters who lived in places such as Hjällbo: 85% had either suffered abuse or witnessed violence at home or school. “It was staggering,” she said. * * * On the other side of Sweden, Johan Olsson, head of the police’s national operation department in Stockholm, was dealing with the shock waves from another high-profile gangland killing. Einar, Sweden’s most streamed artist on Spotify in 2019, was murdered: one bullet to his chest and one to his face. His killers have not been caught. After death threats and an incident last year when he was kidnapped, beaten and photographed by a rival gang, many felt Einar’s murder was almost telegraphed. Certainly, at 19, he fitted Olsson’s victim profile. “Many of them that we talk to don’t expect to be old, they don’t expect to reach 30. The life of these young men is short, nasty and brutish. It’s a very, very grim environment.” Stockholm’s tumult is partly generated by a very different criminal landscape to the mafia-style Ali Khan network that controls Hjällbo. Much of it is characterised by a chaotic individualism of shifting allegiances, sudden betrayals and pervasive nihilism. It is not rare for criminals who once pledged allegiance to lead an ally into a dödsfälla – deathtrap. “Things change quickly, [gangs] are very quick to work together, then they fall out. Or they are suddenly challenged by someone from a layer below. You have to build your own reputation, you constantly have to make yourself respected,” said Olsson – in other words, perpetrate escalating acts of violence. “They live life more in a Hobbesian sense than a Sicilian mafia offensive. It’s an extremely individualistic culture,” said Olsson. As in Hjällbo, geographic segregation, social exclusion and lack of cultural integration for immigrants provide fertile ground for gangs. Olsson says identity is also a driving issue. The most violent offenders, he says, are seen as occupying “no-man’s land”. He adds: “They don’t obey the rules of their parents’ generation and they haven’t really integrated into Swedish society. So they make up their own level of social capital.” Olsson’s forces have recorded significant successes this year. Evidence from the police infiltration of encrypted services such as Encrochat have helped to arrest more than 500 people. But the drivers of gang recruitment run deep. Others moved quickly to take their place. The networks bounced back. “We haven’t really managed to push the threat back,” concedes Olsson. Assessments suggest the threat emanates from a relatively small number of young men, about 9,000 linked to 500 gangs. Yet they carry the potency to shape Swedish politics. Hours before Mike and Mia began their patrol around Hjällbo, the country’s prime minister, Stefan Löfven, resigned, his credibility punctured by the gang violence. On Monday his successor, Magdalena Andersson, was voted in after pledges to end urban segregation and “smoke out” the gangs. When elections are held next year, both the centre-right and nationalist parties will undoubtedly focus on gang violence, pinning the blame on immigration. A change in leadership is unlikely to temper the global forces propelling the violence. More drugs are available and more people are using them. Over the summer, Nord’s officers measured the presence of narcotics in Gothenburg’s sewers. Large quantities were detected regardless of how wealthy or poor the district. “A lot of drugs were coming through,” he said. He remembers how small cocaine seizures used to raise street prices. Now, a 100-kilo bust has scant effect. Sweden’s criminals have decamped to Spain to source larger quantities more directly from South American importers. Earlier this month a shootout between Gothenburg gangs in Marbella left a man fighting for his life. Last month Spanish police arrested seven members of two armed Swedish gangs in Málaga. * * * Trouble flares swiftly in Hjällbo. In May shopkeepers, exasperated with drug dealers linked to junior Ali Khan members, decided to beat them up. Riots soon swept Hjällbo, with 150 men seen fighting near the mall. Two days later, during Sunday lunchtime, a gunman assassinated a 44-year-old shop owner with a bullet to the head. Shocked witnesses dragged the killer from his getaway bike. “They would have beaten him to death unless a police officer arrived firing his gun to save him,” said Nord. Fearing further Ali Khan revenge, Hjällbo shopkeepers contacted family members in Essen, Germany, for backup. Police tracked 20 individuals heading north, stopping them at the Øresund Bridge – with fresh rounds of tit-for-tat retaliation. Nord knows this year’s gang murder tally in Gothenburg could be significantly higher. “We’ve had three murders with handguns [gang killings]. It’s quite low. It could have been 10.” Yet police had noticed something new during the rioting. Normally during disorder in Hjällbo, gang members would stop fighting and turn on the authorities. This time, even the Ali Khan footsoldiers obeyed officers attempting to restore peace. For Merlander, it was confirmation his strategy had paid off. Faced with an impenetrable community cowed by the Ali Khan clan, the state had largely abandoned Hjällbo. No one spoke to the police. Intelligence, the golden currency of crimefighting, was non-existent. “During a previous riot in 2016, people shut their curtains. Now they opened their windows and screamed ‘arrest the bastards’,” said Merlander. This turnaround had been built on old-school policing, he said – pounding the streets in uniform, talking to everyone, including the Ali Khans. Officers were told to memorise the names and backstory of at least 100 gang members. Some can recite the details of more than 300. “If you address criminals by their name, you become human. Their behaviour changes,” said Merlander. Simultaneously, he began hounding the Ali Khan network. Meetings were held with its patriarch, 64-year-old Imam Hashem Ali Khan. “I told him that ‘we’re going to chase you’. I wanted to be very transparent. It gives them a chance to change.” Merlander, who has worked Hjällbo’s streets for 18 years, testified in court against the Ali Khan clan, accusing them of terrorising the area throughout that period. Although the patriarch escaped jail, the community had been served notice that a new boss was in town. Where once his officers coped with an intelligence vacuum, Merlander says they now receive so many tip-offs it is impossible to sift through them all. * * * No one knows when, how – or if – the violence will end, but Hjällbo’s trajectory offers a glimmer of hope. Yet Sweden’s famed openness still presents barriers to policing. Issues such as privacy override calls for increased investigative powers. Nord’s detectives are denied ready access to the CCTV network, along with ANPR (automatic number-plate recognition) technology and even access to traffic cameras. Only recently have they been able to tap phones. Yet winning back the trust of Hjällbo’s residents offers a back-to-basics reminder for UK policing, struggling with a loss of trust, particularly among black communities. Byström argues that the next steps need to focus on reducing segregation, improving education and prevention to cut gang recruitment. “We need to reach families much earlier.” Other issues need investigating, she adds. For instance, no one truly knows the numbers of women and girls drawn into the orbit of Gothenburg’s gangs, or the dangers they face. Back on patrol, Mike and Mia move away from the mall following the meeting with Lelo and associates. “We want to communicate with them so they understand this is our territory,” she said. Loosening the grip of the Ali Khan network will, they appreciate, take time. “There’s no quick fix, this will take at least one generation,” Mike says, crossing the bridge high above Hjällbo’s tram station. Graffitied on its sides, the most prominent part of Hjällbo, are the words: See With Us You Be Smiling. It is the title of Lelo’s latest release – a statement that the gangs and not the state offer reward.Jacob Steinberg was at the London Stadium to witness all that. His report has landed, so off you click. Thanks for reading this MBM! BT talk to a much cheerier David Moyes. “Truthfully, we didn’t play that well today, but we got the goals. Against a team that doesn’t concede many, that’s a great credit to the lads. I just said to Arthur, it was a great cross! It was very fortunate, let’s not kid ourselves on, but you need a bit of fortune sometimes and we had some brilliant individual performances. But overall I want the team to play much better, and I think they can. To beat Chelsea and say we’re not playing well enough, hopefully that helps us. We want to compete with whoever is in the top four, and I think we’re giving them a game. We’ll hang in, and see what we can do.” Thomas Tuchel talks to BT in a low, measured seethe that suggests his players will soon be told what’s what. “I don’t think we did a bad match. An OK match. But it’s tough to play here, and we did too many individual mistakes, and we got punished for it. We talked about it before, but it obviously did not help, and that’s the story. [Jorginho’s backpass that led to the penalty] is not the best decision to pass the ball back, the decision making from Edouard is not the best in that moment. We had a lot of touches in the box but sometimes you need a bit of luck, and this we did not have. The third goal is a strange one. We could not finish with clear chances and struggled to be ruthless. We made way too many mistakes, you cannot do it at this level. We need to play more accurately, more stable, and reduce big mistakes.” Jarrod Bowen speaks to BT. “That’s what we’re about as a team. The belief. We never know when we’re beaten. We’re big on putting balls in the box and sometimes you get a bit of luck. I’m sure Arthur will tell you he shot! We spoke a lot about their set pieces, so Silva’s goal was disappointing. But our grit and determination got us the three points. We wanted to press them aggressively, they’re a top team, we tried to limit their game plan. We haven’t won in a few games and have been disappointed, so to come back and beat Chelsea: what a performance!” That’s one hell of a performance by West Ham. Chelsea hadn’t lost from a winning position at half-time in their last 48 matches. Number 49 was a step too far in that sequence. Hats off to David Moyes for his half-time tactical tweak, which moved Jarrod Bowen closer to Michail Antonio, the pair going on to cause all manner of havoc. Spawny winner, mind, not that Arthur Masuaku or West Ham will care. A huge three points in their chase for a Champions League spot; a big blow to Chelsea in the title race, though they still lead the table ... for now. The leaders lose for only the second time this season. A sensational second-half performance by West Ham. 90 min +4: Antonio breaks down the left, eating up plenty of turf, and plenty of time. He’s barged over by Christensen, who is booked. That’s almost it, surely. A cacophony of whistling. 90 min +3: Hudson-Odoi and Rudiger have half-chances to shoot, but can’t work enough space. Rice batters clear, to the delight of the denizens of the London Stadium. 90 min +2: James is booked for arguing the toss over the non-award of a corner. 90 min +1: Coufal is booked for getting over-eager in the challenge. The crowd are going ballistic. What an atmosphere! 90 min: There will be four added minutes. 89 min: Bowen should have wrapped it up for West Ham, as he’s sent into the Chelsea box down the right by Antonio. He opens his body and hoicks over the bar, with only Mendy to beat. Actually, he might have been flagged offside had that gone in, with VAR sticking its neb in. A very odd goal may have just won this for West Ham! Masuaku throws in from the left. Antonio heads the ball back to the full back, tight on the touchline. He crosses. The ball should curl to the right, but somehow swerves left, a freakish inswinging arc sending it past the startled Mendy and into the top left! A massive slice. 85 min: Benrahma comes on for Lanzini, with a piece of paper for Rice. Moyes can’t have great handwriting, because Rice is squinting at the tactical advice in confusion. He then receives some instruction in the time-honoured vocal style. 84 min: Bowen bustles down the left and looks to win a corner off Silva. The ball breaks back off his shin and it’s a goal kick. West Ham come again, Coufal twisting Hudson-Odoi down the right, but not quite getting a cross or shot away. The hosts fancy a winner, too. 82 min: Rudiger slides in on Bowen, winning the ball. Just as well, because he was off the ground, both sets of studs showing. Had he made any contact with the player, the referee would have had a big decision to make. 80 min: Lukaku meets a cross from the left, only to head over harmlessly from six yards. Chelsea have scored eight goals in the final 15 minutes of their games this season. How they could do with a ninth with the title race in mind. 78 min: There’s bedlam at the corner, the ball nearly dropping to Silva in the six-yard box. Soucek miscontrols before finally poking away from danger, just in time. Chelsea are probing hard for a winner. 77 min: Hudson-Odoi dribbles down the left and cuts back for Jorginho, who tries to sidefoot into the bottom right from the left-hand edge of the D. The ball’s deflected out for a corner, having looked for a second like dribbling into the net. 76 min: Bowen crosses from a deep position on the right. Mendy gets up well to claim under extreme pressure from Dawson, who had come up for an earlier free kick. West Ham are giving this a good go. 75 min: West Ham are so close to taking the lead! Antonio barges Hudson-Odoi out of the way and bursts down the inside-right channel. He whips a low cross through the six-yard box. Mendy is out of position, and the goal is gaping. Bowen stretches for the ball, which has been crossed at pace, but can’t quite get there. He connects, but can’t get his foot around it, the ball sailing inches wide left. 73 min: Pulisic comes on for Alonso. 72 min: Bowen slides into Hudson-Odoi near the left-hand corner flag. Free kick. West Ham clear it easily enough, and launch a counter. Lanzini barrels down the left and looks up for Antonio, but in doing so takes his eye off the ball, allowing Mount to whip it off his toe. Attack over. 71 min: Yep, he’s not going to be allowed back on, manager and doctor getting their way. Fornals comes on in his place. 70 min: Zouma limps around the perimeter as the game restarts. He wants to continue, despite limping severely. He’s surely done, though. 69 min: The trainer comes on to take a look. Zouma is surely kaput, though, having obviously pulled up before falling to the floor. “These West Ham players are giving everything for Moyes, unlike some he has managed,” writes Gary Naylor, who as an Evertonian will know a fair bit about the man. “Does that suggest that the blame for ‘losing the dressing room’ should be allocated as much to the players (specifically the senior pros) as it is to the manager? Though it’s always the manager who walks.” 68 min: Zouma ushers the ball out for a goal kick under pressure from Lukaku. He pulls up clutching his hamstring and goes down. Looks like his race is run today. 66 min: Hudson-Odoi busies himself down the left and slips in Mount, who strides down the channel and whistles a low shot straight at Fabianski. Chelsea are beginning to reassert themselves. 64 min: Ziyech is replaced by Hudson-Odoi. 63 min: A free kick out on the Chelsea right. James to take, with everyone lined up on the edge of the box. His delivery is awful, the ball sailing harmlessly out of play for a goal kick, miles from anyone in Chelsea yellow. 62 min: Mount forces a corner down the right, and takes it himself. The West Ham defence clears easily, and the ball’s soon back at the feet of Mendy, up the other end. The crowd, sensing his unease, raise the volume, but the keeper isn’t to be ruffled despite incoming pressure from Antonio. 60 min: Mendy makes a meal of a high ball he really should snaffle with ease, allowing it to bounce in the six-yard box. He eventually gathers, but that could have caused problems. The Chelsea keeper is looking uncharacteristically uneasy today. 59 min: Lukaku tries to power his way into space in the Chelsea box, but he can’t control and the ball squirts through to Fabianski. “Bowen earned the hell out of that goal,” opines Joseph Harvey. “Been their best player today.” 58 min: Chelsea try to hit back immediately for the second time this afternoon, Mount worming his way down the right and firing a low ball across the face of goal. Coufal’s feathered touch ensures the ball evades Ziyech at the far post. 57 min: That was a hell of a strike, and this is the first time Chelsea have conceded two goals in the Premier League this season. What a belter this is! Antonio wins a long ball down the inside-right channel. He cushions to Lanzini, who shuttles infield for Bowen. He takes a touch inside, and from the edge of the box, curls a low shot around Mendy and into the bottom left! 55 min: Rudiger beckenbauers his way down the middle, all the way to the edge of the box, then slips the ball wide left to Ziyech. The pass is poor, and Ziyech is forced to stretch and hoick over the bar. 54 min: Loftus-Cheek threatens to break through. He’s blocked, and West Ham counter, Antonio nearly closing down Mendy, who leaves his box and blooters clear. 52 min: West Ham have been pinging it around with a little more urgency since the restart. To little overall effect so far, but they have been doing that nonetheless. 50 min: One corner leads to another, despite the ball having come off the head of Jorginho. Fans of manufactured controversy will be disappointed that nothing comes of the second one. 49 min: Alonso makes his presence felt down the left and wins the first corner of the second half. 47 min: A fairly quiet start to the half as both teams scope each other out. West Ham get the second half underway. The injured Havertz has been replaced by Lukaku. Half-time entertainment. Havertz is helped up, and walks off gingerly as the whistle goes. Neither keeper has covered himself in glory here. But the leaders lead, and David Moyes has a little thinking to do. 45 min +2: Johnson has limped off, incidentally, to be replaced by Masuaku. And now Havertz is down, having taken an accidental whack while stretching to poke a shot goalwards from a tight spot on the right. 45 min +1: The restart, and Antonio tries to beat Mendy, strolling around on the edge of his box, direct from the kick-off! He pulls it wide left. Had that been on target, it would have been the most sensational of equalisers. 45 min: There will be two added minutes. They don’t enjoy this, though, and wow, this is some response. Ziyech crosses from a deep position on the left. Mount, coming in from the right, meets the dropping ball and sends a peach of a sidefoot volley into the bottom right! What a sensational shot ... though Fabianski won’t be happy with that, either, having been beaten at his near post. 43 min: Mendy, a little shaken by events, shanks a simple pass to James straight out for a throw. The crowd enjoyed that as well. 42 min: Havertz tries to regain the lead for Chelsea in short order, but his low shot is blocked easily enough. The home fans are right up for this now, having fallen a little quiet before the equaliser, as Chelsea threatened to take a two-goal lead. But now look. 41 min: Lanzini gave James a wee barge in the back there. A suggestion James might have been playing a few mind games before the penalty was taken, and that was the inevitable payback. Lanzini thrashes the spot kick into the top left. Unsaveable! Mendy went the wrong way, in any case. He then has a brief exchange of views with James before celebrating. 38 min: Mendy takes too much time over a poor Jorginho backpass. Bowen buzzes around him. Mendy tries to hold him off, but Bowen fights his way onto the ball. Mendy barges him from behind, and that’s a no-brainer of a decision for the referee. 36 min: Rudiger opens his body and tries a curler towards the top right. It’s blocked and cleared. Chelsea come again through Mount, whose daisycutter is met by Fabianski. The league leaders are in the mood for more. 34 min: The corner’s half cleared, then Christensen sends an overly ambitious effort miles over the bar. 33 min: Alonso bursts down the left and crosses low for Havertz at the near post. Diop slides in to toe out for a corner. 32 min: Loftus-Cheek has a dig from 20 yards. Straight down the throat of Fabianski. 30 min: ... and now Silva earns his corn up the other end! Coufal creams a shot towards the bottom left. It’s beaten Mendy, and heading in. But Silva reads the danger and clears off the line! What a signing Thiago Silva has proved to be. A proper Indian summer. This is too easy. Silva rises, ten yards out in a central position. He heads down, towards the bottom right but not tight in the corner. Fabianski, reacting late, can only tip onto the post and in. Antonio lost his man, too. Poor from West Ham’s point of view. 28 min: The presence of Havertz wins a corner for Chelsea down the right. A brief game of head tennis leads to a second corner. From which ... 27 min: Coufal and Bowen combine crisply down the right but can’t quite open Chelsea up. The league leaders giving very little away. 25 min: Alonso crosses from the left but Diop clears easily. Then James flings one in from the right. Havertz wins the header and looks for the bottom right, but it’s a soft one and easy for Fabianski. 23 min: Jorginho is challenged by Rice and flops on the ball, hoping for a free kick. It goes the other way, and he’s booked for arguing the toss. The home fans say their piece. 22 min: Alonso probes down the left and wins a corner off Coufal. Ziyech takes it. He fails to beat the first man. West Ham clear. 20 min: The corner’s flung into the mixer and the ball pinballs around the six-yard area. Dawson sends a weak shot straight at Mendy, though the box was so crowded, that could have ended up anywhere. West Ham must wait for their seventh goal of the season from a corner kick. 19 min: Rice curls it in deep, and Loftus-Cheek is forced to head clear at the far post. Corner coming up. 18 min: Rudiger tugs Lanzini as he dribbles down the right. Free kick, and a chance to fling one into the Chelsea box. Everyone lines up on the edge of the area. 17 min: West Ham seem happy enough to sit deep and ask Chelsea what they’re going to do about it. There’s no way through at the moment. 15 min: Mount drops a shoulder and works his way down the left, but just as things look like opening up for him, Coufal closes him down. 13 min: Chelsea pass it around in the dominant style, but can’t find any way into West Ham’s final third. 11 min: Chelsea should be leading. Mount is found down the inside-right channel and cuts back for Havertz, who slams into the side netting from six yards. Ah, Mount would have been flagged offside for certain, but that’s a poor miss nonetheless. 10 min: Up the other end, James has a go from 20 yards. It’s heading into the bottom left, but Fabianski smothers the ball. 9 min: ... and now Antonio sails down the left and curls infield for Soucek, who heads harmlessly wide right from 12 yards. A decent chance, that, and he should have done better. 8 min: Bowen has a shot from distance. It’s high and wide, but that’ll give West Ham, who have started slowly, succour. 6 min: Warm and heartfelt applause rings out in memory of the tragic Arthur Labinjo-Hughes. Rest in peace, little man. 6 min: A bit of space for James out on the right. His low cross finds Ziyech, who from six yards can only toe-poke lamely towards Fabianski. 5 min: Rice wins a couple of big challenges, first against Mount, then Ziyech. The crowd very much enjoyed those. 3 min: Rice, released by Chelsea as a youngster, heads clear. 2 min: Chelsea hog the ball in the early exchanges. Then Diop pointlessly shoves Mount to the floor, out on the right. Free kick and a chance for Chelsea to load the box. Chelsea kick off ... but only after everyone takes the knee. There’s no room for racism. The teams are out! West Ham are in their claret and blue, while Chelsea wear their Dixon-Speedie-Nevin-era second-choice pinstripe yellow. We’ll be off soon, after that rendition of Bubbles with the twangy bassline. BT turn to David Moyes. “After the international break, we didn’t come back as good as we’d like. We’d more international players away in that period than we’d had before, and we always used that time to prep the players. That’s one of the reasons behind [our form since the break] but we’ve also missed a few chances, which hasn’t helped. We’ve got to work really hard to get goals. We’ve been making chances. It’s getting the right finish away to see if we can get the goals.” Thomas Tuchel talks to BT. “Watford played a brave and aggressive game and we had trouble to adapt. You still have to find a way to win and we did that. So here we are on Saturday at 12.30 to do the same thing. We had all three midfielders out against Watford. Normally we put all the responsibility on their shoulders and if the core is not there things get more difficult. I am happy with Ruben who steps in, but things are easier for him with Jorginho by his side. The schedule is relentless. We need to build Romelu up ... there is a difference between match-ready and training-ready and Premier League ready. He needs to be patient and that is not his nature.” A pre-match chat with Sir Geoff Hurst. The West Ham legend and former Chelsea manager - who also played a game or two for England, we hear - talks to Donald McRae. West Ham make two changes to the XI named for the 1-1 draw with Brighton. Issa Diop and Manuel Lanzini both start, the former for the first time in the Premier League this season; Pablo Fornals and Said Benrahma are benched. Chelsea make four changes to the XI selected to start the 21 win at Watford. Reece James, Thiago Silva, Jorginho and Hakim Ziyech are back; Christian Pulisic, Saul and Cesar Azpilicueta drop to the bench, while Trevoh Chalobah is hamstrung. West Ham United: Fabianski, Zouma, Dawson, Diop, Coufal, Soucek, Rice, Johnson, Bowen, Lanzini, Antonio. Subs: Yarmolenko, Fornals, Vlasic, Areola, Noble, Benrahma, Masuaku, Kral, Ashby. Chelsea: Mendy, Christensen, Thiago Silva, Rudiger, James, Loftus-Cheek, Jorginho, Alonso, Ziyech, Mount, Havertz. Subs: Arrizabalaga, Lukaku, Pulisic, Werner, Saul, Barkley, Hudson-Odoi, Azpilicueta, Sarr. Referee: Andre Marriner (West Midlands). Given Chelsea have won six titles to West Ham’s zero, the all-time league record between these two grand London institutions is closer than you might think. Chelsea lead the way with 44 wins, but West Ham aren’t too far behind on 39. The results from the last two seasons further illustrate how difficult it can be to predict what these clubs will serve up: Chelsea did the double over the Hammers last time round, but West Ham beat Chelsea both times in 2019-20, including a memorable rollercoaster 3-2 win last July, Andriy Yarmolenko scoring a last-minute winner on the counter, a game well worth revisiting. Chelsea are coming off the back of a disappointing performance at Watford. The fact that victory can be painted as such, by Thomas Tuchel’s admission, shows the high bar the European champions and current league leaders set for themselves. But West Ham have high expectations these days too, and their meagre haul of one point from the last nine has been a serious disappointment, especially in the wake of that evisceration of Liverpool. Both teams will be looking to make a bounce-back statement, with the title and a top-four spot on their respective agendas. Throw in derby bragging rights, and this could be a cracker. Kick off at the London Stadium is at 12.30pm GMT. It’s on!Lesley Lloyd played football not merely for fun but for freedom. “It was about fighting for what we believed was right,” she says. “I’m proud of what we did.” Lloyd is reflecting on the events of 50 years ago when, as captain of Southampton Ladies, she led her team to victory in the first Women’s FA Cup final. That 4-1 triumph over Scotland’s Stewarton Thistle at Crystal Palace National Sports Centre in May 1971 was much more than just another match; it marked a watershed moment in the game’s history. On 5 December 1921 the English Football Association had declared the game to be “quite unsuitable for females” before barring women from playing on grounds belonging to affiliated men’s clubs. With its Scottish, Welsh and Northern Irish counterparts swiftly following suit, the ban stood for half a century and was not lifted until 1970 when the dawn of enlightenment coincided with the start of a slow-burn revolution; not to mention one of the highlights of Lloyd’s life. “We were at the front,” she says, sipping coffee from a Southampton FC mug at her home on the south coast. “It’s a privilege and an honour to have been the first ladies team to have won the FA Cup. It’s something you dreamed of and no one can take away from you.” On Sunday Lloyd, now 73, will be a 50th-anniversary guest of honour at Wembley when Arsenal face Chelsea in an evocative Women’s FA Cup final staged 100 years to the day from the ban’s imposition. Before kick-off she will join Elsie Cook, the former Stewarton Thistle captain, in walking on to the pitch and placing the trophy on a plinth. Both women are expected to receive considerable applause for the part they played in putting women’s football back on the map after five decades on the margins. “The way the game has progressed is just brilliant,” says Lloyd. “Before the ban was lifted, the only place we could play was on a local common so Crystal Palace was like Wembley to us. There were no real facilities on the common. We had a hosepipe to hose our muddy boots down and a sort of hut we got changed in but that was it. There was a pond nearby and quite a few balls ended up in it. I was a midfielder, a No 8, so I ran all over the pitch and, if there was a mud bath, I fell into it.” In those days, Southampton paid to play football, with their squad of secretaries, trainee solicitors, schoolgirls and council workers chipping into a central fund to cover petrol, kit, food and coach hire. “We paid for everything ourselves but the one thing we have in common with the players today is that we were very competitive,” says Lloyd, then a finance worker. “We only trained about twice a week but we played as hard as they will on Sunday, believe me. I know some of our players still have scars on their legs. “But the skill level and the fitness level is so much higher now; we were fit for our time but we wouldn’t have lasted five minutes against today’s players. I just wish I was 50 years younger and had access to all the facilities available now.” Today’s nutritionists would certainly have raised an eyebrow at Lloyd’s pre-match meals on Cup final day. “We got to Crystal Palace too early in the car,” she recalls. “So we went and had a cup of coffee and a cake. Then we had lunch and I remember eating cheese and pickle sandwiches.” Although she was cheered on by her husband, Graham, and her parents at Crystal Palace – where the groundsman had “forgotten” to cut the grass – there was no public party in Southampton afterwards. “There wasn’t really a celebration, it was all very low key,” Lloyd recalls. “But there were a lot of people watching at Crystal Palace, a real sense of occasion and it was mentioned on the news that evening. There was nothing in the national newspapers, though.” It felt an entirely different world from 1920 when, shortly before the music stopped and the 100‑year ban began, the internationally acclaimed team of Preston factory workers known as Dick, Kerr’s Ladies attracted a crowd of 53,000 to Everton’s Goodison Park for a match against St Helens Ladies, with a further 14,000 locked outside. The ensuing five decades of injustice explain why Norman Holloway, Southampton’s manager in 1971, swiftly stopped fretting about the unacceptably long grass at Crystal Palace and instead focused his team talk on the bigger picture. Southampton’s captain clearly remembers him telling the team that, as the inaugural FA Cup winners, they would not only make history but remain an enduring part of it. “We were quite defiant back then,” says Lloyd, who retired a few years later in order to concentrate on raising her two children. “We wondered why we couldn’t have this and that, why football was still a man’s domain but I never dreamed the women’s game would come so far. “It’s taken time but I think the 2015 World Cup in Canada, when England reached the semi-finals, was a very big turning point in capturing people’s imaginations and the game’s just brilliant now. I only wish I wasn’t 50 years too old and could be playing on Sunday.” Fans can still purchase tickets for the Vitality Women’s FA Cup final by visiting ticketing.theFA.com, from £20 for adults and £2.50 for children.Magnus Carlsen played to a quiet 41-move draw with Ian Nepomniachtchi on Saturday in the seventh game of their world championship match in Dubai, only hours after the Norwegian champion dramatically took control of their deadlocked best-of-14-games showdown with a marathon game-six win that ended after midnight. Nepomniachtchi, marshaling the white pieces, played 1 e4 before the pair blitzed out their opening moves into the same anti-Marshall line of the Ruy Lopez that had featured in each of the Russian’s three previous games as white (1 ... e5 2 Nf3 Nc6 3 Bb5 a6 4 Ba4 Nf6 5 O-O Be7 6 Re1 b5 7 Bb3). Carlsen took lengthy thinks of 33 combined minutes before his 12th and 15th moves, falling more than 20 minutes behind his opponent on time. But not long after the world No 1 gave up his stronghold in the center with the committal 17 exd4, a flurry of rapid simplification began and the action fizzled out fast. After the players agreed to a peaceful result after 2hr 30min, Carlsen admitted his energy was low after Friday’s gruelling back-and-forth marathon, which surpassed the 124-move stalemate in game five of the 1978 title match between Anatoly Karpov and Viktor Korchnoi as the longest contest in the 135-year history of world championship matchplay. “I couldn’t really sleep yesterday,” Carlsen said. “I was way too excited. But all the way today I was thinking, ‘I’m tired but it’s probably a lot worse for him.’” Nepomniachtchi was quick to dispel the notion that Friday’s taxing affair affected his opening choice for Saturday’s game (“Absolutely not!), but noted: “It was quite a new experience to play two games in the same day.” He also pointed out, with a hint of pique, that the late finish for game six was enabled by the late 4.30pm local start times, chosen for the convenience of other time zones. Carlsen, who turned 31 on Tuesday, has been ranked No 1 for more than a decade and was considered the world’s best player even before he defeated Viswanathan Anand for the title in 2013. He’s making his fourth defense of the world championship against the 31-year-old Nepomniachtchi, the world No 5 from Russia. The overall score at the midpoint of their €2m ($2.26m) showdown at the Dubai Exposition Centre is 4-3 in favor of Carlsen, who will have the white pieces in Sunday’s eighth game ahead of Monday’s rest day. “Obviously with [Friday’s] result it’s going pretty well,” Carlsen said. “It’s a long way to go, half the match still. But I’ve made my breakthrough so the state is good.”A woman was taken to a major trauma centre after falling on to live rails at a busy tube station on Friday night in London. Witnesses told the Guardian that the woman, who survived the incident, appeared to be “jostled” by busy crowds at Tottenham Court Road station before falling on to the tracks shortly before 12.50am. One called the accident “entirely preventable”. However, the fall was understood to be initially viewed by Transport for London (TfL) as the result of a “medical incident”. One witness said that the woman did not put her arms out when she fell. An urgent investigation into the circumstances surrounding the incident is under way, TfL said. It occurred amid severe delays and crowding at stations due to strike action by the RMT union. The woman, who fell off the eastbound Central line platform, was treated at the scene by medics before being taken to a major trauma centre. One witness, who did not want to be named, said that the platform was extremely crowded and that it had been 15 minutes since the previous train. In an account provided to the Guardian, she said: “A lady was screaming, telling everyone to run and I was petrified more were going to fall on the tracks or get crushed in the panic.” The witness said the woman “was completely stuck on the current, convulsing”. Saying that four people climbed down to help, the witness added: “She was obviously turning to prepare to cram on the tube and the pushing on the platform launched her. “Her body was all the way on the further side [of the] track … She went so far.” The witness said she had commented to a friend about how overcrowded the section of the platform had become moments before the woman fell. She added that she raised the alarm in a call to station staff after a man on the platform slumped to the floor in shock after pressing the emergency button. She added: “There was smoke coming from all over her. All the paramedics were running down with defibrillators. “They knew the strikes would cause severe delays and yet had no one managing the crowding. Not even an overhead announcement saying spread down the platform.” A TfL spokesperson said announcements were made throughout the night advising people to move along platforms, and that staff were on duty at the station. However, another witness, who wished to remain anonymous, said they saw “no staff” and claimed it was “entirely preventable”. She said: “Everyone was kind of jostling for space on the platform and it was just so ridiculously dangerous and no staff anywhere. “I can’t believe these strikes were happening and didn’t provide adequate staff. This accident could have been prevented. I think she was turning ready to get on the train or something and next thing she was face down on the tracks. She added: “I genuinely just assumed she was dead. I don’t see how someone could be smoking like that and survive. It is just so awful. “She was convulsing, but some people on the platform didn’t seem to know what was going on. I can’t believe nobody else fell too. But no staff, nothing. This was entirely preventable.” The station was closed for 45 minutes while emergency services handled the incident. Nick Dent, director of customer operations for London Underground, said: “We are urgently investigating the incident that took place at Tottenham Court Road tube station at around 12.45am this morning where a customer fell on to tracks. “We would like to reassure customers that the safety of everyone on our network is always our top priority and our station staff immediately attended the incident. The customer was subsequently taken to hospital by London ambulance service. “A full investigation with all the relevant authorities into the circumstances of this incident will be carried out.” A London ambulance service spokesperson said: “We sent an incident response officer, an advanced paramedic and two ambulance crews to the scene. “We treated a woman at the scene and took her to a major trauma centre.” No details were given on the woman’s condition. British Transport Police were also approached for comment. • The headline and first line of this article were amended on 7 December 2021 to better reflect the Guardian’s usual style of reporting. • tom.ambrose.casual@theguardian.comA woman jailed for at least 18 years after being found guilty of murdering her husband is to appeal against her conviction on the grounds that video and audio evidence released into the public domain midway through her trial impeded her right to a fair hearing. Penelope Jackson, 66, was found guilty of murder in October at Bristol crown court after a jury of eight women and four men delivered a 10-2 majority verdict. The case attracted widespread publicity after a clip in which the retired accountant admitted stabbing David Jackson, 78, was circulated on news websites and social media platforms. Police bodycam footage showing the moment of Jackson’s arrest outside her home in Somerset was released after requests from the media and the permission of the trial judge. Jackson is captured on camera confessing: “I admit it all.” She appears calm as she tells officers: “He is on the kitchen floor” and repeatedly asks for her coat. She goes on to say: “I stabbed him. He’s an aggressive bully and nasty and I’ve had enough.” In addition, audio evidence was circulated of a 999 call Jackson made in which she admitted to an operator that she had stabbed her husband three times. Later in a statement she said she had been in a state of traumatised shock. Martin Winter, Jackson’s solicitor, said: “The release of the media and the interest it stirred up created an unfairness because it coincided with the beginning of her giving evidence.” Jackson admitted killing her husband but denied murder, claiming instead she suffered a “loss of control” after decades of emotional and physical abuse at the hands of the former army lieutenant colonel. The court heard how he had held a knife to his wife’s throat during a family barbecue and, on another occasion, threatened her with a poker after a row over a TV remote control. Winter said while the jury had seen the evidence of the confession prior to its dissemination, it had been viewed by jurors in the controlled arena of the trial. “The fear is that once the images go outside of the courtroom, the ability of the judge to advise a jury about that evidence is lost,” he explained. “Inevitably, it went further than the responsible news outlets and attracted a lot of commentary on social media. It was subject to mocking and mimicry and became the subject of memes and dark humour.” Clare Wade QC had sought to persuade the jury that Jackson had a loss of control – a partial defence to murder – after being pushed to the edge by her husband’s abuse. But sentencing Jackson to life with an 18-year minimum term, Judge Martin Picton told her: “I have no doubt you intended to kill your husband and it was premeditated murder. Your behaviour shows a shocking level of callousness.” Jane Monckton Smith, a criminologist specialising in domestic homicide, said: “I think the footage was very detrimental to her and I think it was misinterpreted.” She added: “The type of person that commits a domestic homicide is usually very manipulative and controlling, whether they are male or female – unless they are responding to abuse against themselves and then they fall into a different category. “In the footage, Penelope Jackson was not trying to manipulate what people thought. She was just in shock and telling the truth. There was no subterfuge but rather an honesty which, in my personal opinion, supports her story that she was abused.” Smith, a former police officer and professor of public protection at the University of Gloucestershire, said: “To somebody who doesn’t know about intimate partner homicides, that footage could come across as if she was heartless and cold. But when you understand how coercive control works and its impact on victims you can see she is in shock and not attempting to manipulate people’s ideas of what happened.” Jackson’s legal team had resisted the application to release the footage. Winter said: “We urged the court to delay the release of the material precisely because it can take on a life of its own. It was something around which people who didn’t want to bother themselves with the detail could watch and come to a conclusion about before widely publishing their opinions. “It becomes the subject of speculation and uninformed comment and the fear is the jury can be swayed by the commentary when it is that widespread.” The Crown Prosecution Service said it would not comment on a case once an appeal has been lodged. The Judicial Office does not comment on individual cases.Jason DeBord regrets the demise of an old parlour game once much-loved in the 19th century: What Did I Eat Last Night? It involved a player recounting their dreams – recorded in a journal upon waking – as an audience was challenged to guess what dream-provoking food they had consumed for the previous night’s supper, be it stilton, rarebit or undercooked or cured meats (all understood to be culprits when it came to colourful dreaming). “Maybe you had eaten rare beef and then you dream about cows, you know, chasing you,” explains DeBord. “It sounds like a blast, doesn’t it? I’d have loved to have played that game.” DeBord, who, as RadOwl, moderates the 250,000- member Reddit r/dreams community, is one of a growing number of professional “dreamworkers” who use dream analysis as a therapeutic technique. These days he is most likely to be regaled with the blockbuster dream topics: public nakedness, seeming visitations from deceased relatives, falling or flying, sex with an unlikely other, being unable to find an exam room, and giving birth. The pandemic, during which many westerners have woken later or without the aid of an alarm clock and experienced longer stretches of dream-rich REM sleep, has seen a big growth of participation in online dream-sharing groups. “It’s been a busy time for people both having and remembering strange dreams, and also thinking about these dreams and what they might mean,” DeBord says. Over on r/dreams, a user called idk is anxious. “I am a girl, but I dreamed I had my own penis and it was detachable and I was very panicked because I couldn’t find it,” she posts. User DrDiaz is the first to interject, directing idk to Freud (who famously theorised penis envy as a stage of female psychosexual development). “Freud would DEFINITELY have something to say on that!” AlexMilo is next up, offering a similar dream in which he discovered his testicles had been mounted on his work desk as a form of stress ball: “I literally just woke up looking for [somewhere] I could post about my detachable balls,” he writes, before a respondent returns the discussion to idk’s detachable penis by suggesting it could symbolise something in her waking life: power perhaps, and its loss? All humans dream, and many cultures have a rich tradition of communal interpretation. In ancient Egypt, dreams were recorded in hieroglyphics, while today the Senoi people of Malaysia use collective dream sharing as a way of confronting their anxieties, urging one another to bring a souvenir back from their dreamworld to share: a snippet of a song or a poem. In Māori and Australian Aboriginal traditions, vivid dreams are understood as a means of conveying messages, perhaps the location of a food or water. The Chantal of Mexico and the Kichwa of Ecuador use medicinal plants alongside dream sharing as a community-bonding exercise. Still-thriving Islamic dream-sharing practices draw from the writing of 8th-century dream interpreter Ibn Sirin for whom dreams of holy men and minarets were a window into dreamers’ religious piety. But, more recently, dream-sharing practices have been pushed to the fringes in the rationalist west, partly due to the marginalisation of dream interpretation in Christian traditions but also because of Freud. Antonio Zadra, professor of psychology at the University of Montreal and co-author of When Brains Dream: Exploring the Science and Mystery of Sleep (2021), believes this marginalisation of dreams and any messages they might convey for our waking life, can be traced to a 20th-century backlash against Freudian psychoanalysis. “For Freud, dreams betrayed our socially unacceptable desires and sexual impulses from infancy,” he says. “In rejecting Freud, society also rejected the notion of paying much attention to our dreams and their content.” For Professor Mark Blagrove, who researches sleep and dreaming at the University of Swansea, the role that might have once been played by dream sharing has been overtaken by modern mass media: novels and movies have pushed dream sharing to the margins. “It could be that for the ancients dreams were tear-jerkers, or entertained or amused, much in the way that cinema does today,” he says. “Such practices could have had a role in human domestication, as captivating dream storytellers were favoured in an evolutionary sense.” The nadir for many dream enthusiasts was the 1970s, when Harvard psychiatrists John Allan Hobson and Robert McCarley proposed the activation-synthesis hypothesis. Quickly influential, this hypothesis argued that dreams are the brain’s attempt to make sense of random neuron activity that activates the brainstem during REM sleep. This led to the commonly held perception that dreams were scientifically and psychologically meaningless, as DeBord explains: “It was the idea that dreams are just these random responses to electrical activity or, so to speak, ‘brain farts’.” But the psychoanalytic interest in sharing dreams to analyse the subconscious, initiated by Freud, was continued by Swiss psychiatrist Carl Jung. To Jung the role of dreams was to lead a person to wholeness through “a dialogue between ego and the self”. It’s the Jungian tradition that many of today’s keen dream sharers identify with. They include a 44-year-old Northern Ireland-based online dream-sharing enthusiast who prefers to be identified by his Reddit moniker OldowanKenobi and spends most of his online dream interpretation time on the sub reddit r/dreaminterpretation for its explicit Jungian approach to symbols in dreams. OldowanKenobi likes posting his own dreams, but also helping to settle forum posters’ anxiety by analysing their dream symbols in relation to their daily lives. “I enjoy trying to understand the images that people write about,” he says. “Often I check their profiles and histories on reddit to see what issues they’re dealing with and combine that into the interpretation. I’m looking for something deeper that the person may not be fully aware of yet.” OldowanKenobi sees these inputs as a form of gifted therapy, unaffordable to many in its traditional one-on-one talking form. “I just hope to initiate a spark or connection in someone’s mind to help their mental health a bit.” Charlie Sanders, a 22-year-old freelance illustrator and r/dreams Reddit poster from Newcastle, enjoys discussing his dreams online with strangers for their “unbiased, more openminded” views. Sanders has a “dream circle” of six mutually supportive global enthusiasts with whom he regularly shares his nightly dreams. “I’ve always had really vivid dreams, which I think are partly caused by the fact that I have epilepsy,” he says. Sanders categorises his dreams into those that chew over the themes of his day; “nightmares”, which play out in dramatic visual vignettes, and “message” dreams, which he tends to recall in greater clarity and which he sees as tools to improve his everyday life. “I don’t personally think of dreams as some otherworldly connection with a higher power or aliens or anything like that,” he says. “I see them more as a reflection of our own internal wisdom: kind of our subconscious telling our conscious mind something we’re not understanding about ourselves.” Sanders credits one dream, and its analysis by his dream circle, with helping him to have the confidence to launch his creative career and institute healthy boundaries in personal relationships. “It was a bit like a scene from 2001: A Space Odyssey,” he recalls, “there was this tunnel of lights and colours and I heard a voice telling me I was on a track and nearly there.” The emergence of online dream-sharing forums are one expression of a renewed interest in dreaming which is also seen in the arrival of dream-sharing apps such as DreamsCloud, DreamBoard and Awoken. Therapists are also offering dream-sharing retreats and group work, including dream guide Tree Carr’s London dream retreats, where the former musician uses South American plant medicinals guayusa and calea zacatechichi to help attendees better access the meaning of their dreams. The rehabilitation of the importance of dreams follows a similar reappraisal of sleep seen in books such as Matt Walker’s international 2018 bestseller Why We Sleep, or Arianna Huffington’s 2016 The Sleep Revolution, in which she interrogates capitalism’s fetishisation of the sleepless industry and argues for a “great sleep awakening”. It’s an irony not lost on sleep academics that after decades in which sleep analysis was positioned as unscientific, neuroscience is now pointing to the importance of these unconscious hours, as events of the day are played out alongside retrieved associated memories from our past and our brain “renders verdicts” on the day’s events. Despite the growing consensus that the symbolism in dreams holds meaning for our waking hours, there are voices of dissent. Cognitive neuroscientist Dr Erin Wamsley, who studies dreaming at Furman University in South Carolina, sees no evidence that dream content is more symbolic than our waking cognition. “Dream imagery is a relatively transparent amalgam of our daily thoughts, feelings and experiences,” she notes. Professor Bill Domhoff, a pioneer in dream-content analysis at the University of California (Santa Cruz), argues that the content of dreams is too consistent across the arc of our lives, and human cultures, to make the case for investing symbolic meaning in any one dream. During England’s 2020 coronavirus second wave, infection control doctor Dr Elaine Cloutman-Green, 42 and based in London, tweeted a dream she’d had the night before. “I was trying to get some results about how we were treating Covid patients and to do this I had to peel a series of tiny blue quail eggs that I had to pull out of a hot water bath in which I kept burning my fingers,” she says. Cloutman-Green’s vivid dream found its way to Mark Blagrove who, in 2016, launched a series of “dream-sharing salons” with artist Dr Julia Lockheart, in which an in- person or online audience responds to dreamers recounting their dreams as Lockheart captures their imagery in an artwork painted on to pages taken from Freud’s The Interpretation of Dreams. Cloutman-Green, who described herself as “not a therapy person at all, I wouldn’t make time for it,” agreed to be a speaker at the salon. “At the time I had just lost a family member to Covid and was dealing with the awful trauma of Covid at work and the impact of lockdowns at home,” she said. “Talking about all of this through the imagery of the dream made me realise I had been ignoring my personal anxieties around Covid as I channelled my energy into my work.” Through the questions the community put to Cloutman-Green about the significance of the images, she was able, she says, “to combine those two sides of myself”. She is now an enthusiast for dream sharing as a simple therapeutic method that’s open to all of us, with no barriers to access. “I now see dreams as worth exploring, rather than just waking up and thinking: ‘Wow, that was a bit weird,’ and getting on with my day,” she says. Cloutman-Green keeps Lockheart’s painting – which has depictions of her at her desk next to stacks of quail eggs and a smaller closeup of her hands handling broken yolks – as a “reminder that self-reflection is not an indulgence”. Alexandra Moulding, a 45-year-old therapist based in Swindon, used to share dreams with her father as a child. By her teens Moulding was journalling her dreams and looking for repeat symbols in these dreams and trying to interpret them, including a recurring one about a “patched-up crooked house”. Today she runs an in-person dream-sharing circle in Swindon and is a member of Facebook group Dream Symbols and Interpretation, which has 15,000 members (having doubled its membership during the pandemic), and which she has been a moderator of since 2020. It was a 2014 dream about a dead baby being boarded up in the walls of a house in which the walls were weeping tears that made Moulding think, “Oh crikey, I have to do some work on myself!” With help from dream listeners online, Moulding came to see the dream as symbolising the “child in myself that had been walled up”. She realised that sadness that she had carried over from events in her childhood needed to be addressed before she moved forward in her adult life. Moulding thinks, though, that there can be downsides in broadcasting one’s intimate thoughts online. She is careful to intervene on Dream Symbols if she thinks members are trying to diagnose pathologies from others’ recounted dreams or offer reductive interpretations. “There’s no single meaning of others’ dreams, like you’d get with those old-fashioned dream dictionaries, and we should be suspicious of anyone who says otherwise,” she explains. That said, Moulding points out that the impulse to share our dreams with others and try to work out what they might mean is a “forever human thing”. “Einstein’s Theory of Relativity came to him in a dream and Niels Bohr first saw the structure of the nucleus of the atom in a dream. These were clever scientific people who took time to listen to their dreams.” DeBord thinks that humanity might fare somewhat better if we all took a moment each morning to share our dreams from the night before. Dreams, after all, are ephemeral things, stored in short-term memory and overwritten by new short-term memories when our day, and the first cup of coffee, intervenes. We don’t necessarily need to dwell on the late-night fridge raid on the stilton and jamon. “Keep a dream journal and ask others about their dreams, trying to relate to them by thinking how you’d feel if you’d had a similar dream yourself,” he advises. The beauty of dreams, DeBord adds, is that they unleash the inner therapist in us all. “You already know what your dream means as it’s been created by you rather than beamed in by an outside force,” he says. “All we need to do is listen.” • This article was amended on 6 December 2021 because an earlier version mislocated Furman University in North Carolina. It is in South Carolina.Torrey Peters’s Detransition, Baby is the story of Reece, a sharp and self-destructive trans woman in New York, who finds herself suddenly back in touch with a former lover, Ames. Ames was previously Amy, also a trans woman, but has now detransitioned. Ames’s new girlfriend, Katrina, reveals she is pregnant with his child. The three of them form an unconventional family and try to decide whether to raise the child together. Detransition, Baby was an international bestseller and is being adapted for Amazon Prime by the team behind Grey’s Anatomy. The novel was longlisted for the 2021 Women’s prize for fiction, the first time the award has recognised the work of a trans woman. Peters lives in New York with her wife. Detransition, Baby has been described as the first great trans novel. How do you feel about that? I see myself as coming out of a trans tradition. There’s a number of trans writers before me who wrote great novels. What I did was combine the things that trans people have always been doing well in their novels with a big domestic family drama. This allowed me a kind of crossover audience – it was just a bridge between those audiences. And the cis audience got to see itself through a trans lens. And that’s always been exciting for cis people. Is Reece a version of yourself? Both Reece and Ames are heightened versions of myself. Reece is me leaning into my cattiest, haughtiest and in some ways most bitter self; Ames is like what if I interrogated how much we really believe all these things we say about being a woman, the rules that circulate in the trans community? Often, I think of novels as a test case and this book is a test case; it’s a generational test case that asks, how are we going to go forward? How are we going to move past a kind of YA stage of writing about this stuff where it’s like “Are my parents going to accept me?” and “Will I get a boyfriend?” How do we deal with the adult realities: should we have kids, how do you find meaning, how do you approach the next 30, 40, 50 years? What can you do in a novel that you couldn’t do in a blogpost or article? There are political dangers with saying: “I don’t know what identity is, I don’t know that this way is the right way” in an op-ed or a tweet. In a novel, that’s different. Trust builds between the writer and the reader. They trust me to take them to a certain place in the book. I will trust that the reader is not reading my book simply to extract moments of political point-scoring. What was it like when the book took off? People who I had never imagined reading it were suddenly reading my book. People from high school who I wasn’t friends with sent me messages saying: “I read about your most intimate desires” and I was like, “OK, Mary Grace, I remember you liked horses”. It was that to an exponential amount. Initially deep exposure, then surprise, then amusement. In the wake of the Women’s prize longlisting, a group calling itself the Wild Women Writing Club wrote a letter of complaint to the organisers, signed by a number of long-dead authors including George Eliot and Aphra Behn. How were you affected by that? It’s scary when you have something like that happen. To some extent, I could see the humour. It took me about two weeks to finally get my feet under me. I was so moved by the other writers who came out to defend me. Do you remember in Lord of the Rings when Aragorn and Gandalf charge together and the orcs just scatter either side of them? Well, I had Lauren Groff, Garth Greenwell and Carmen Maria Machado riding out into the trolls and they just scattered them. They were actual heroes. I’m going to always be grateful for them. They didn’t say anything to me about it, it wasn’t coordinated, they just went and did it. I’m welling up right now talking about it. What other great books have you read this year? Darryl by Jackie Ess, another trans writer I often speak about. It’s the story of a cuckold. It’s hilarious and moving. Ayad Akhtar’s Homeland Elegies pointed the way to new ways to speak about identity, new modes of honesty about identity and class. I am going to lose my fanbase and say that Jonathan Franzen’s Crossroads is very good. One of my favourite writers is Elena Ferrante and knowing that Franzen was challenged by Ferrante and sees Crossroads as his My Brilliant Friend, this great writer rising to the challenge, it’s really exciting. Detransition, Baby is out in paperback on 6 JanuaryFat Leonard | Project Brazen Harsh Reality: The Story of Miriam Rivera | Wondery Sunday Feature: Afterwords: Stuart Hall (Radio 3) | BBC Sounds A couple of juicy investigative podcasts last week: Fat Leonard, which exposes the US navy’s taste for drugs, booze, fancy hotels, prostitutes and general off-sea high living. And Harsh Reality: The Story of Miriam Rivera, which exposes the British taste for… tacky reality shows. Fat Leonard, as a show, is already a sensation in the US. In it, British investigative journalist Tom Wright interviews Malaysian businessman Leonard Francis, at length and in great detail, about the special services (see above) that Francis used to provide to high-ups in the US navy when its ships docked in Singapore. These services did not come cheap (Francis used them to bribe officers into giving his firm multimillion-pound deals with the navy), and he has already pleaded guilty to fraud and bribery and is helping investigators. Now suffering from kidney cancer, Francis is under house arrest in San Diego, awaiting his sentence. Meanwhile, 33 people have been charged with crimes, and nine navy officers, including a rear admiral who eventually worked at the Pentagon, have been indicted for bribery and corruption. They’re about to be tried; their defence counsel has tried to subpoena Wright’s tapes, but he has said no. So, an ongoing case, much lip-smacking raw material, and the podcast makes good use of it all. Wright, who smuggled in a microphone to Francis’s home, does well in drawing out the scandalous details. A type familiar to anyone who has hung out around rock stars, Francis is the fun-fixer: the bullying, larger-than-life friend who blags everyone in as VIPs, sources the strongest drugs, the flashiest restaurants, the most beautiful and, who would have thought it, available women. His tales may be salacious, but they ring true. He has video evidence. He kept notes. What raises the podcast above most is that Wright, while enjoying the ride, is not totally swept away. Early on, he wonders why Francis is coming clean and surmises that it is because he feels stitched up by the navy. “I’ve done a lot over the past 30 years, supporting hundreds, if not thousands, of ships, sailors and marines,” says Francis. “I’ve never brought any harm to the United States… Nobody got hurt.” Wright never takes Francis completely at face value: he’s brusque in his storytelling and interviews other sources too. This makes for an interesting frisson that comes to a head in episode six, when Wright interviews Morena Galvizio de Jesus, who has two children with Francis and accuses him of treating her badly (he won’t let her see the children). “I think you’re a misogynist,” says Wright to Francis, who does not react well. Wright interviews other women too: Paula, an ex-navy helicopter pilot who blew the whistle on a previous scandal, and Marcy, the wife of a navy captain who was corrupted by Francis. The establishment hasn’t given them a second thought. In Harsh Reality the stakes are smaller, but no less human. Over six episodes, it tells the tale and fallout of a 2004 Sky reality TV show, There’s Something About Miriam, which sold itself as a dating show with a twist: the model Miriam Rivera, whose heart the young male competitors were trying to win, was a transgender woman. I know: exploitation to the max! But this is an enjoyable listen: dynamic, with some excellent interviews with those involved. Plus host Trace Lysette is American, which leads to some hilarious descriptions of the UK. Still, there’s no denying the cruel tabloid approach of the reality TV of that time, how daft young men were tricked into signing contracts and taking part in a telly stitch-up without understanding what was going on. And how Rivera, queen of the NYC ballroom scene, was disrespected and used as a punchline. Treating trans people, especially trans women, as freaks was far too common, and There’s Something About Miriam, while pretending to be a celebration of transgender life, was, in the end, just another circus. The strength of both Fat Leonard and Harsh Reality is in their acknowledgment that, for every person having a wild time, and for every person making money out of that wild time, there are others who are being exploited. Someone who understood this treatment from a colonised perspective was the late superstar cultural intellectual Stuart Hall. Born in Jamaica in 1932, Hall spent his adult life in the UK, and in Radio 3’s Sunday Feature: Afterwords, which opened with a lovely soundscape of voices, we heard about his academic approach. Hall’s combining of scholarship with personal experience – cultural identity studies – seems almost commonplace now, but still has an effect. It was lovely to hear one of the younger speakers say that Hall inspires her today.Michael Gove has become the British economy’s Mr Fixit. While Rishi Sunak gives the appearance of someone who obsesses about little other than how and when to reduce the national debt, it is left to the MP for Surrey Heath to chart the government’s next steps. As the new boss of Whitehall’s most clumsily renamed department – for “levelling up”, housing and communities (DLUHC) – it is Gove and not the chancellor who appears to have the job of joining the random dots on Boris Johnson’s map to a brighter, more equal and more planet-friendly future. In recent exchanges across the floor of the House of Commons, Gove has shown that his brief is a wide-ranging one. Asked last week about the lack of rail lines in north-west Leicestershire, he happily trod all over transport secretary Grant Shapps’s toes to say the area “could have no surer champion in the jousting required to secure the [rail] investment needed”. With the Home Office, education department and the Treasury also in his sights, not to mention the vexed topic of devolution, Gove added: “We need to ensure that all communities feel they have the right investment not just in transport, but in skills, schools and ensuring that streets are safe and communities can take back control”. It is clear that Gove is the cabinet’s action man, one who not only attends to his immediate brief, but also addresses the broad issues facing the country. As he goes about fashioning a bolder Britain, there are reports he could refer to that show how areas of the country not known for their private-sector prowess – or not any more at least – could benefit from significant public investment. This would be investment quietly binned by Treasury officials after it was found to offer little bang for each buck spent. The latest productivity index from the thinktank Be The Business shows that firms with between two and 249 employees in the north-east and north-west of England improved during the pandemic at a faster rate than the same-sized firms in London and the south-east. Still in its infancy, and with only 1,000 respondents across the country, the index nonetheless illustrates how companies, even in deprived areas, are using technology, improved management skills and innovative ideas to boost output. Importantly for Gove, the index shows that infrastructure investment in the north-west and north-east will have a receptive audience of up-and-coming businesses. However, a separate study by Cardiff and Nottingham Trent universities, based on a broader range of data, reveals the very low base from which private sector productivity improvements outside London and the south-east start. This may seem obvious when the UK Competitiveness Index, now in its 21st year, shows that former industrial area of Blaenau Gwent in Wales is the least competitive locality. Not far behind are the battered economies of Redcar and Cleveland in the north-east, and Mansfield in the east Midlands. What is saddening is that south Tyneside is also among the 10 worst performers, and Kingston on Hull, Stoke-on-Trent and Sunderland are not far behind. By contrast London boroughs grab nine out of the top 10 spots. One of the report’s authors, Prof Robert Huggins of Cardiff University’s school of geography and planning, says there is a link between areas that are climbing up the productivity rankings and government investment. Liverpool, Leeds and Glasgow and Clyde Valley are among those improving lately. However, Huggins says the only major factor that has changed is City Deals, agreements between Whitehall and key cities that pre-date the current government. “The problem for the UK is that such funding remains limited both its terms of the amount of funding available and the limited number places able to access it,” he says. What’s worse, he says, is that these deals remain exceptions, and rather than the competitiveness landscape being levelled up, “the UK is likely to become more uneven, with the least competitive locations forecast to grow at the slowest rates”. Gove will need to heed these warnings as he continues his negotiations with the Treasury. He shares Sunak’s free-market sympathies, but appears more open to the idea that long-term public investment complements private sector spending and will not make those in deprived areas put their feet up. There is always a risk that areas that haven’t seen much government cash in a half a century won’t know what to do with it. But if these reports show one thing, it is that the risk is worth taking.An architect who was invited to design a kitchen extension for a married couple spent an evening with them to discuss their (conflicting) needs and aspirations for the work. At the end, he gave them this valuable advice. “You don’t need a kitchen,” he said, “you need a divorce.” This story brings us to the announcement that Boris Johnson’s idea of building a bridge between Northern Ireland and Scotland would be, at £335bn, absurdly expensive. Such was widely suspected as soon as the plan became public given, among other things, that it would have to cross the 300m-deep Beaufort’s Dyke, which is filled with up to a million tonnes of dumped munitions. But it has required a government feasibility study by a team of “world-renowned technical advisers” to conclude that bears do, after all, shit in the woods. It might save the taxpayer a 12-figure sum if a therapist could help the prime minister explore his compulsion to inflict heavy engineering on large expanses of water. (See also: the Thames garden bridge, the Emirates Airline cable car, the “Boris Island” airport). More obviously, Northern Ireland would benefit more from a resolution of its border issues than from a structure completed decades in the future but, as with the couple and their kitchen, it’s easier to fantasise about construction than sort out a fractious relationship. Gift that keeps taking Imagine that you were given a truly repulsive Christmas decoration, a sculpture of coagulated ectoplasm, its finish gritty, like something from a seaside gift shop. On its summit is a big pointy glow-in-the-dark star that goes jarringly with the rest. Imagine then that you had to live with it, 365 days a year, forever. And that it was more than 140m high. This is the fate of the citizens of Barcelona, who have to watch the endless rising of the Sagrada Familia church, 139 years after construction started. It is, of course, a famous project of the celebrated architect Antonio Gaudí, but it resembles his spirit only in the realm of parody. It is paid for, to add insult to injury, with the help of a tax exemption on the enormous income the church makes out of tourists. So you have to pay for the gift, too. Supreme spat with neighbours This week, the case of Fearn v Tate Gallery reaches the supreme court. Here, some residents of a glass-walled block of luxury flats called Neo Bankside are complaining about the fact that a viewing gallery on top of Tate Modern’s Blavatnik Building allows the public to see into their living rooms. Their case seems to be weakened by the fact that it was never a secret, through the time that Neo Bankside was designed, built and marketed, that Tate wanted to erect a large public building next to the Neo Bankside development. In which case, you might think something other than all-glass walls might have been a good idea. Regular windows, perhaps? But then the developers and home owners would have been denied value-enhancing panoramic views out. The high court and court of appeal having rejected the residents’ claim, it has gone to the highest court in the land. So what is going on is this: a small group of property owners, with the resources to hire expensive lawyers, are trying to work the full majesty of the British legal system against a hugely popular public institution, the proximity of which, by the way, also increases the value of their properties. It would be easier to put up curtains, you would have thought, except that apparently a clause in their lease forbids this. Maybe they could use their legal muscle to sort that out, then. • Rowan Moore is the Observer’s architecture correspondentA big game and an even bigger result for Exeter. The home side have not had the smoothest of calendar years, but a try apiece for Tom O’Flaherty and Luke Cowan-Dickie in front of a reinvigorated crowd made it another sobering trip west for a Saracens team who tend not to find Devon the happiest of hunting grounds. The second-placed Londoners, who lost the try count 2-0, could have few real complaints with Exeter’s fifth straight home league victory over their opponents, partly assisted by the visitors’ lack of self-discipline. While the home pack, reinforced by the return of Cowan-Dickie, Jonny Hill and Jonny Gray, were excellent, the game was notable for the unusually high number of times Saracens were penalised for dissent or unsportsmanlike comments. The referee, Luke Pearce, seeking to avoid any repeat of the acrimony that has hung over this fixture, took exception to his decisions being questioned from an early stage and at one point marched Billy Vunipola back 20 metres for two successive backchat offences. Mako Vunipola was also singled out, with Pearce suggesting it was “soul-destroying” for officials to have to deal with a constant stream of critical commentary. “Every time I make a decision I don’t want three of your players questioning me,” he told Sarries’ co-captains, Jackson Wray and Alex Goode, having warned both sides before kick-off that he would not stand for any nonsense. Mark McCall, the Saracens director of rugby, said his team had been their own worst enemies. “We were let down today by inaccuracy and ill-discipline,” he said. “We were marched back three times, which is not good enough. It’s not just frustrating, it’s highly costly. It cost us points and it cost us decisions later because you’re on the wrong side of the referee and things you deserve you don’t get. “One or two of the players, who I won’t name, have already apologised to their teammates because they recognise that it’s not what we need.” Given the slimness of the final margin, there was no escaping the direct effect all this careless talk had on the outcome, although the man of the match, Cowan-Dickie, and the similarly excellent Henry Slade looked in no mood to be denied either way. The margin might have been significantly wider had Exeter not blown a try at the end, having also had a 10th-minute effort from Sam Simmonds ruled out on the advice of the TMO when Slade was judged, in the buildup, to have been marginally in front of Joe Simmonds when the latter got his boot to a loose ball on the ground. For all Exeter’s possession, though, they were 6-3 behind on the scoreboard a minute before the interval. They needed a flash of inspiration from somewhere and it duly arrived when, with an advantage being played, Simmonds’s cross kick towards the left corner was superbly gathered above the covering Aled Davies by a leaping O’Flaherty, who gleefully returned to earth to score. It gave Exeter a two-point advantage to defend entering the second-half, prompting a tense third quarter, dominated by tactical kicking. It was Saracens who finally broke the deadlock via Lozowski’s third penalty, awarded for offside, before Exeter’s decisive moment arrived in the 57th minute. Another loose ball was hacked upfield by Joe Simmonds and pressure applied to the retreating Saracens cover produced a penalty for Exeter which, in turn, set up the decisive close-range lineout drive scored by the pumped-up Cowan-Dickie, the home captain for the day. Two more Lozowski penalties narrowed the gap once again but it was Exeter who finished the game in the box seat. “It felt like a proper Premiership game of rugby,” said Rob Baxter, their delighted director of rugby. “Both teams went hammer and tongs. I’m just proud of the guys and that little bit of fight they had in everything they did. That ultimately made the difference.”Thomas Tuchel criticised his defence after Chelsea’s title prospects suffered another blow when they fell to a sloppy 3-2 defeat at West Ham. Chelsea, who have won two of their past five league games, were unusually slack at the back at the London Stadium. Édouard Mendy was at fault for two of West Ham’s goals – the goalkeeper gave away a foolish penalty for the first and misjudged Arthur Masuaku’s mishit cross for the winner – and Tuchel said his team must stop making mistakes. “The performance is enough to win the game,” Chelsea’s manager said. “But what we clearly see is that we give easy goals away. This is really unusual. We make big mistakes that lead to big chances, that lead to easy goals. We do this now in three match days in a row: Man United, Watford and again today. If you do this at this kind of level, you cannot expect to have a result. “The next 90 minutes is interesting – to have the focus and the attitude right. We are not good enough in the details at the moment. We do too many big mistakes and we need to care more about the details. “There’s no need to ask big questions or start doubting about the big picture. If you play at West Ham, that’s about details. Without doing big mistakes, there’s a big chance we win this game.” Tuchel said Mendy is struggling at the moment. “I don’t know why exactly, but it seems he has lost a bit of confidence. “OK, decision-making was not at the highest level today at the first goal, but we also bring him into a really awkward situation. He could have saved the situation. He did not. “We are far, far away from blaming anybody, but we need to admit we are making too many crucial mistakes.” Chelsea’s injury list lengthened when Marcos Alonso and Kai Havertz limped off, while Tuchel is unsure when N’Golo Kanté will return from a knee injury. “I have no idea when he will be back. We’re missing not only N’Golo but also Mateo Kovacic for four or five, six weeks. And Jorginho is playing with hip pain for many days – and you can see it.” West Ham, who lost Kurt Zouma and Ben Johnson to injury, are fourth in the table. “We didn’t play well enough in the first half,” David Moyes said. “The second half we improved greatly and that gave us a real chance.” Moyes said he had congratulated his matchwinner Masuaku for a “great cross” that somehow ended up in Chelsea’s net. “We have to say it was a bit of a lucky goal,” Moyes said. Masuaku also laughed about the goal. “So, was it a cross or was it a shot??!? (hint: I was as surprised as you),” he wrote on Twitter.For Graham Potter and Brighton, a wonderful sense of deja vu. Down to 10 men following injury to Leandro Trossard and well into 10 minutes of second-half stoppage time, Neal Maupay rattled in a second late equaliser in four days to rescue another point for Brighton. Potter, as in midweek, was out of substitutes when Trossard was forced off with an elbow problem but just as it seemed defeat was inevitable, Maupay rifled in from close range to hush the Southampton support. A blue flare flew on to the corner of the pitch from the away end and Southampton, whose disconsolate players slumped to the floor at full-time, ended up being booed off. It was not how Ralph Hasenhüttl hoped to mark his three-year anniversary in charge. Hasenhüttl’s biggest gripe was with Alex McCarthy, blasting his goalkeeper for not telling him he was struggling with a hamstring injury that prevented him from jumping and hampered Southampton’s hopes of holding on for victory. They have now dropped 71 points in the past three years, 15 more than any other team. James Ward-Prowse, in an attempt to cover for his goalkeeper, inadvertently played Maupay onside when Brighton recycled Jakub Moder’s free-kick. “Alex must definitely be more professional and this is what I missed today,” a livid Hasenhüttl said. “This is something we cannot accept. There must be a message and then we can make a change. I still had one change in hand and I can change the goalkeeper if necessary. It is the reason we have a goalkeeper on the bench. If he’s not able to jump, we should change him. We have to learn from this and in the future be more honest.” Hasenhüttl expects McCarthy to miss next Saturday’s trip to Arsenal and the back-up Fraser Forster is also sidelined, meaning Harry Lewis, who is yet to make a first-team appearance for the club, is his only fit goalkeeper. Hasenhüttl was apoplectic but McCarthy had kept Southampton in the game, denying Maupay with 13 minutes of normal time to play after the striker was picked out by Aaron Connolly. Maupay made no mistake in the eighth minute of stoppage time to earn Brighton a ninth draw in 11 matches. “There’s a great spirit with the players,” Potter said. “We have belief as a team. The one thing I don’t doubt is their willingness to keep going until the end.” Southampton led through Armando Broja but while the on-loan Chelsea striker continued his impressive scoring run after nonchalantly twisting inside Shane Duffy before finishing with the outside of his boot – his third league goal in four starts – a draw felt like a defeat, with Southampton left kicking themselves for squandering another lead. Broja should have doubled their advantage five minutes after the interval but scuffed wide after latching on to Tino Livramento’s cross. Livramento and Che Adams also passed up first-half chances and Southampton faded in the second half. A naivety ended up undoing Southampton’s good work. “When you’re so stupid in the end, you don’t deserve three points,” Hasenhüttl said. Brighton tested McCarthy in the first half through Enock Mwepu and Trossard, whose elbow injury, Potter said, was not as bad as first feared. The visitors may have been one-man light heading into stoppage time but they continued to probe and in the eighth added minute, Oriol Romeu clipped Yves Bissouma on the edge of the box, allowing Brighton to find another leveller. Moder’s free-kick cannoned off the wall but the Poland midfielder recycled the ball back into the area, locating Maupay a few yards out. Maupay, not for the first time this season, was the name on the lips of supporters long after the final whistle. The striker emerged from the tunnel for his post-match interviews to a hero’s reception from a couple of hundred delirious fans. “We have one big strength this season,” Maupay said. “We never give up.”France’s rightwing opposition party has chosen a female candidate for next year’s presidential election for the first time in its history. Valérie Pécresse emerged victorious after two rounds of voting by members of Les Républicains that unexpectedly saw favourites including “Monsieur Brexit” Michel Barnier knocked out in the first vote last week. Pécresse now faces an uphill struggle to impose herself on the presidential campaign, with the election a little over four months away, on 10 April. Among her rivals will be Paris mayor Anne Hidalgo, the Socialist party candidate who is trailing in the polls and with whom Pécresse has regularly clashed over city hall decisions. Supporters chanted “Valérie, Valérie” as the result of the poll of 150,000 party members was announced on Saturday afternoon showing she had beaten her hard-right rival Éric Ciotti by 61% to 39%. Neither had been a favourite to come through the first round. Pécresse, 54, is currently president of the Île-de-France regional council, which includes Paris. She served as budget minister and higher education minister during Nicolas Sarkozy’s 2007-12 presidency. “For the first time in its history, our party will have a female candidate for the presidential election,” she said. “Between the outgoing president and me, there’s a difference in our natures. Emmanuel Macron has one obsession, which is to please. Me, I have only one passion, which is to do.” She added: “Nothing is doomed. We are not condemned either to disorder or to decline. Our country is full of talent, full of energy. “The Republican right is back … we will give our country back its unity, its dignity and its pride.” During the party’s primary campaign, the main Les Républicains candidates veered from the party’s traditional centre-right territory towards the far right. Ciotti declared that he would hold a referendum to stop mass immigration and set up a “French Guantánamo Bay” to deal with terrorism. Pécresse, who has described herself as “two-thirds Angela Merkel and one-third Margaret Thatcher”, had argued she was the candidate with the experience and prominence to take on Macron. As education minister, she faced down long-running street protests and university sit-ins to force through reforms to higher education. A former budget minister, she has, until now, been pro-European and moderate; she promises to focus on the economy and on building consensus if she makes it to the Élysée Palace, and has pledged to increase salaries and end the 35-hour maximum working week. However, in an election campaign that has so far turned endlessly around the three I’s – immigration, integration, Islam – Pécresse has also hardened her line, promising laws to increase “domestic security and combat Islamic extremism”. It remains to be seen whether she will move any further to the right, but in her victory speech on Saturday Pécresse appealed to voters “tempted by Marine Le Pen or Éric Zemmour” – the two far-right contenders who have dominated the campaign so far. “There’s no need to be extremist to be combative, no need to be insulting to be convincing,” she said. “You know that the merchants of fear have never been capable when it comes to action, and in our history nobody who divided us has saved us.” Pécresse, who was born in the wealthy Paris suburb of Neuilly-sur-Seine, is a graduate of the now-dissolved École Nationale d’Administration (ENA), the grande école and hothouse for the country’s political elite, finishing an impressive second in her class. Even before then she had been a brilliant student, passing her baccalauréat at 16, two years early, and learning Russian at 15 while spending time at young communist camps in what was the Soviet Union. “I followed propaganda courses and sang the Internationale in Russian,” she recalled afterwards. “From these trips, I was left with an attachment to freedom of thought, the idea that non-conformism is more rightwing than leftwing. And the language.” France’s 2022 presidential election is a two-round vote, the first taking place on 10 April and the second two weeks later. The definitive list of candidates will not be known until March, when all candidates must submit a list of 500 signatures of support from the country’s mayors or specific elected officials. So far, around 20 people have officially announced their candidacy, including eight from the left. Polls carried out before Pécresse was chosen as Les Républicains’ candidate suggest Macron is still expected to be re-elected next year, but the most likely scenario remains a second-round duel between the president and Le Pen, a repeat of 2017. Before Pécresse’s victory, Xavier Bertrand – a former minister and now president of the northern Hauts-de-France region,which includes Calais – had been credited with the right’s best chance of unseating Macron, but even then most polls had him in fourth place after the first round, behind Le Pen and Zemmour. The left, meanwhile, is divided and struggling. According to BFM TV’s Élyséemètre, an amalgamation of the main opinion polls, Hidalgo is trailing behind the Ecology-Green party candidate Yannick Jadot and the hard left’s Jean-Luc Mélenchon. Zemmour will host his first election rally on Sunday evening, with 19,000 people expected. On Friday he unveiled his slogan: “Impossible n’est pas français” (Impossible isn’t a French word). About 50 unions, political organisations and anti-fascist associations have called for a demonstration in Paris to coincide with the rally, and police fear clashes.Divock Origi had been overdue a potentially season-altering goal but chose some moment to provide it. Titles are won on days like this and everyone present knew it, not least all of those who leapt off the Liverpool bench and celebrated extravagantly when Wolves’ resistance was finally broken. A match whose tenor rose as the temperature plummeted had looked certain to be remembered for an astonishing miss by Diogo Jota before his teammate, finishing clinically four minutes into added time, ensured there would be no regretting an opportunity squandered. Wolves, who were always in the game but weathered spells of heavy pressure in each half, appeared to have survived when José Sá made a stupendous late save from Sadio Mané. But they were hanging on and had one last hurdle to vault when Virgil van Dijk considered his options before sending a long, diagonal pass to Mohamed Salah. Perhaps the Egyptian’s first touch, taken perfectly on the bounce and sending him into the box, was simply too good; perhaps the substitute left-back Kia-Jana Hoever, introduced against his former club in the 90th minute and left trailing, had not yet got up to the pace. It was probably a bit of both but there was no questioning Salah’s composure in picking out Origi and no conjecture about the finish, cracked under Sá on the turn after taking a touch. “We had to keep going and Divock Origi, the legend, finished it off for us. Love it,” beamed Klopp, whose post-match comments constituted a paean to his perennial deputy striker. “He is an incredible finisher and, if we don’t know it at Liverpool, who should know it? Winning in the 95th minute is great but, if Divock scores, it’s even better.” It meant Liverpool could doubly profit from Chelsea’s misstep at the London Stadium and finish the day in second place. They took control from around the 25th-minute mark but, against opponents whose matches are rarely high-scoring at either end of the pitch, had thin gruel to feed on by half-time. A header by Jota, directed wide at the far post to jeers from his former public, was as close as they came although Salah was denied by one superb piece of defending by Romain Saïss. Wolves were increasingly scratchy but compact and, as Bruno Lage explained afterwards, intent on not getting caught in the transition. Sá saved smartly from a ricochet off Thiago Alcãntara soon after half-time and on the hour Wolves had cause to feel fortune was smiling their way. When Sá raced out to clear near the left touchline but succeeded only in taking out Saïss, the ball ran free for Jota to advance into the penalty area. With Sá nowhere he had a clear run and time to pick his spot, even with Conor Coady and Max Kilman retreating towards goal, and once he had reached the six-yard line it was a case of waiting for the net to billow. Instead he blasted straight into Coady’s midriff, to universal amazement, when the slightest precision would have sufficed. Jota had returned to haunt Molineux with a winner last season but this was an error that could have been hanging over Liverpool next May. As the wind swirled and the rain fell in sheets, it came to feel like the kind of winter evening this ever-atmospheric venue might cherish. Adama Traoré forced Fabinho and Andy Robertson into rash lunges and, accordingly, yellow cards but Wolves were imprecise when they did break and Lage could constantly be seen urging them against impetuosity. “It’s frustrating, because when I come in the dressing room and see my players’ faces, they did everything planned and did not deserve to lose,” Lage said. Given that Chelsea are the only other team to have restricted Liverpool to a single goal all season, Lage’s side can certainly be said to have performed respectably. But they were at full stretch by the end and Klopp was ultimately rewarded for his boldness in bringing on Origi for Jordan Henderson in the 68th minute, upping the ante further. “It is really important and it feels really big,” he said. “It was like in our good old times, two years ago, when we really needed it. “It is an important skill to stay positive: it was not needed too often this season but thank god we could show it today.” The warmest thanks went to Origi. “Top striker, top boy, that’s how it is,” Klopp continued. “He has scored some of the most important goals in the history of his club.” This could yet have been another.Right, that’s it for today’s clockwatch. But if you just need one more hit, you can join Scott Murray for Watford v Manchester City. Ta-ra! Wolves 0-1 Liver pool West Ham 3-2 Chelsea Southampton 1-1 Brighton All over at the Camp Nou. Juanmi’s excellent goal has given Betis a famous victory, one that moves up to the third in the table. Barcelona stay seventh, and in all sorts of bother. We could have three Premier League leaders in one day, which sounds like a crap Crowded House parody. Chelsea were top this morning, Liverpool overtook them thanks to Divock Origi’s injury-time winner, and Manchester City will leapfrog them both if they win at Watford this evening. You can follow that with Scott Murray. And here’s the updated Premier League table. Liverpool are top, Newcastle are not bottom. Barcelona 0-1 Betis If it stays like this, Barcelona will be closer to the relegation places than they are to the leaders Real Madrid. Here’s the as-it-stands table. All that Premier League drama meant I missed Southampton legend Juanmi putting Real Betis ahead at the Camp Nou! ‘Brighton in draw shocker, yawn.’ Yes, yes, but that doesn’t begin to tell the story of another dramatic game. Liverpool go top of the table, for a couple of hours at least, after the definitive hard-fought victory at Wolves. Callum Wilson’s goal gives Newcastle their first league win of the season! Neal Maupay, who scored an 89th-minute equaliser at West Ham in the week, has raised it - and flipped it - with a 98th-minute equaliser at Southampton! Divock Origi has added another entry to a unique portfolio of cult heroism. It was a fine finish on the turn after brilliant play from Salah. A number of the Wolves players collapsed to the floor. But I can’t dwell on this because... Liverpool have snatched it in the 94th minute! An easy victory for Rangers, who move eight points clear at the top. Southampton 1-0 Brighton Trossard’s injury means there will be ten minutes of added time at St Mary’s. Southampton 1-0 Brighton Leandro Trossard is receiving oxygen as he is stretchered down the tunnel. It sounds like he is in excruciating pain. Brighton have already used their three subs, so they will be down to 10 men for the last few minutes. Wolves 0-0 Liverpool Jose Sa has made a brilliant save from Sadio Mane! A Wolves defender sliced a clearance back towards his own goal. It went straight to Mane, whose close-range toebung brought an outstanding reaction save from Jose Sa. Newcastle 1-0 Burnley The Burnley substitute Jay Rodriguez has had a goal disallowed for offside. It was the right decision, it says here, so let’s all move on. Southampton 1-0 Brighton It sounds like Leandro Trossard has suffered a very painful elbow injury at St Mary’s. He’s been receiving treatment for two or three minutes, which suggests a possible dislocation. “As things stand, Inverness still top the Scottish Championship on 31 points, and Arbroath, on 28 points, are fifth, and out of the play off places,” writes Simon McMahon. “It’s not quite the Romanian third division in 1984, but still.” Never mind all that, has anyone had a seat on the ball? The latest scores in our featured games Premier League West Ham 3-2 Chelsea (FT) Newcastle 1-0 Burnley Southampton 1-0 Brighton Wolves 0-0 Liverpool Championship Coventry 1-2 West Brom (FT) Scottish Premiership Rangers 3-0 Dundee Serie A AC Milan 2-0 Salernitana (FT) La Liga Barcelona 0-0 Real Betis (3.15pm) Newcastle 1-0 Burnley Newcastle are 13 minutes away from their first league win of the season. According to Clinton Morrison on Sky Sports, Newcastle have been much the better team. Southampton 1-0 Brighton Alex McCarthy has just made a good save from Neal Maupay, it says here. If it stays like this, Southampton will be only a point behind Brighton; this despite losing three of their best players in the summer and winning none of their first seven league games. Ralph Hasenhuttl is such a good manager. Wolves 0-0 Liverpool Seventeen minutes to go at Molineux, where Liverpool are desperately seeking a winner. In the circumstances - Chelsea losing, Liverpool struggling to score for the first time in months - it would be a huge victory. Four games, four wins for Giovanni van Bronckhorst. Wolves 0-0 Liverpool Another one goes by for Liverpool. Salah clips a lovely pass over the top to Mane, whose imperfect control allows Jose Sa to make a brave save. Wolves 0-0 Liverpool An interesting substitution from Jurgen Klopp: Divock Origi is on for Jordan Henderson. Wolves 0-0 Liverpool I still can’t believe that Jota miss*. He was a few yards out and could have rolled the ball into either corner. Instead he just welted it straight down Coady’s pipe. * Yes, I realise it wasn’t technically a miss, but it was so pipe down “If Uri Geller is disappointed by getting his predictions wrong,” writes Andy, “maybe he’ll cheer himself up with a drink at a Wither Spoons.” It depends on the wether. Wolves 0-0 Liverpool: what a chance for Liverpool! Diogowhateverhisnameis has just missed a wonderful opportunity. The keeper Jose Sa was completely out of the game, but Diogo J Silva IV hammered it straight at Coady on the line. He could have picked a spot, any spot, and he’s normally such a composed finisher. Not this time. The latest scores in our featured games Premier League West Ham 3-2 Chelsea (FT) Newcastle 1-0 Burnley Southampton 1-0 Brighton Wolves 0-0 Liverpool Championship Coventry 1-2 West Brom (FT) Scottish Premiership Rangers 2-0 Dundee Serie A AC Milan 2-0 Salernitana (FT) La Liga Barcelona 0-0 Real Betis (3.15pm) “Hi Rob,” says Brian Wiley. “There’s a misunderstanding of Diogo J’s name. His full name is Diogo José Teixeira da Silva, and his nickname is Diogo J in English or Diogo Jota in Portuguese. The J is an abbreviation of José. Jota is just the Portuguese word for the letter ‘J’. It’s a nonsense to call him Jota in the commentary as if that were his surname. Call him any of Diogo J, Diogo or Silva!” It might be a nonsense, but it’s in the Guardian style guide and I’m not brave enough to deviate from that. The last Guardianista to do so had their Tweetdeck access suspended for a whole week. I haven’t seen such sickening torment since the cold turkey scene in Trainspotting. Rangers are heading seven points clear at the top of the Scottish Premiership. Wolves 0-0 Liverpool A Liverpool corner leads to a game of pinball in the penalty area, with Thiago eventually slicing wide. That was a good chance. Not much to see here; both teams have only had one shot on target. Peep peep! The second halves are under way. This is the Premier League table as things stand. A comfortable win for Milan, who go top of Serie A, at least for the next few hours. Half-time entertainment “Hi Rob,” says Phil Grey. “If New Castle don’t get three points today, Uri Geller might be watching them play Black Burn, Mill Wall and Birm Ingham next season.” But will he still be talking out of his Gallow Gate End? Peep peep! The first half has finished in the 3pm kick-offs, and this is where we’re at. Premier League West Ham 3-2 Chelsea (FT) Newcastle 1-0 Burnley Southampton 1-0 Brighton Wolves 0-0 Liverpool Championship Coventry 1-2 West Brom (FT) Scottish Premiership Rangers 1-0 Dundee Serie A AC Milan 2-0 Salernitana (2pm) La Liga Barcelona 0-0 Real Betis (3.15pm) Newcastle 1-0 Burnley “Hey Rob,” writes J.R. in Illinois. “Burnley fans and/or the 3.2% of fantasy football managers who have Maxwel Cornet in their team would probably like to know that he went off injured in the 32nd minute.” What do you think this is, a football update service? Wolves 0-0 Liverpool Wolves have their first half-chance, with Alisson just beating Traore to a low cross from Ait-Nouri. “Fond memories of Arthur Montford,” writes Willie Mills. “’A goalmouth stramash’, and, after going down to an early goal against Czechoslovakia in a must-win qualifier: ‘It’s a disaster, a disaster for Scotland’. Much missed.” “Afternoon Rob,” says Stephen Carr. “Apropos of nothing, but earlier I returned from a near 50-mile round trip when my son’s U13 game was called off after five minutes because the opposition were shivering due to the inclement conditions. On that basis, the cliché ‘can he do it on a wet Wednesday night in Stoke?’ needs to be updated to reference stormy Saturday mornings in Skelmersdale.” Another area in which Cristiano Ronaldo has been found wanting. Newcastle are in front! Callum Wilson has scored after an error from Nick Pope. It was checked by VAR for a possible foul on Pope, but the goal was given, and rightly so according to those who can legally watch the game. Wolves 0-0 Liverpool: what a tackle from Saiss! Robertson’s low cross is about to be put into an empty net by Salah when Saiss slides in to divert the ball away from Salah. That was tremendous defending. Joe Aribo has put Rangers ahead at Ibrox with a deflected shot that wrongfooted the keeper Adam Legzdins. Wolves 0-0 Liverpool Wolves still haven’t managed a shot off target, never mind on, but they have done well to restrict Liverpool to just that one Jota chance. Wolves 0-0 Liverpool Diogo Jota, who scored the winner on his return to Molineux last season, has missed a great chance to put Liverpool in front. Alexander-Arnold flipped a delicious cross to the far post, where Jota got away from Semedo but headed fractionally wide. The latest scores in our featured games Premier League West Ham 3-2 Chelsea (FT) Newcastle 0-0 Burnley Southampton 1-0 Brighton Wolves 0-0 Liverpool Championship Coventry 1-2 West Brom (FT) Scottish Premiership Rangers 0-0 Dundee Serie A AC Milan 2-0 Salernitana (2pm) La Liga Barcelona 0-0 Real Betis (3.15pm) It’s there! Armando Broja, the 20-year-old Albanian on loan from Chelsea, has put Southampton ahead with a majestic finish. “Morning greetings from the disunited states of Trumpistan,” says Mary Waltz. “Poor Eddie Howe’s pained face has not changed since he took over management of Newcastle. At this pace he will be bald by the end of the season.” What’s wrong with being b- oh who am I kidding. Wolves 0-0 Liverpool Still no shots on target for either team. Wolves have quietly been superb in defence this season. “Burton?” sniffs Simon Glinn. “Buxton, methinks. And normal conditions.” Ach, apologies. It’s not my worst typo - that involved Count Duckula - but it’s still a bit shoddy. Wolves 0-0 Liverpool Wolves have started pretty well at Molineux, keeping Liverpool at arm’s length and looking dangerous on the break. “Hi Rob,” says Robert Ellson. “I see that incorrigible spoon-botherer Uri Geller is lending his support to a team he calls New Castle today.” Check out that big fat caveat! Crikey, he’s lost a bit of conviction since he took approximately 100.00 per cent of the credit for David Seaman saving Gary McAlliter’s penalty at Euro 96. Southampton 0-0 Brighton Southampton have made a fast start, it says here, with Armando Broja forcing a couple of early saves from Robert Sanchez. “Afternoon Rob,” says Jon Collin. “Whenever I see Alexis Saelemakers’ name, I get this song in my head.” And why not? Peep peep! The 3pm games are under way. Half time: AC Milan 2-0 Salernitana Nothing to see here: Milan are cruising to victory. West Ham 3-2 Chelsea FA Cup Morecambe have beaten seventh-tier Bu r xton 1-0 in the lunchtime game. Cole Stockton scored the only goal of a game that was played in vile conditions. “‘The commentator’ being none other than Arthur Montford, a legend of Scottish sports broadcasting, though perhaps less well known outside Scotland than his BBC contemporary Archie MacPherson,” says Simon McMahon. “The way he says ‘Sensation!’ as the header goes in, tremendous stuff.” “Hi Rob,” says Simon McMahon. “In the SPL, St. Johnstone v Ross County has been postponed due to a waterlogged pitch, Dundee United v Celtic isn’t until tomorrow, and no one cares that much about Rangers v Dundee, Hibs v Motherwell and Aberdeen v St. Mirren, so the Scottish Championship is where it’s at today. And it’s quite the league, with only four points separating the top five. “Inverness displaced Kilmarnock at the top last night after beating them 1-0, but Raith could move into top spot today with a win at Arbroath, who could themselves leapfrog Raith into second with three points. Partick could also finish the day in second. Hope that’s clear. And if it’s tight at the top, check out the bottom - only one point between the bottom five. It’s like two leagues for the price of one!” For no particular reason, your email has reminded me of Tommy Murray at Ibrox, 49 years ago this weekend. My favourite bit is the unemotional way the commentator says “Murray having a seat on the ball”, as if it was an everyday occurrence. Maybe it was. Peep peep! West Brom hold on for a crucial victory, their first away from home since September. Peep peep! Another famous win for West Ham, who came from 1-0 and 2-1 down to stun the leaders Chelsea. Get all the reaction with Scott Murray. As expected, Milan are having a comfortable afternoon. Alexis Saelemaekers has put them 2-0 up, and I’d love to describe the goal but I can’t because the game isn’t being televised in Britain. There’s been a fifth goal at the London Stadium, and well I never. We’re in for a lively finish at Coventry. Kyle McFadzen, who scored an own goal in the first half, has pulled one back for the home side. I was going to say he’s scored at both ends, but technically he’s scored at the same end twice. That didn’t take long. Franck Kessie has put Milan ahead against the bottom club Salernitana. If Milan win they will go top of Serie A, at least until the leaders Napoli play Atalanta tonight. Southampton v Brighton This is a really enjoyable interview with - IMPHO - the most likeable manager in the Premier League. There’s been a fourth goal at the London Stadium, and either West Ham or Chelsea have scored it. Coventry 0-2 West Brom It’s been a bit of a smash and grab from West Brom, not that they’ll care: a win today would move them to within six points of second-placed Bournemouth, and end an alarming run of form away from home. West Ham 1-2 Chelsea is the half-time score in the early Premier League game. You can follow that one with Scott Murray. Hello and welcome to another busy Saturday clockwatch. Only three Premier League games kick off at 3pm but they’re all important for different reasons. Newcastle, still desperately seeking their first win of the season, are at home to Burnley; draw specialists Brighton visit draw-curious Southampton; and Wolves, the team with the best defensive record outside the Big Three, have the stiffest test of their credentials: Liverpool, who have scored a scandalous 63 goals in 21 games this season, are in town. There are some big games elsewhere, too, including Coventry v West Brom in the Championship. In that game, a 12.30pm kick off, West Brom lead 2-0 thanks to Karlan Grant and a Kyle McFadzean own goal. In other leagues, Rangers, AC Milan and Barcelona are in action, and there are 13 ties in the FA Cup second round. If there’s any romance, you’ll hear it here fourth. Here’s a full list of our featured games, all 3pm kick-offs unless stated. Premier League West Ham 1-2 Chelsea (12.30pm) Newcastle v Burnley Southampton v Brighton Wolves v Liverpool Championship Coventry 0-2 West Brom (12.30pm) Scottish Premiership Rangers v Dundee Serie A AC Milan v Salernitana (2pm) La Liga Barcelona v Real Betis (3.15pm)The final whistle had barely blown before T-Rex’s I Love to Boogie began to boom out of the sound system at St James’ Park. Judging by the width of his smile, Eddie Howe was ready to dance with joy. Clearly emotional, Newcastle’s manager instead settled for hugging everyone in sight before joining his players on a lap of appreciation. As they circumnavigated the pitch, applauding fans in all four corners of the stadium, an outsider might have assumed Howe’s team had just qualified for Europe and were preparing to party. In reality they had narrowly won a first Premier League game of the season at the 15th attempt to inch off the bottom of the table. Granted, Newcastle are only above Norwich on goal difference, but, coupled with a rare clean sheet, Callum Wilson’s winning goal imbued everyone in black and white with renewed hope. No side in Premier League history has failed to win until December and avoided relegation but Howe’s players are now level on points with third-bottom Burnley and have improved significantly since he replaced Steve Bruce as manager last month. “There’s a long road ahead, but for sure we can stay up,” said Howe. “The spirit was exceptional, I’m very proud of the players.” Newcastle started in hesitant fashion, passing the ball too slowly and permitting Burnley to push them ever deeper. As the crowd grew increasingly edgy, Nick Pope found himself underemployed and Martin Dubravka tipped Johann Gudmundsson’s shot on to a post, Sean Dyche’s body language in the technical area assumed a slightly greater macho swagger than usual. Howe had adorned his team with a midfield diamond featuring Joelinton at its apex, but Josh Brownhill in particular stripped much of the early shine from this configuration, making some important interceptions. Further back James Tarkowski, who is apparently high on Newcastle’s January shopping list, put in a convincing audition at centre-half, persistently second-guessing home attacking manoeuvres. Then just as the murmurs of concern in the stands began to become audible, Pope stumbled and dropped Joe Willock’s cross under pressure from Fabian Schär. Opportunity beckoned for Callum Wilson and, having taken a steadying touch, Newcastle’s No 9 swivelled sharply before lashing the ball over Chris Wood, who was stationed on the goalline, from a technically challenging angle. “That mistake changed the game,” lamented Dyche who accepted the judgment of a VAR review that Pope had not been fouled and the goal was therefore legitimate. “Until then Newcastle looked nervous and we were the better side.” Having lost Maxwel Cornet, his liveliest forward, to a first-half injury, the Burnley manager’s early confidence gradually evaporated as the atmosphere turned electric and the ground echoed to choruses of “Eddie Howe’s black and white army”. Not that Burnley ever surrendered. Instead they delighted in engaging Newcastle in a series of often intensely physical subplots all over the pitch, with the duel between Dyche’s left-back, Charlie Taylor and the excellent Miguel Almirón proving particularly intriguing. The good news for Howe was that Almirón and co refused to be bullied into submission. Indeed, with Jonjo Shelvey getting the measure of Brownhill and Ashley Westwood in midfield, his side improved appreciably in the second half. No longer sitting so deep, they pressed further up the pitch at a considerably higher tempo than before. With Allan Saint-Maximin repeatedly destabilising Dyche’s defence, they looked almost unrecognisable from their earlier incarnation. Yet although Pope did well to tip Jonjo Shelvey’s shot over the bar and Nathan Collins deflected another from Almirón to safety, Newcastle’s recent defensive history ensured Howe could never quite relax. He seemed to wince whenever Burnley won a set piece. Shortly after one of Dyche’s substitutes, Jay Rodriguez, had a goal disallowed for offside, Howe sensibly switched to a back five, withdrawing Almirón and introducing the ever-reliable Federico Fernández. Awkward trips to Leicester and Liverpool followed by home dates with Manchester City and Manchester United now confront Newcastle, but at least they can now approach them with some genuine optimism, a sense that all is not necessarily lost. “We must be prepared to fight,” said Howe. “But, first, we have to enjoy this moment.”It is not only raining but pouring for Bath. For weeks they have been struggling to find a win. Now they are struggling to field a senior team. Northampton ran in six tries as Bath sank to nine defeats from nine league matches this season and by half-time they had lost their half-back pairing of Danny Cipriani and Ben Spencer to injuries. Their woes began before the first whistle sounded, with their lock Josh McNally withdrawing during the warm-up. Cipriani left the field for a head-injury assessment and never returned, Spencer went off with a serious-looking problem to his right arm and in the second half the lock Mike Williams was forced off after a blow to his head. With such a long injury list, it was not what Bath wanted – especially with a date to face Leinster in the Champions Cup next Saturday. “It’s very early to tell but they are all relatively significant injuries, I would suggest,” said Bath director of rugby Stuart Hooper. “Sometimes you look at things and think ‘What’s going on?’ But I will never let anybody say a word against the application that the players showed.” Bath’s last win in the Premiership was when Northampton visited The Rec in June, and apart from a brief wobble at the start of the second half this did not look like an occasion when Bath were going to break their duck. Not that the Northampton director of rugby was ecstatic with his side’s display. “Our performance was probably only six out of 10,” said Chris Boyd, whose side now sit third in the table. “We did well enough to get a good victory but it certainly wasn’t vintage.” Indeed, Saints were wasteful in attack at times and had they been more ruthless it would have been an even grimmer afternoon for Hooper and Co. Bath are in a very public search for a defence coach and the opening 15 minutes provided compelling evidence of the need for that appointment. Saints found space down the wings far too easily. Tommy Freeman fed Rory Hutchinson for try while fans were still taking their seats, then Freeman crossed for a touchdown of his own. How fortunate Bath were to have Sam Underhill on the field. While his team lacked coherence, the England flanker ran hard, tackled harder and polished off a lineout drive to get his team on the board. Saints had the bonus point in the bag before half-time, with their No 8, Juarno Augustus, scoring either side of a yellow card for Williams. Lewis Boyce salvaged an iota of respectability for Bath just before the break with a try from short range, but at 28-12 the contest already felt sealed in Saints’ favour. The tries continued to flow after the break and Bath briefly threatened a revival. Will Stuart touched down after the hooker, Sam Matavesi, was sent to the sin-bin for offside, but Courtnall Skosan responded with two tries for the hosts to settle the home crowd’s nerves. Boyd offered a consoling message for Hooper. “We went through a lean time last season during Covid and it’s tough being a coach and a player in that environment,” he said. “But at the end of the day they will come out of that hole.”Is this a glitch? Is the system experiencing an outage? It is a temptation that is best resisted, the urge to talk about this Chelsea team as a piece of fine-point engineering, to style Thomas Tuchel as a pure systems man, poring over his data charts, banging his dials, reconfiguring the flux capacitor with a bent hairpin. But still, something is happening here. A 3-2 defeat by an excellent West Ham at the London Stadium leaves Chelsea with two wins in their last five games, their lead at the top of the table dissipated, with a sense of the same kind of drag recurring, the same clog in the works. Even the greatest teams have vices to wrestle with. In this Tuchel Chelsea iteration it is a tendency to become overwrought in its passing patterns, hypnotised by its own possession. It would be unfair to say Chelsea have played the same game 53 times under Tuchel: there are always shifts of personnel, and of shape, too, when Romelu Lukaku plays. But there is also a very distinct set of patterns and, in their weaker passages, is a sense that Chelsea can get a little lost in themselves, that too many parts need to fire together to change the tempo or the emotional pitch of a game. By the end here Chelsea had 19 shots to 11, and 63% of possession, but seemed always to be building and rebuilding the same moment of pressure, like a car lost in the Stratford gyratory system, somehow always circling back to the same set of lights. First of all, this was a wonderful win for West Ham. Jarrod Bowen was a mischievous, high-craft attacking presence, battering away at the Chelsea centre-backs like a wasp against a window pane, albeit one that would eventually be cracked open. Kurt Zouma was smart and sure-footed, despite playing most of the game in various states of agony. And Declan Rice was simply himself, easing about with that familiarly stirring upright style, the kind of gait that sports writers find irresistible, that demands words like purring and gliding, a Rolls Royce, a Bentley Continental, a magnificent snorting steer. He is a wonderful footballer, the best in his position in the league, and a key reason why West Ham remain a genuine candidate to keep that fourth spot. As for Chelsea, there will be a temptation to blame goalkeeping error for this defeat. Édouard Mendy is probably allowed an off-day. He certainly had one. But to blame Mendy would be to shoot the messenger, to become distracted by the outcome not the process. Chelsea lost this game in the way they were always going to lose a game, prefigured in their last London derby when Mendy saved the day against Brentford. The London Stadium was a lovely, crisp, sunlit space at kick-off, and Chelsea started like league leaders. How do they score goals anyway? Pore back over this season and the most common route is an overload on the flank, a diagonal pass, usually the width of the box, followed by a shot back across goal. That or a set piece headed directly into the goal. It is a pretty narrow gauge through which to drive your entire attacking payload. But they keep doing it all the same. And they scored one of each here. First Hakim Ziyech’s beautiful, flat, zinging corner delivery found Thiago Silva all alone right in front of goal. West Ham equalised soon after, gifted the goal by an appalling piece of defensive play from Mendy, who took Jorginho’s back pass and tried to trick his way out of the arc of Bowen, a career outfield player with, even by Premier League standards, notably quick, scurrying feet. Mendy was forced to drag Bowen down. Manuel Lanzini clanged the penalty into the top corner. By half-time it was 2-1 to Chelsea. This time the diagonal pass came from Ziyech, the finish from Mason Mount, who volleyed the ball inside Lukasz Fabianski’s near post. But West Ham refused to fall away after half-time. For a while they shut Chelsea down, blocking up the flanks and denying them a real sight of goal for 20 minutes. Then they took the game away, equalising with a fine low finish from Bowen, then winning it via a shanked cross from Arthur Masuaka that fooled Mendy with its weird arc. And in fairness Chelsea are due a ripple. There was something of the miracle plate-spinner about the run to the Champions League trophy last season, the sense of every little tweak finding the right response. Lukaku was supposed to add another layer. But it is still essentially the same setup, a temporary fix that has worked so well it has become, for now, the permanent solution. There are missing parts, too. For all the massed ranks of Chelsea talent N’Golo Kanté is so well-suited to what Tuchel wants to do in those areas. The real absence is probably a fit, working, competent Timo Werner, an attacking player with that direct, high-speed style who doesn’t appear to be playing in a pair of wooden clogs. The last few weeks have felt like a sea change in this team, something reaching a caesura. Time for Tuchel to gear up for stage two.For more than 20 years, those who lived in and around the village of Lokhari in Uttar Pradesh, India, have prayed for the return of an important statue of a goddess that was stolen from a local temple. Now those prayers have been answered. The 8th-century goat-headed deity has been discovered thousands of miles away – in an English country garden, covered in moss. The sculpture will be formally given to the High Commission of India in London. It is a case that shames Sotheby’s, which offered the statue for sale in 1988, a few years before the auctioneer was to face serious allegations of having encouraged looting of ancient Indian religious sites. The recovery has been made possible by Christopher Marinello, a leading expert in recovering stolen, looted and missing art. “This piece is considered a god, not just a sculpture,” he said. “Looted objects are not simply financial assets for collectors and auction houses to profit from.” Vijay Kumar, co-founder of the India Pride Project, dedicated to recovering stolen religious artefacts, said: “It’s such a unique sculpture. It’s been a dream to find her. I was actually beginning to lose hope.” Both men criticised Sotheby’s for offering it as lot 92 in its London auction of 14 November 1988. It was estimated to fetch around £15,000. Today, its value would be far higher, not that it could be sold legitimately. In 1997, the statue was among looted antiquities featured in the former Observer journalist Peter Watson’s damning book, titled Sotheby’s: Inside Story. He and investigators from the Channel 4 Dispatches programme also secretly filmed Indian dealers claiming that they had supplied an entire container-load of objects, some of which were sold at Sotheby’s in London. It led to the auction house ending regular antiquities sales in London and tightening up procedures to ensure it would not handle an item if there was a suspicion it might have been looted abroad. The goat-headed deity was among yogini – female religious figures – that went missing between 1979 and 1982. Originally part of a temple, they had stood on a hill near Lokhari. Watson wrote that the site once had 20 sandstone images of gods, each roughly five feet high and with animal heads. He quoted Vidya Dehejia, then curator at the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, as saying: “Villagers report that in recent years a number were carted away in trucks by vandals.” Watson added that Dehejia had reproduced the goat in her book, Yogini: Cult and Temples: “It was identical to lot 92.” He said the smuggler was “someone who Sotheby’s had ample reason to believe trafficked in illegally excavated and/or stolen antiquities smuggled out of their country of origin”. Asked whether the piece had actually sold in 1988, Kumar said: “Sotheby’s, as I understand, pulled this from their auction, though that is still unclear. What was shocking was that they did not reveal the consignor or turn over the details to the Metropolitan police, even during the investigations in 1998, when Watson broke the story. “And, more shockingly still, is that it could remain in the UK for over two decades after being listed as stolen and missing in his book.” Marinello, a lawyer and founder of Art Recovery International, has recovered nearly £400m-worth of art on behalf of museums, governments and religious institutions, among others. He expressed dismay at the lack of help from Sotheby’s: “I wrote to them. They were wholly uncooperative.” He added: “My goal is to call out Sotheby’s for selling loot but more importantly to highlight the countless looted objects in English gardens and collections related to colonial history. Collectors should come forward – sort of an amnesty – through us, and we will guarantee them anonymity. Otherwise, they risk embarrassment or legal seizure in the future when they or their heirs attempt to sell the loot in the marketplace.” The sculpture was rediscovered after the owner, who wants to remain anonymous, decided to sell her home. The sculpture was in the garden when she bought it 15 years ago. She immediately ensured that the sculpture would be returned unconditionally. A spokesman for the High Commission of India paid tribute to Marinello’s pro bono work and described the loss of such antiquities as very painful: “These are our ancient heritage. When pieces go missing from temples, it creates a void.” Sotheby’s said: “This episode relates to something that allegedly occurred almost quarter of a century ago. Sotheby’s adheres to the highest standards in the industry, supported by a world-class compliance team, who work closely with outside authorities to ensure that we operate to the highest level of business integrity.”If, as expected, Ollie Robinson walks out at the Gabba on Wednesday it will be emotional, both for the cricket fan who attended the 2006‑07 tour at the age of 13 and the professional who feared his England career was over after one cap. Robinson’s rise to prominence this year is such that England’s hopes of regaining the Ashes could well hinge on how he fares. This is not to place undue pressure on the 28-year-old but rather reflect his centrality to Joe Root’s plans. Besides, he does not appear to be a cricketer with a fragile temperament. This was put to the test on his debut against New Zealand at Lord’s in June, when offensive tweets from his teenage past emerged on day one and a media storm erupted. Robinson not only held his own thereafter, but, after the short ban that divided public opinion, he returned to impressive effect against India, claiming 21 wickets that included Virat Kohli three times. Not that he did not fear the worst at the time. “I didn’t think at one stage I was going to be playing for England again,” Robinson says as he awaits the first Test in Brisbane. “It’s been quite a rollercoaster over the last six to eight months and to be here and be with the team, it’s an emotional time for me. “To get here and hopefully play the first Test is going to be huge for me, a massive achievement and something that I’ll never forget. Hopefully I’ll play and do well.” Robinson says he continues to work on himself “as a person” and is committed to ensuring the England dressing room is a welcoming, inclusive environment. His career is certainly one of self-improvement, having gone from freewheeling rookie batsman to metronomic fast-medium bowler who generates bounce from his 6ft 5in frame and sideways movement from a supple wrist, and tries to outthink opponents. These skills will be challenged in Australia, no doubt, but while it is his first time here as an England player, it is not unfamiliar territory. His father, Ian, whipped him out of school for an extended Christmas holiday during the 2006-07 Ashes and his memories of watching Andrew Flintoff’s side proved an inspiration, even if a 5-0 drubbing resulted. “I think Freddie got [89 at Sydney] one day and I remember thinking he just took it to the Aussies and growing up that’s how I wanted to play my cricket,” he says. “It’s inspiring to watch that as a youngster and now hopefully try and emulate it.” If that trip stirred the passions then spells in grade cricket with Sydney Tigers in 2012-13 and St George in 2017-18 helped developed the bowler during his winters. It was with the latter where he first crossed paths with Josh Hazlewood – a player he unashamedly tries to emulate – and also Trent Copeland, the twice-capped right-armer. Though Robinson’s numbers with St George did not leap off the page – a side injury made for a slow start – Copeland remembers seeing a potential international cricketer in the making who absorbed information “like a sponge”. “I don’t think his consistency was finely tuned,” Copeland says. “But you could see the way he let the ball go out of the wrist. “Some guys are born with it. The difference is the kiss off the wicket. Often guys when they talk about the best bowlers – Hazlewood is one – it feels like the ball comes up off the wicket and at them, rather than coming into the middle of the bat or skidding on. “Ollie’s height is a big asset but one of his strengths is going to be that steep bounce and the wrist right behind the ball. When you aren’t outright pace, it’s about being methodical, using angles, the crease. Those things make him a very, very good bowler.” Robinson’s third spell in Australia came last year when England Lions won an away “Test” against their equivalents for the first time and he took seven wickets with the pink Kookaburra ball. This year he has noted more lacquer on its red equivalent and, with the La Niña weather system bringing the prospect of cloud cover and perhaps greener pitches, he is optimistic about harnessing assistance. Operating in the low-to-mid 80s mph, this clearly would be welcome but Robinson has attributes that go beyond simply fishing for dynamite with the Dukes ball on green-tops. For one he is a meticulous planner who watches hours of footage, and is confident enough to publicly share plans for a quirky batsman such as Steve Smith. “He plays a lot of balls from deep in his crease, his contact points are a lot deeper than other batters. So my lengths might have to be slightly different to him,” Robinson says. “If you start to starve him of his scoring areas, he seems to want to score. He’s not someone that will just sit there and block all day. “Hopefully, he’ll make the mistake or if the ball is moving I can get him lbw or nick off. Out here it’s a bit harder with the ball not moving as much but I’ve looked at him and Marnus Labuschagne quite in depth and hopefully have a plan for both.” This studied approach was evident against India, as was a confrontational side that may be required in Australia. “I don’t think me as a person could keep my head down if I tried. I’m definitely going to be trying to get under the skins and try to unsettle them.” Time will tell if all these elements come together in the white heat of Ashes cricket but, after a turbulent start to his Test career, Robinson appears ready.The last time a journalist won a Nobel prize was 1935. The journalist who won it – Carl von Ossietzky – had revealed how Hitler was secretly rearming Germany. “And he couldn’t pick it up because he was languishing in a Nazi concentration camp,” says Maria Ressa over a video call from Manila. Nearly a century on, Ressa is one of two journalists who will step onto the Nobel stage in Oslo next Friday. She is currently facing jail for “cyberlibel” in the Philippines while the other recipient Dmitry Muratov, the editor-in-chief of Novaya Gazeta, is standing guard over one of the last independent newspapers in an increasingly dictatorial Russia. For Ressa, whose news site, Rappler, has had its licence suspended and who wasn’t even sure she would be able to go and pick up the award until Friday when the government granted her permission, the parallels between the modern moment and the 1930s are all too terrifyingly obvious. “It’s a huge signal that we are in that same kind of moment. We are on the verge of fascism. It’s different this time because it’s being enabled by technology but it’s also happening faster. There is this insidious manipulation happening at scale and humanity is wrapping its head around that.” It is, she says, “a sliding doors moment”. For Muratov, too – speaking in a rare interview over Zoom on a flying visit to New York last month – there is no doubt that the award is symbolic not just of an existential threat to press freedom but of a world on the brink. “I think our world has stopped loving democracy and has started reaching for dictatorships. Journalists are like independent media. They’re the defence line between dictatorship and war.” The question is whether the world will notice what Christophe Deloire, the president of Reporters Sans Frontières, calls “a moment of truth”. He believes that the awarding of the Nobel to Muratov and Ressa is a clear danger signal to the world. “The systems that have been established for democracy and human rights are clearly in danger. Everyone can see it. We can feel this sense of emergency. And this moment represents a crystallisation of multiple different crises.” If it is “a sliding doors moment”, for Muratov and colleagues in Russia, there seems to be no doubt about which way the doors are sliding. During his tenure at Novaya Gazeta, six journalists have been murdered including Anna Politkovskaya, who was shot dead in the elevator of her apartment building in 2006. But the present moment is chilling in a new and different way. And there are other parallels between 1935 and now. Von Ossietzky won the prize for a series of exposés about how Germany was deliberately breaking the Treaty of Versailles and secretly rearming. He tried to warn the world of the dangers of a newly militarised Germany and he didn’t live to see the consequences of his reporting borne out. He died in 1938. When I ask Muratov if we in western Europe should be afraid of Russia and its intentions, he doesn’t hesitate: “Yes, of course. There’s nothing to hide about that. Any dictatorship has very easy access to violence. Our country, my country, to my dismay, supports the [Belarus] dictator Lukashenko who’s essentially trying to start a war in the very centre of Europe.” Muratov has been a less public figure than Ressa. He’s been at the helm of Novaya Gazeta for decades and has found ways to keep operating even as other independent news outlets in Russia have been driven into the ground. It’s for this reason that he’s been a more controversial figure too. In Russia, the news of his Nobel received a mixed reaction. The most high-profile journalist in Russia, Alexei Navalny, who’s also the leader of the opposition, is currently in a Russian prison. It had been widely rumoured that he was in the running for the prize but that the Norwegian Nobel committee lost its bottle and caved in to pressure from the Kremlin. And, in Russia, Navalny supporters in particular were outraged and upset though Navalny himself sent his congratulations from prison, noting “what a high price those who refuse to serve the authorities have to pay”. Muratov isn’t put out by the question. “The majority of those people have in fact changed their opinion,” he says. “And I’m very grateful to Alexei Navalny for the congratulations.” When he was asked a day before the award was announced who he thought should get it, Muratov said Alexei Navalny. In Russia, there are increasing signs of darkness: that Russia is shifting, as an Economist headline put it last week, “from autocracy to dictatorship”. “The situation, unfortunately, is very dark. There is a Stalinisation of the country that is currently occurring. Once again secret services and the secret police are playing a huge role. Secret services always make the decision but never bear the responsibility for the consequences of said decision.” And Muratov is frank about the challenges – and accommodations – he’s had to make to keep operating. “I try to conduct dialogue with everyone but the cannibals,” he says from a cafe in New York on his first trip outside Russia since the prize had been announced. He’d travelled to attend the screening of a documentary, Fuck This Job, by another Russian journalist and filmmaker, Vera Krichevskaya, about the last independent TV station in Russia, Dozhd (Rain), and its battle-scarred owner, Natalya Sindeyeva. (The film will be shown on the BBC in January.) If Novaya Gazeta has managed to negotiate a line between maintaining its independent reporting and not being crushed by the Kremlin, Dozhd has fallen on the other side of that line. Both Dozhd and Sindeyeva have been labelled “foreign agents” by the government as has the oldest human rights organisation in Russia, Memorial. It’s the plight of Memorial – and hence the most fundamental human rights in Russia – that is currently terrifying them. The organisation is currently fighting for its survival in court after being accused of “justifying extremism”. For Muratov, Sindeyeva and Krichevskaya, together in New York, it’s another sickening irony: the organisation was founded by a Nobel peace prize winner, Andrei Sakharov, and set up as a deliberate effort to prevent the country falling again to totalitarianism. Sindeyeva calls it “a catastrophe. We believe it’s the symbol at the bottom, when you can no longer go further down.” In Russia, she says, Stalin is being rehabilitated and Memorial was set up to remember “the victims of Stalinist repressions”. For Deloire, the recognition of Ressa, Muratov and the importance of journalism brings a glimmer of hope. It’s a profound moment, he says, because it “crystallises the problems but also it crystallises the need to focus on solutions”. He points to President Biden’s summit for democracy, also taking place this week, as another faint ray of hope. But it’s a precarious line. Observers say the threat against Ressa is a taste of worse to come in the Philippines, where the son of the former dictator, Ferdinand Marcos, has joined forces with the daughter of the current authoritarian president, Rodrigo Duterte. Ressa has spent much of the last four years trying to point out that none of this is happening in isolation and that the “assault on truth” is doing the same to western democracies as it has done to her country. Muratov is even more gloomy. “It’s terrifying that countries that have been living in a democracy for so many years are rolling towards a dictatorship. That’s just a terrifying thought.” Meanwhile, he says he’ll do what newspaper editors do: edit his newspaper for as long as he’s able. Or, as long as Vladimir Putin lets him.The lady in the white mask is quite the gracious host, mwah-mwahing her pals, hugs-a-go-go, writing thoughtful little Post-it notes, blessing her set with her exclusive attention. Only this is not a gathering of socialites over canapés, but a child sexual abuse trial, and her friends are fancy lawyers, and the people who once served and allegedly serviced her and her ex-lover Jeffrey Epstein, body and soul, seem to be in no mood for mwah-mwah. Welcome to the cocktail party from hell, or to give the proceedings their proper name, the trial of the United States of America v Ghislaine Maxwell. Staged in the grand US federal court building in a half-empty Manhattan, it is a grimly fascinating study, if you side with the defence, in false memory syndrome and gold-digging. Or, if you favour the prosecution, how power and money robbed a whole series of victims – each more child than woman – of their innocence and pretty much got away with it. Until, perhaps, now. Maxwell’s defence lawyer Bobbi Sternheim pooh-poohed the prosecution as nonsense from the get-go, grabbing the best zinger of the opening bout: “Ever since Eve has been blamed for tempting Adam with an apple, women have been blamed for things men have done… She is not Jeffrey Epstein. She is not anything like Jeffrey Epstein.” Her lawyers are good: they swagger well for the big money she is paying them. The prosecution are younger, thinner, paler, mostly women. Their prose is flatter. To set the scene, here is the backstory to the trial. Maxwell is the daughter of the late Robert Maxwell – mad, rich and a monster who abused everyone around him, including his ninth child, Ghislaine. Robert Maxwell fell off his yacht, the Lady Ghislaine, on 5 November 1991. Disgrace followed when it emerged that the tycoon had stolen about £400m from the Mirror Group’s pensioners. Overnight, Maxwell lost her access to private jets and helicopters and limousines and fancy dinner parties. She fled London to New York and found Epstein. He was the second monster in her life. She got it all back – the private jets and helicopters and limousines and fancy dinner parties with Bill Clinton and Donald Trump etc. And in return, all she had to do, the prosecution alleges, was to find him fresh children. Maxwell loved Epstein from when they first met in 1991 to the late 1990s when they split up but she carried on running his life for some years after. The last known photo of the two of them together is in 2005. After Epstein killed himself in prison in 2019, she ran for the hills, to avoid the prying media, her friends said. To the US authorities, she was hiding from them, and after almost a year they tracked her down to the “boonies” in New Hampshire. She has spent the last 500 days or more in prison awaiting trial in a cell 6ft by 9ft, the lights on, the peephole clicking open every 15 minutes or so and no one at all to mwah-mwah. Was Maxwell a handmaiden to child sexual abuse? Her defence is both that she had no idea what was happening and that it never happened at all. The first witness in the case for the prosecution was Epstein’s pilot Larry Visoski, a deep-voiced come- fly-with-me who recalled high-profile passengers such as Andrew Windsor, Bill Clinton, the astronaut John Glenn and actor Kevin Spacey. Visoski was pretty artful in his answers, saying he never saw any sexual abuse or any signs of it whatsoever. But the man who flew the Boeing nicknamed the “Lolita Express” did say that he saw two very young women in the company of Epstein and Maxwell, one of them being Virginia Roberts. She in 2001, when aged 17, was photographed by Epstein next to Maxwell and Windsor, his arm around her bare waist, in London. Windsor is also known as Prince Andrew, also known as the Duke of York. Roberts – now Virginia Roberts Giuffre – is not going to be a witness in this trial, nor Windsor charged. The second very young woman the pilot identified was the next witness, anonymised as “Jane”. More than two decades on, she is still a woman of stunning beauty and elegant detachment. Her evidence was that she first came across Epstein and Maxwell in the summer of 1994, when she was eating an ice-cream at a holiday camp in Michigan. Her father had died the previous year, her family was poor, her relationship with her grieving mother troubled. She lived in Palm Beach – trailer-park land – and Maxwell and Epstein were delighted at the coincidence because they, too, had a home in Palm Beach (where the rich people live). Maxwell acted the role of an “older sister”, took her to the movies, went swimming with her in Epstein’s pool, joked about sex, asked whether Jane had a boyfriend. Soon Epstein made his move: “He pulled me on top of himself and proceeded to masturbate on me. I was terrified and felt gross and I felt ashamed.” She was 14. Once induced into what, to me, sounds like a child sex cult, Jane did as she was told. She said that Maxwell and Epstein would lead her up the circular stairwell in their Palm Beach home and demonstrate how Epstein liked to be massaged. Maxwell sometimes touched her breasts, Jane said: “I felt ashamed.” As Jane spoke, Maxwell, restless, would put on and take off her reading glasses, lean forward and pass Post-it notes to her lawyers. Then it was their turn to pull the wings off this awkward butterfly. They say that Jane and other accusers received big money from a $121m (£90m) fund set up by Epstein’s estate to compensate victims, implying the more the victims squeal, the more money they get. Sternheim called Jane a “very successful actress” who never accused Maxwell of wrongdoing before Epstein’s death. When Maxwell attorney Laura Menninger asked whether she told family members and close friends about Maxwell’s alleged sexual abuse, Jane said: “I don’t know. I was very reluctant to give details. I didn’t want to share it with them in the first place.” Challenged by the defence team on why her memory of Maxwell’s abuse only occurred after Epstein’s death, Jane said: “Memory is not linear.” Jane is a famous actor in a big US soap opera. Menninger asked Jane: is an actor “someone who plays the role of a fictional character … someone who takes lines borrowed from a writer?” “Yes,” said Jane. Menninger asked if Jane had played someone stalked by serial killers, an overly protective mother, a car-crash victim and a prostitute. “Not my favourite story line,” replied Jane bleakly. Towards the end of several hours of cross-examination, Jane seemed to retire into herself. She kept on saying “I don’t recall”, as if she was being tortured and she just wanted it to be over. At the very end she was challenged once again about the $5m she got from Epstein’s estate. She replied: “I wish I would have never received that money in the first place.” She was crying. Jane’s story struck every reporter I spoke to as entirely compelling, of somebody who does not tell the authorities until it is too late because she feared falling out with her mother over bringing the family name into disrepute. It does not mean what she is saying is not true but that she had a very good reason not to go there. Still, her seeming withdrawal into herself on the second day would have been seen by the defence as a “win”. The third witness was “Matt”, a former boyfriend of Jane, who backed up her story; the fourth witness was a butler, Juan Alessi. A squat, thick-set rubber ball of a man, in a black suit and yellow tie, he worked at the Palm Beach house from 1990 to 2002. He, too, identified Roberts Giuffre and Jane as being at the house – and scores of other very young women over the years. He said that Maxwell told him: “Mr Epstein doesn’t like to be looked at in his eyes. Never look at his eyes, look in another part of the room and answer him.” Alessi said Maxwell introduced a 58-page booklet titled “household manual”, a book on etiquette. The defence said: “You know they hired a countess to write the book?” Alessi replied: “I don’t know that, sir.” One bit read: “Do not eat or drink in front of Mr Epstein, Ms Maxwell and their guests … Remember that you see nothing, hear nothing, say nothing except to answer a question direct to you. Respect their privacy.” Alessi understood that to be “a kind of warning” and implied that Maxwell was a tough taskmaster: “It was slavery.” He confirmed he first met Jane in 1994. “I don’t know exactly how old she was but she appeared to be young. I would say 14, 15.” (Jane had said she was picked up and driven to Epstein’s house by a chauffeur – a “sweet Latin-American man”. Alessi is from Ecuador.) Alessi recalled that he occasionally found sex toys on Epstein’s massage table. When the defence came to rip his wings off, Alessi fought back, hard. Challenged that he had stolen $6,000 from the house after he quit, he admitted it, but he stuck firmly to his guns that he never arranged sex massages for Epstein, only drove girls to and from under order. But no one complained? he was asked. “I wish they had complained,” he said. “Then I could have done something about it.” The crooked butler had got his dignity back. US law says that federal trials like this can’t be televised, and Covid restrictions mean that space in the court room proper is limited. I watched proceedings beamed live into an annexe at the court along with members of the world’s media. Before the jury was brought in on Friday, Judge Alison Nathan – as sharp as tin tacks – heard legal argument, the defence asking for photos of ‘small’ schoolgirl uniforms not to be shown to the jury because they had been taken in his New York mansion and so irrelevant. The judge ruled in favour of the prosecution, finding that the photos proved his interest in underage girls. What is striking about the prosecution case is that there are no tapes, audio or visual, of abuse, despite a lot of reporting suggesting Epstein was a blackmailer. What remains is the evidence of the individual witnesses – such as Jane, who claim they were abused – which can be pulled apart, and the circumstantial evidence of witnesses such as the pilot and the butler. Three more women who say they were abused when they were very young will take the stand as the trial proceeds. But what will the jury make of all this? The #MeToo generation of young women does not appear to be represented at all, a result, perhaps, of the defence gaming the jury selection process. The jurors appear to be largely young men of colour and elderly, not well-off white women – the kind of people I see on my subway train. You can see the trick the defence has played, and then you reflect that these are exactly the kind of people who have spent their whole lives cleaning up rich people’s shit. If so, that does not bode well for the mwah-mwah princess in the dock. That said, on Friday lunchtime I hurried off to get a bite to eat in a nearby coffee shop. Sitting at another table, on his own, was Maxwell’s brother Kevin. I last saw him in the flesh in 1996 when, reporting for the Observer, he and his older brother, Ian, were found not guilty of helping their father, Robert, steal £400m from the Mirror Group pensioners. They had fancy lawyers too. The Maxwells have a history of getting off and – all over the world, but especially in the US – money can trump justice. The trial continues. John Sweeney’s podcast is Hunting Ghislaine. His book of the same name will be published in the spring.England’s Roses secured an emphatic victory over Jamaica and their first series win against the Sunshine Girls since 2013. From the blow of the first whistle Jess Thirlby’s side romped to victory, using the full depth of the bench to reinforce their Commonwealth Games winning credentials ahead of the Birmingham 2022 challenge. Last week’s sluggish start by England was cast into distant memory as the Roses burst emphatically out of the blocks. Eleanor Cardwell, rewarded by Thirlby for the force of impact she made in the first Test victory, continued to wreak havoc on the Sunshine Girls’ star-studded defence. A rejection by Jamaica’s world-class defender Shamera Sterling on the Manchester Thunder player at 10-4 was a sharp reminder to the crowd of what the Jamaicans are individually capable of when given space, but it did little to dent either Cardwell or the Roses’ momentum. Down in Jamaica’s attacking end, a starting seven changed by Connie Francis struggled to penetrate. All 1.98m of Jhaniele Fowler was efficiently neutralised by the iron-cast partnership of Eboni Usoro-Brown, Layla Guscoth and Beth Cobden. An on-the-buzzer goal from the circle’s perimeter by Jamaica’s skipper closed the quarter a whopping 21-13 in England’s favour. A visibly fired-up Jamaica entered the second quarter determined to undo some of the damage inflicted on them in the first 15. Sterling, now in at goal keeper to try to answer the Sunshine Girls’ Cardwell problem, made an impression. Two errant goals off the bat by Jo Harten and a more efficient Jamaica forced Thirlby into her first change. Helen Housby replaced the shooter. As the Cardwell-Housby connection oiled up England rediscovered their first-quarter form. Jamaica, lacking in execution with 12 unforced errors to England’s five, burnt out and England went into the break the sharper and more authoritative side. A 16-goal advantage in the hosts’ favour heading into the third was quickly extended to 20 by En gland as Jamaica’s error count headache rumbled on. Buoyed by a score-line showing her seven’s dominance Thirlby turned to her bench and gave those that had been responsible for England’s lamentably slow start last week a chance to redeem themselves. With tested combinations the key in Thirlby’s eyes to England walking away in Birmingham back-to-back gold medallists next year, the Roses’ head coach did not hesitate to throw all her players under the cosh. The up-and-coming Sophie Drakeford-Lewis was tried at wing attack and England’s most capped player, Jade Clarke, put in at centre. As the klaxon heralded the 66-47 win the home crowd roared. With back-to-back series wins, first against the world champions, New Zealand, away on their turf and then Jamaica here on home soil, the Roses have never dared to look so formidable. Thirlby, however, was reticent to start the revelries just yet: “I’m not the kind of coach that gets too carried away too soon,” the Roses’ head coach said after her side’s triumphant win, “so we’ll quietly celebrate the series win this evening and get ourselves ready for tomorrow. “To get a series win against both New Zealand and a series win against Jamaica back here is an incredible achievement and not one that has been done in such a short time frame by any England team so it certainly helps to build confidence and that is an important part of that jigsaw heading into a major tournament.” The three-Test series will conclude on Sunday with the final match taking place once again under the lights of Nottingham’s Motor Point Arena.One of the biggest businesses in New York City has developed a worrying hole: bagels. According to the New York Times, bagel shop owners are facing a shortage of cream cheese, a culinary calamity that could upend how tens of thousands New Yorkers begin their day. “This is bad,” Pedro Aguilar, a manager at Pick-a-Bagel, told the paper. “This is very bad.” As of Friday afternoon, Pick-a-Bagel predicted its schmear supply would only last until Monday. Zabar’s, an upscale deli in Manhattan’s Upper West Side, only had enough cream cheese to last 10 days. “Begging is one of my plans, which I have done, and it’s helped,” said Scott Goldshine, Zabar’s general manager. Goldshine said he had contacted eight distributors recently, to no avail. “If anybody’s got it,” he said of the creamy comestible, “let them call me.” The cream cheese crisis comes amid supply chain problems which have roiled the US throughout the Covid-19 pandemic, disrupting availability of items ranging from appliances to apparel. Some New York bagel shops have also reported problems in finding sandwich meats including ham and beef tongue, the Times said. Many bagel stores in New York use Philadelphia-brand cream cheese – made by the Kraft Heinz food conglomerate – as a base. Unlike the Philadelphia available to most retail consumers, it is sold “unprocessed and unwhipped”, allowing shops to add their own flavorings, the Times said. But for the past several weeks, companies which supply bagel shops said, orders from manufacturers have not kept up with demand, imperiling the most beloved topping for bagels, the ring-shaped bread synonymous with New York City. “I’ve never been out of cream cheese for 30 years,” Joseph Yemma, owner of F&amp;H Dairies, which distributes products to many New York bagel stores, told the Times. “There’s no end in sight.” Kraft-Heinz said there was a surge in demand and it had ramped up shipping by 35%. “We continue to see elevated and sustained demand across a number of categories where we compete,” the company said. “As more people continue to eat breakfast at home and use cream cheese as an ingredient in easy desserts, we expect to see this trend continue.” Frank Mattera, one of the owners of Bagelsmith in Brooklyn, was among proprietors hunting cream cheese in other states. He told the Times he planned on picking up 2,000lb in neighboring New Jersey. “I’ll jump in my truck and I’ll drive to northern Jersey and pick it up, but I usually wouldn’t have to go that far,” Mattera said. “You make a phone call and it’s dropped off to you.”Labor says it will fund up to 20,000 extra university places over 2022 and 2023, and provide access to 465,000 free Tafe places in nominated areas of skills shortages, if Anthony Albanese wins the next federal election. The new skills and higher education commitments, worth $1.2bn, will be unveiled by the Labor leader at a campaign-style rally in Sydney on Sunday. The Tafe initiative will cost $621m over the forward estimates, and the university commitment costs $481.7m. With federal parliament now finished for the year, and the election looming in the first half of next year, Labor has moved into campaign mode. Sunday’s skills package is Labor’s second major election policy announcement in two days. Labor unveiled its new climate change policy on Friday, which includes an emissions reduction target for 2030 of 43% and a commitment to boost the share of renewables in the national electricity market to 82%. Labor says providing free Tafe places in targeted areas will help rebuild the industries hit hardest by the pandemic, like hospitality and tourism, as well as meeting current and future needs in the care economy, including jobs in child care, aged care, disability care, nursing and community services. The funding will provide more than 465,000 free Tafe places, including 45,000 new places. The package also includes a $50m technology fund to improve IT facilities, workshops, laboratories and telehealth simulators. Labor will aim to prioritise the new funding for universities which are able to offer additional courses in national priority areas, such as clean energy, advanced manufacturing, health and education, or where there are skills shortages. The opposition says funding for additional university places will help the higher education sector recover from the pandemic. Universities did not have access to the wage subsidy jobkeeper, and the closure of the border meant institutions lost revenue from international students. Universities are estimated to have lost a total of 35,000 staff during the pandemic after government decisions effectively excluded them from the wage subsidy scheme. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Policy documents circulated in advance of Sunday’s rally say universities will receive funding over six years from 2021-22 for the additional 20,000 commencing university places across 2022 and 2023 in national priority areas. The additional funding will be allocated to universities based on the ability of institutions to offer additional places in areas of national priority and skills shortage; their programs to recruit underrepresented groups “like those who are the first in their family to go to university, and people in regional, remote and outer-suburban areas, and First Nations people”; and student demand. In a statement circulated ahead of the rally, Albanese said the skills and higher education program would address some of the cuts to vocational training and apprenticeships. “Today we have 85,000 fewer apprenticeships and traineeships compared to 2013,” the Labor leader said. “At the same time, it’s getting harder and more expensive to go to uni.” Albanese said the proportion of applicants who get an offer of a place at university “has fallen every year since the Liberal government slashed university funding – this year, the offer rate fell to its lowest level in years”. “This has happened in the face of the stark economic reality that nine out of 10 jobs of the future will require a VET qualification or a university degree.” Albanese said an intervention was necessary because one in four businesses were experiencing skills shortages and “at the same time there are two million Australians who are either looking for a job or want to work more hours”. Labor’s announcement follows a separate higher education commitment from the Morrison government. Under that proposal, unveiled by the prime minister during a speech to business leaders late last month, four “trailblazer” universities would receive a funding boost of more than $200m for research hubs to advance Australian manufacturing.The drought and heatwaves that seared eastern Australia in the lead-up to the 2019-20 black summer bushfires killed as much as 60% of the trees in some areas that escaped the fires, according to new research. While Australian species are typically hardened to extreme conditions, the record heat and dryness of 2019 pushed some common tree varieties beyond their thresholds, potentially threatening whole ecosystems if they don’t grow back. Working off information about diebacks supplied to the citizen science website the Dead Tree Dectective, researchers at Western Sydney University’s Hawkesbury Institute for the Environment assessed the health of 18 tree species across 15 New South Wales forest and woodlands. Measurements were taken during the drought and about eight to 10 months after good rains, finding trees deaths reached 60-70% in the worst affected areas. The sites examined ranged from the northern tablelands down to the southern highlands region of the state. “There was some snow gums up around Armidale – which is the northern extent of their range – they were hit very badly,” said Brendan Choat, an associate professor at the university and a lead author of a paper to be submitted to the Frontiers in Plant Science journal. “About 60% of them didn’t recover in any way.” Red stringybark trees and brittle gums were among other species that suffered losses of up to 50% in the sites studied. Choat said that visits after the rains can mask the extent of forest loss, with lots of grass returning and pioneer species coming back. “But a lot of the bigger trees amongst those [green] patches are just sitting there dead,” he said. The study found “trees with a severely compromised canopy immediately after drought did not manage to recover even with prolonged favourable water availability”. The loss of leaf cover indicated a failure in trees’ internal hydraulic system that draws moisture from the roots to the canopy. Researchers are debating whether younger or older trees fared worse. Choat said smaller trees, with less developed root systems, appeared more vulnerable as they were less able to tap into soil moisture and groundwater than larger ones. Still, many trees aged 40 years or older also perished, underscoring the severity of conditions for plants that were “superbly adapted” for Australian conditions. Some of the trees that survived the drought also struggled afterwards. With root loss, they were susceptible to being blown over, particularly if soils later became saturated. The widespread loss of often common species could trigger the transformation of ecosystems from forests to woodlands, or woodlands to scrublands, Choat said. But such trends were difficult to predict given the limited modelling on vegetation done in Australia compared with many northern hemisphere areas. Uncertainties also remain about how the climate will change with global heating. “Even if you have very high rainfall years [and] you have more extreme droughts and more intense fire burning between those, that will not be enough to maintain some of those systems,” he said. “You’re more likely to get some big changes there.” Philip Spark, an ecologist based in Tamworth in northern NSW, recently photographed large areas of dieback near his town and land between Bundarra and Uralla. Areas affected include the endangered Blakely’s red gum and white box ecological communities. “There are whole hillsides of dead trees,” Spark said. “It certainly crossed a threshold. “It’s definitely by far the worst I’ve seen [in terms of mass dieback] and I’ve been here since 1964.” The potential change of tree species could have far-reaching effects because such shifts would alter the availability and seasonality of food resources for insects, birds and other species, Spark said. “It remains to be seen if they’ll regenerate down the track.”There is no better representation of the decline of the English upper class into the global rich’s servant class than Ben Elliot. On the one hand, the co-chairman of the Tory party is now a rent collector, hauling in money for the Johnson administration from the Russian rich and native hedge fund bosses. On the other, he is an actual servant: an upmarket flunkey, to be sure, praised by society magazines for his “puppyish schoolboy charm”, but a flunkey nonetheless. Elliot is a founder of the Quintessentially “concierge” service that gives the super-rich anything they want: luncheon on an iceberg; the Sydney Harbour bridge closed for a wedding proposal. There’s nothing Elliot won’t do for paying customers up to and including arranging a meeting with our future sovereign. Camilla, Duchess of Cornwall, is Elliot’s aunt and it appears that no considerations of good form or good manners have prevented him monetising the connection. Not that the prince appears to mind. A Quintessentially advert interrupts a montage of shots of yachts and celebrities to quote his royal highness as saying he is “particularly grateful” to Quintessentially for organising a party he attended. Members of Elliot’s Quintessentially club donate to the Conservatives. The Conservatives gave Elliot £1.4m of taxpayers’ money in 2016 to “attract the right high-value individual investors to the UK through bespoke programmes”. If on arrival, those high-value individuals went on to show how valuable they were by hiring Quintessentially and donating to the Tories, the circle would be complete. Upstairs has moved downstairs in the remains of the Tory day and a large segment of British capitalism is now employed as the best servants money can buy. The law, PR, City, estate agency and banking know that easy riches come from serving the large part of the world where it pays to forget Balzac’s warning that the secret of a great fortune no one can explain is invariably an undetected crime. For want of an agreed name I propose “Corruptistan” to cover Russia and the ex-Soviet states, the kleptocracies of Africa and the Middle East and probably soon China as the communist elite learns how to expatriate its wealth. Given the secrecy of the financial system, the defunding of the police and regulatory authorities and the English libel law, no one can say how many in the UK are living off immoral earnings. But two statistics and one quotation give us a measure of the UK’s dependency culture. Graeme Biggar, of the National Economic Crime Centre, said a “disturbing proportion” of criminal money from the old Soviet Union is “laundered through UK corporate structures”. Companies House, meanwhile, has become a front organisation for organised crime. So welcoming is it to criminals that 335,000 of its listed companies do not reveal the name of their beneficial owners. And 4,000 of the names it appears to reveal turn out on close inspection to belong to children aged two or under. Last month, Professor Sadiq Isah Radda, a Nigerian anti-corruption official, encapsulated the consequences of the UK’s tolerance of theft. An opponent of corruption in Nigeria, home to countless online scams? A joke figure, you might think. But Radda spoke with a seriousness no government minister can muster when he said the UK was “the most notorious safe haven for looted funds in the world today”. The corruption we facilitate destablised Nigeria and, he might have added, many other countries besides. Last week, a handful of MPs asked why the Conservatives were so peculiarly soft on this particular crime. In 2017, they promised a law that would compel the foreign owners of UK property to reveal their identities. (The willingness to allow private and state criminals to launder their wealth anonymously through the prime London property market was Radda’s main charge against Boris Johnson.) Nothing has been heard of this bold “anti-corruption strategy” since. Likewise, the government has said it wants to stop Companies House being a crime scene where anyone can set up a firm without proof of identity or the most cursory checks. Even the Conservative party appeared to agree that it should not be harder to apply for a passport than to set up a shell company. But once again nothing happened.As for the recommendations in the Russia report on money laundering, they vanished as soon as they were made. The SNP’s Alison Thewliss asked: “I wonder who benefits from this delay. Is it the oligarchs and those to whom they donate?” Pat McFadden, Labour’s shadow chief secretary to the Treasury, asked Conservative MPs why they thought “their party has been such an attractive destination” for £2m in gifts from Russian donors.” Change must come soon or not at all. Britain has benefited so greatly from the wealth of the corrupt we may soon be at the stage where we cannot afford to clean ourselves up. So many people are making so much money, what was once outrageous has become normal. This to my mind is why the security services and the judges just shrug when oligarchs with links to hostile foreign powers use the intimidatory costs of England’s unreformed legal system to menace critics. No one likes hard questions about a nation’s guilty secrets, not even the men and women who are professionally obliged to ask them. Labour certainly believes that tolerance of fraud is now part of the government’s economic strategy and the Treasury wants to loosen what few protections exist to compensate the financial services industry for the Brexit debacle. Cynical readers may not care as long as the UK can wallow in streams of hot money. They should recall how many times con artists have tried to fleece them. Online fraud is the crime you are most likely to suffer from, yet nowhere in the government’s online safety bill is there a word about fighting the fraudsters who flourish on social media platforms. Once the Tories started turning a blind eye, they found it impossible to stop. You cannot profit from economic crimes committed abroad while enjoying the rule of law at home. The presence of the global plutocracy’s valets at the top of government and society shows the UK no longer even bothers to pretend that it can. • Nick Cohen is an Observer columnisttoWith the first Ashes Test almost upon us, some things have finally started to settle. In Australia, Tim Paine’s exit as captain and player has been absorbed, with not much time needed to get used to Pat Cummins as the entirely expected successor. A new wicketkeeper and a new vice-captain have been chosen, largely as predicted. In the UK, five weeks after releasing the statement that “Yorkshire County Cricket Club is pleased to announce the actions it has taken” over its investigation into racism, which recommended no action against any of the offenders, the club’s new management has sacked the old staff en masse. Given Yorkshire’s intransigence until now, it was the only viable method of slate-cleaning. Accordingly, the cricket administrators of both countries will be eager to claim some goodwill on entering this marquee series. Unfortunately, things are the opposite of being settled in the arena of the virus. You know the one – it has had enough airtime by now. Having seen a new variant, suddenly Australian politicians are back to border closures. The federal government has banned arrivals from some African countries – though not European where cases have been found. In any case, the variant is already in New South Wales. Both Ashes teams have done two weeks of quarantine to enter Queensland on the expectation that travel from there would be open and easy to South Australia, then Victoria, then NSW. Cricket Australia could have avoided that by changing the order of Tests, given Queensland’s proximity to its vaccination target, but the players accepted a relaxed resort quarantine near Brisbane was not significantly more onerous than the precautions they would have needed to take in a training camp in Melbourne or Sydney. But now South Australia is an unknown: some political reporters were briefed on Saturday that a border closure to Victoria and New South Wales was imminent, only for the premier to hold a press conference announcing that it would not happen. This kind of non-announcement tends to be a softener for the change to be implemented later. The players would probably still get into Adelaide from Brisbane, but almost all of the media contingent would be stuck in Melbourne or Sydney, where broadcasters and journalists have planned to cover the match off television to avoid Queensland quarantine. Western Australia’s government has surely ended the last wispy notion of a Perth Test, despite Cricket Australia clinging to the phantasm even as daylight dissolves it. For the teams to play in Perth they would have to fit two weeks of quarantine into the four free days after the Sydney Test, something beyond even the considerable adaptability of Marnus Labuschagne. Another venue is required, several are being considered. Cricket Tasmania is now lobbying CA to get that match, days after savaging CA for encouraging local boy Paine’s resignation over sexual text messages sent to a colleague. “The treatment afforded to the Australian Test captain by Cricket Australia has been appalling and the worst since Bill Lawry over 50 years ago,” was the line from CT chair, Andrew Gaggin. He has been less forthright about the Federal Court sexual harassment case brought against the institution on 26 November by the recipient of Paine’s messages, with reports that at least two other CT employees behaved similarly. CT made sure news outlets knew the organisation had accused the woman of theft, but not that she had already lodged a harassment claim before their accusation was made. Shades of Yorkshire in Hobart. Just another calm and easy Ashes buildup then? At least the sun has come out in Brisbane after 10 days of torrents. The percentages on that sample may not be favourable, but it shows good conditions are possible even under the weeping of La Niña. Boards in trouble always hope people will stop paying attention when the matches start. It is also true that when matches start, it is usually a relief. So it would sting if the first Test is a parade of rain delays. This southern summer was supposed to be the free and easy one, after two bad years. But complications threaten. As any kid who has read We’re All Going on a Bear Hunt knows: we can’t go over it. We can’t go under it. We’ll have to go through it.There are days when the most challenging part of my job is not to fall off my chair in response to some breathtakingly candid comment from a panellist. Here’s an example. Last month, we were discussing the PM’s bold announcement that despite signing on to a request for countries to strengthen their 2030 emission reduction goals by next year, just hours later, Morrison declared his government had no intention of doing anything of the sort. Panellist: “Scott Morrison has one job – I’m not defending him, just want to make that very plain – he’s got one job at the moment – that job is: win the next election.” Me: “You serious?” Panellist: “Yeah, course.” Me: “He’s the prime minister of Australia and you say his only job is to win the next election?” The panellist, who had earlier explained he was indeed anxious for effective action on climate change, looked at me blankly and explained, well yes. That’s just how politics works. A singular focus on winning was indeed everyone’s expectation of Morrison: the PM’s himself, the Liberal party’s, and indeed it was simply the convention in politics. Winning. Duh. As the exchange became more tense and the panellist increasingly baffled, I explained: “I made a promise to myself a couple of weeks ago that whenever anybody treated politics as a game on this program, I would pull them up.” Why? Because any acceptance that politics is just a game reinforces the idea that the only real aim of the whole effort is power. To remain in power. And that nothing is possible unless you play it like this. In his newly published profile of the prime minister, The Game: A Portrait of Scott Morrison, author Sean Kelly notes the idea that politics is a game – a sport – infects political reporting. “For example, in reporting on the Medevac legislation much focus was on the political effect of the new laws and their impact on the election. The suffering of real people vanished, replaced by the discussion of the game of politics.” “Everything is analysed in terms of the political strategy being pursued … removed from the realm of literal meaning, taking place in an area in which everything has a hidden meaning,” Kelly writes. Now clearly not everything was analysed in these terms. The desperate need to ensure asylum seekers, kept in offshore detention, had access to timely, quality medical care was well covered in many quarters. But the second, dispiriting, depressing, demoralising beat of the discussion was always how the issue of immigration remained a powerful, if toxic, political issue. A “winner”. What if this sort of blank-faced acceptance of the political status quo, the hidden political meaning of every exercise of executive authority, is turning people off even more than outright corruption and pork barrelling? What if it’s this brand of discourse that’s feeding a weary cynicism about the whole exercise of democracy? In fact, lately I’ve wondered, what if turning people off is the whole point? What if the aim of cynical politicking is to repel us with objectionable political behaviour and the attendant giddy media reflections of who’s winning, who’s losing, who gets the bragging rights? The result being we disengage and leave politics to the political insiders? In the past week, it was possible to hear endless discussions about a proposed federal anti-corruption commission without hearing much detailed discussion of the competing drafts of proposed legislation. How much power should the “political police” have? Should commission hearings be held in public? Who should be allowed to blow the whistle on corruption in public life? Much reporting was just about the politics. Why wouldn’t ordinary people feel left out? Some years ago, at what I imagine my host thought to be a high-powered dinner party (what on earth was I doing there, I still wonder) a corporate insider (female, not a regular Drum guest) gently took me aside and asked me why I didn’t have more “proper people” on the program. I sensed she was speaking about herself. Perhaps more out of boredom than a genuine sense of curiosity, I asked what were the recognisable features of a “proper person”. She explained that they were senior people who already had a voice in politics and corporate life. Those who already had power. That’s who we should be listening to on the 6pm ABC nightly current affairs program, a show dedicated to a broad discussion of the social, political and community issues of the day. Glass of wine in hand, I pushed on relentlessly, to get her to the bottom of this idea of “the proper person”. “Who isn’t a proper person?” I asked. Sensing things were becoming awkward, this woman replied it was those younger people, people you’ve never heard of … you know, not “proper people”. With a federal election looming and so much at stake, and with Labor pursuing a “small target” approach to policy, perhaps we could re-imagine coverage of this election campaign as listening to voices of “improper people”. Heaven knows enough of them have had their lives and businesses affected by bushfires, Covid and recession, not to mention the general dismay at the blowing up of 40,000-year-old sacred sites. If we deliberately engineer civil discussions between a diverse range of people – drawing on people from different parts of the country, with different cultural, linguistic and ethnic roots, varying sexual orientations, ages and socio-economic backgrounds, the coming election will be an opportunity to reclaim and enrich our politics rather than just becoming a few weeks of high-vis campaign cosplay to be endured. They are best placed to reflect on what policies actually mean for their communities and the nation. And importantly, if both major political parties maintain a “small target” approach to the election, limiting any grand policy announcements, the election period might provide an opportunity for the people to imagine what future they want for our society, and how we might get there. Now, the panellist I mentioned was former NSW Liberal MP Stephen O’Doherty. He’s a man of faith and conviction. He’s not a paid lobbyist but he uses his insider’s knowledge of how politics works in this country to lobby MPs. Currently he’s working – pro bono as always – on ways to get music education resumed in schools following Covid shutdowns and for targeted financial assistance for musicians who have lost income over the past two years due to government-imposed Covid restrictions. Off air, he asked me if I really thought it was wrong for him to leverage his insider status in this way? Clearly, I don’t. Stephen O’Doherty is one of the good guys. He is pursuing worthy causes that need support from people like him with access and influence. That’s the whole thing about insiders. They can do what outsiders can’t. My point is, if we care about the future of the public square, and we aren’t seeking to undermine it, we can’t afford this distinction between insiders and outsiders, proper people and improper people, any more. Ellen Fanning is a host of ABC’s current affairs program The DrumBookseller Samir Mansour did not get much sleep the night in May this year that changed his life: he had stayed awake watching the news for updates as Israeli bombs fell on Gaza City. Around 6am, the Al Jazeera anchor said that the busy downtown street home to Mansour’s business was under attack. His instinct was to rush to the area in an effort to save his collection. Instead, he arrived just in time to see two missiles smash through the glass storefront as the building collapsed. “I knew it would be difficult but I had to try and save some of the books, some belongings,” he says. “Twenty years of my life, everything I worked for… I saw it destroyed right in front of my eyes.” The loss of the Samir Mansour Bookshop was by no means the greatest tragedy in the latest confrontation between Israel and Hamas, the Islamist group that rules the Gaza Strip’s two million residents. More than 250 Palestinians and 13 people in Israel were killed in the 11-day-war this year, the third round of fighting since 2007 when the militants wrested control of the coastal enclave. The destruction of this cultural institution, however – beloved as a place to get lost in a book and escape the hardships of life under Israeli blockade – ripped a hole through Gaza’s literary community. The Israeli military says the bookshop was not its target, but claims the building in which it was situated also contained a Hamas facility for producing weapons and intelligence-gathering. Nevertheless, together with the targeting of nearby Iqraa library, as well as two other smaller bookshops, the bombings dealt a significant blow to the cultural lifelines that keep besieged Gaza connected to the outside world. Mansour’s main branch had served as a bustling library-cum-meeting spot for students and readers of all ages, who spent happy hours browsing and drinking tea or coffee with cardamom. No one was ever turned away for curling up and reading as long as they wanted, and Mansour’s small publishing house, set up to “preserve Palestinian culture for future generations”, gave a platform to 50 local authors. “It was very shocking to realise I was a target,” he says. “I’ve worked with books my whole life, starting with my father when I was 12. I don’t have any political affiliations. In Gaza we have grown up under war, but I still never expected this.” In the days after the strike, the help that poured in from both the local and international community touched Mansour deeply. Dozens of volunteers helped him retrieve some of the 100,000 books buried under the rubble, even if most were unsalvageable; an online campaign raised more than $243,000 (£183,000) to help replace the lost stock and rebuild, and promises of book donations have flooded in from all over the world. The blockade on Gaza means building materials are often in short supply and subject to high inflation. But Mansour is determined not only to bring the shop back to life, but to improve and expand the space, and to establish a new Gaza Cultural Centre library next door. After seven months of painstaking work, reconstruction is now 90% finished, and Mansour hopes to reopen by the end of the year. “I didn’t even know they were doing a fundraiser at first. I was honoured. I am very grateful to everyone who has donated and helped us rebuild,” Mansour says. “I decided to start running again at full capacity as soon as possible, to keep my staff employed. The new shop will be three times bigger.” Life in Gaza remains hard, and gets harder every day. The Israeli and Egyptian blockade has created what aid agencies dub the “world’s largest prison”, with sky-high unemployment, water that isn’t safe to drink or wash with, and rolling power cuts. The healthcare system had already collapsed before the emergence of Covid-19, and to date just a quarter of the population has received at least one vaccination dose. But Mansour dreams of the day the siege will lift, and he can export his books by Gazan authors to new readers around the world. “Even despite the embargo, we manage and survive,” he tells me. “Imagine if we had room to breathe and travel and not just in books.” • This article was amended on 30 December 2021 to include the position of the Israeli military (IDF) that the bookstore itself was not the target, but the building in which it was situated.For the Melbourne-based Japanese chef Kantaro Okada, the base of a dish is of utmost importance: “In ochazuke, the broth, the dashi, is probably the most important – not the topping, not the grilled fish. “I feel like in a lot of dishes the main ingredient is quite important, but for us I think what surrounds it and the base [is more important] ... By perfecting that, or striving to, we’re very confident it doesn’t matter what goes on top.” At his cafe, 279, on Victoria Street in West Melbourne, this means paying particular care to the ingredients most commonly used in his musubi, also know as onigiri: rice balls with various fillings or toppings, shaped into triangles and often wrapped in a piece of nori. Okada has taken great care to curate the types of nori and rice used, as well as the rice cooker. “We went through, like, 10 rice cookers to find the right one,” he says. 279 also offers a number of osozai (cold side dishes) and desserts, but musubi remains the focus. “A lot of Japanese shops are very specialised,” Okada says. “I think all the hospitality and food stores in Japan specialise in something and try to perfect it.” Okada’s exacting approach comes through in his recipe for ochazuke, a dish of rice with hot dashi poured over it. It asks for just one millilitre of usukuchi soy sauce (saltier but lighter in colour than regular soy sauce) a serve. When measuring such small quantities, Okada uses a high-precision scale for accuracy. He also marinates his salmon in shio koji overnight. The fish undergoes a near-invisible transformation; its umami qualities are supercharged and it tastes somehow more like itself. This is thanks to enzymes from koji, a kind of fermented rice: proteins in the fish are broken down into their component amino acids, which we perceive as umami. While a precise method yields precisely balanced flavours, the dish is otherwise uncomplicated; smoky bonito flakes and grassy sencha make for a light yet deeply savoury broth. It’s also perfect for using leftover rice, and the topping can be customised depending on what’s in your fridge: snapper or any kind of white fish works well, while other popular toppings include seaweeds and pickles such as umeboshi. The concept for 279 grew out of Okada’s longing for the musubi he ate in Japan, which were difficult to find in Australia. “We were making it at home, and I was like, I could eat this every day. So it was like the shop was built for myself!” Okada and his wife, Hitoe, workshopped 279’s menu together, with Hitoe testing musubi fillings and toppings while Okada worked on selecting and testing rice and nori varieties. “Every weekend we would experiment and try new musubi, new onigiri, different ingredients, until at a point we were like, ‘I think we could actually offer this to customers.’” Kantaro Okada’s ochazuke Prep 10 min Marinate Overnight Cook 20-25 min Serves 2 For the salmon 1 salmon fillet (about 120g), skin on 15g (about 2 tsp) shio koji (optional) For the dashi broth 720ml water 28g katsuobushi (bonito flakes) 4g (about 2 tsp) loose-leaf sencha 2ml (scant ½ tsp) usukuchi soy sauce ¼ tsp salt To serve 240g (scant 1⅓ cup) cooked short-grain rice 2 tbsp tenkasu (tempura bits) shio kombu (seasoned salted kelp, sold cut into thin strips) 6cm piece (50g) takuan (pickled daikon radish), thinly sliced wasabi Pat the salmon fillet dry with a paper towel. Coat the salmon evenly with the shio koji and place in a covered container, then refrigerate overnight. The next morning, take the salmon fillet out of the fridge and preheat the oven grill on a high setting. Using your hands or a paper towel, wipe off as much of the shio koji as possible; you can even give it a quick gentle rinse in cold water. (Shio koji burns easily, so remove as much of it as you can.) Place the salmon fillet skin-side down in a small baking dish or tray. On a rack set about 15cm from the grill’s heating element, grill for 15 to 20 minutes, or until the top of the salmon is slightly charred. While the salmon is cooking, bring 720ml of water to a boil. Add the katsuobushi and tea leaves then immediately turn off the heat. Allow the mixture to steep for two minutes before straining to remove the solids. Add soy sauce and salt; taste and adjust with a little extra salt if necessary. Once your salmon is done, remove from the grill and separate the fish from the skin, then discard the skin. Use a fork or chopsticks to gently flake the fish into small chunks. Divide the rice in half. Wet your hands, then shape each 120g portion of rice, cupping your hands together to form rounded triangular “balls” about 3cm thick. Alternatively, use a smaller bowl to shape the rice. Place each rice ball in a bowl. Divide the flaked salmon between the two bowls, placing it on the rice ball. Top each bowl with a generous pinch of shio kombu threads. Divide the broth between the bowls and add a tablespoon of tempura bits to each. Serve with wasabi and takuan on the side; the wasabi can be added to the ochazuke to taste, while the takuan is eaten as an accompaniment. Shio koji, katsuobushi, usukuchi soy sauce, tenkasu, takuan and shio kombu can all be found at specialty Japanese grocersFor decades, more than 100 mouse-nibbled fruit boxes, tea chests and old leather suitcases sat untouched in a 3-metre pile in the backyard shed of Frances Newell’s home in suburban Melbourne. They were stuffed with thousands of letters – some in German, others in English – that she had kept when her father moved out of their family home in Castlemaine in the 1990s. The 73-year-old knew she was taking in a trove of heirlooms, as the family had dragged the “mountains of letters” across their many homes in regional Victoria over the years. But the size of the task meant she continually put off sorting through them. The retired academic and teacher was aware that her late mother, Evelyn Parker, had been involved in progressive causes in her youth, and had met her father, James Newell, when they were both conscientious objectors during the second world war. Parker had also told her children about the years she spent in Berlin in the 1930s teaching English to Jewish families, and in particular the bond she had formed with a German couple, Max and Malwine Schindler. The Schindlers – no relation to the industrialist Oskar – had been held up in the eyes of Frances and her siblings as a noble pair who defied the Nazis before and during the war to save vulnerable people. But when Parker died in 1988, the family were left with a gap in the legacy of their mother and the Schindlers. When Frances visited Berlin in 2016 to fill in the missing pieces of the family folklore, searches for the Schindlers at museums and libraries turned up no significant records. This void in the Schindlers’ story left Frances with “a very strong sense of obligation” to make sure it would not be forgotten. So in 2017 she and her siblings finally sat down and began sifting through the tranche of letters. What they discovered were vivid details about Parker’s role in a long-forgotten underground network established by anti-Nazi activists that helped Jews and political dissidents flee Germany, as escape routes rapidly closed. ‘An important part of the network’ Born in Lancashire in 1912, Parker got to know the Schindlers after becoming a pen pal of their son Rudolf, who was her age. She spent a gap year with the Schindlers in 1930, before Rudolf spent a year with her family in England. Then, at the beginning of 1934, she received a letter from Max asking for her urgent help in Berlin. Max explained that he had lost his job at the local council in the Berlin district of Neukölln because he was active in the Social Democratic party (SPD in German), which was banned after the Nazis took power in 1933. He was now setting up an English-languague school and library, which was a disguise for a network of SPD-aligned and progressive activists, to help Jews and others persecuted by the Nazis for their politics to get out of Germany. “So, off I set,” Parker said in 14 pages of handwritten notes, the only previous attempt at recording her experiences. “The bulk of our students were prospective refugees, most Jews, we taught them the requisite amount of English … and did anything else for them we could.” The language school meant the Schindlers could send their students to Britain, where they were taken in by contacts made through the labour movement. That year, while his daughter was in Berlin, Parker’s father placed a classified ad in this masthead, then known as the Manchester Guardian, seeking “board and lodging in English families” for Max’s students. There was a surge of similar ads as Jews scrambled to get out of Europe. This allowed Jewish Germans to bypass the exhaustive process of organising migration to the UK or the US through the Nazi authorities, which demanded proof, often unachievable, of wealth or financial support at their destination. Parker’s contacts in England made her an important part of the network. Her presence in Germany meant the Schindlers could introduce her to people as a visitor, taking her to birthdays and social events to allow SPD members to congregate. “Here’s this young English woman, they could say, ‘we’re showing her the sights, come meet her’,” Frances says. “But there was an underlying story behind that – it was about resistance to the Nazis.” Parker returned to Lancashire in 1935, and continued corresponding with the Schindlers about the school while working to find families in England who could accept more refugees. It was the letters she received from them before and after the war, as well as some photographs, that ended up in the shed in Melbourne. There are also letters with others, including a Jewish man, Paul Rosenfeld, whom Parker had taught English and helped prepare for migration while working as an au pair for his family throughout 1936, when she was again in Berlin. Rosenfeld made it to England in 1939, and met Parker during the war. “It was a great joy to unexpectedly see you again after a long time in the hotel and to chat about memories of past well-lived days,” he wrote to her in January 1940. “Meanwhile a lot has changed.” However, correspondence with another Jewish woman did not continue after the war. Frances has since confirmed she did not survive the Holocaust. Frances says she was always proud of her mother’s efforts, and her father’s wartime activism, and took inspiration from them for her own involvement in protests against the Vietnam war, for which she was twice jailed. ‘We had to honour them’ At first Frances’s sister Jan (also Newell) would come to her house each Friday to sift through the letters. Progress slowed during 2019, but Melbourne’s long Covid lockdowns in 2020 gave Frances time to devote herself to the process. She estimates she must have spent “well in excess of 600 hours” going through them. “In those prewar years, they were so unbelievably optimistic. These are young people, they’re full of joy and optimism. They really thought that they were going to make it, that the world was not going to take the path it did. That’s the great tragedy of it, the contrast of the early years and the tone of the latter years,” Frances says. Jan says: “In reading the letters, you got such a sense of the Schindlers as individuals, as if you knew them ... It was very clear that Mum loved them.” The Schindlers ran the network until the outbreak of war made emigration impossible, but when the Nazis began evicting and deporting Berlin Jews in 1941, the couple used their apartment to hide families from the Gestapo. Max was conscripted into the army, to work as an English translator at a prisoner of war camp in Luckenwalde. Rudolf was sentenced by a court to castration for the crime of being a schizophrenic. Records show he was used as a guinea pig for experiments in a psychiatric institution. Rudolf died in circumstances that remain unclear. In a letter to Parker in September 1945, Max wrote: “We hid Jewish friends of ours till the very last moment at the risk of our lives.” The exact number of people the Schindlers saved is unknown, but seven people provided testimonies about the couple, which led to Malwine being honoured by the Berlin senate in 1963 as an “unsung hero” (Max had died a few years after the war). Apart from that ceremony, public details of the Schindlers’ efforts were scarce. So at the end of 2019, after realising the wealth of information she had, Frances asked the city of Berlin to consider installing one of the 12 commemorative plaques chosen each year outside the Schindlers’ home. The application was backed up with research by Berlin’s Silent Heroes memorial centre, and last month, the plaque was unveiled outside the Schindlers’ former home at Pariser Strasse 54 in the Wilmersdorf district. Frances plans to visit next year, and the city has promised an official ceremony to mark the occasion. “A sense of obligation to tell that story has kept me going for the last six years,” she says. “I found reading through them really hard, it was hard work.” “At least there’s recognition now,” Jan says. “Mum would be pleased. I feel like there was an enormous sense that we had to honour them in some way. There was also a sense of there being so much suffering. “It didn’t feel like it had been laid to rest, and it felt important to do something.” • This article was amended on 14 December 2021 to correct the name of the camp where Max Schindler worked as a translator to Luckenwalde. A previous version rendered it as Buchenwald, which was a concentration camp – Luckenwalde held prisoners of war. It was also clarified that Rudolf Schindler was held in a psychiatric institution rather than a concentration camp.Traditional owners from western Arnhem Land say they are the “original archaeologists” of their country, and now they are taking action to preserve their priceless history on their own terms. “Many of the stories are still hidden away from non-Indigenous people who have learned very little about them,” Bininj traditional owner Conrad Maralngurra says. “They need to live with us for 10 or 20 years to get the whole meaning of cultural integrity.” This week, a group of Bininj traditional owners from the breathtaking stone country of western Arnhem Land travelled to Darwin to present a digital portrait of their country and culture focused around rock art to the annual conference of the Australian Archeological Association. Berribob Watson, of Manmoyi, and Maralngurra, of Mamadawerre, two small outstations on the Arnhem Land plateau about 300km east of Darwin, detailed the work of nearly 200 Bininj Aboriginal people and addressed the conference in English and Bininj Kunwok (dialects of western Arnhem Land). “We spoke to them as the original archeologists of our country,” Maralngurra says. “We have been writing it [history] down from the start, on the rock. Stories on that rock is the law, our heritage and gives people their rights.” Bininj are traditional occupants of western Arnhem Land, which borders Kakadu and Nitmiluk national parks in the west and south-west. The region’s Kombolgie sandstone has been carved by a cycle of wet and dry seasons over millennia and is one of the world’s most remote and inaccessible regions. Indigenous occupation goes back to the last ice age. Rich rock art is liberally scattered on the walls and ceilings of sandstone shelters. It is estimated there are three or four art sites for every 10 sq km of rocky terrain, potentially more than 40,000 sites. Most art is in or near areas where Bininj lived for thousands of years. While some sites are specific to men or women, most are communal. In the recent past, rock art research has been the domain of non-Indigenous anthropologists and archaeologists employed by tertiary institutions with government funding. Their findings, including interviews with traditional owners, photographs and artefacts taken from sites, often remained with institutions where they were archived. Rarely did the data come back to a community in any form other than a research paper or government document. However, Bininj have turned that model on its head. In 2010, Aboriginal elders from the Warddeken and Djelke IPAs established the Karrkad-Kandji Trust to seek alternative sources of funding for land management and cultural projects. The trust approaches Australian and international philanthropic organisations and individuals. The KKT established a $5m rock art project in Arnhem Land, the main contributor being the Ian Potter Foundation. Bininj hired their own support staff – Claudia Cialone and Chester Clarke – to live in their communities and coordinate a program to help Bininj locate, record, preserve and maintain sites and artwork. “We employed these people because we want them to help us preserve the stories through Balanda [European] ways. We also want to share the stories but we want to take control and have legal ownership of the knowledge. We want to maintain, preserve and protect it for the benefit of our own country and people,” Maralngurra says. The rock art program has an annual budget of $800,000 and employs more than 50 traditional owners and 100 Indigenous rangers, who spend much of their time travelling through remote areas to locate sites. Art is recorded by camera and video, and appropriate landholders are interviewed. The information is stored digitally for future generations. According to Claudia Cialone, Warddeken land management has built a unique rock art conservation team. “An academic paper is not enough to express Bininj passion and interest in rock art, so they decided to create their own narrative and take that to the world,” Cialone says. Maralngurra said the program is sparking interest all across western Arnhem Land and people in larger settlements, who have not been back to their traditional country, are clamouring to return. “Rock art is at the root of our society,” he said. “It is where we get the stories from. There is a lot of enthusiasm for people to go back and see where their story was established.” There are more than 125,000 known rock art sites in Australia, from the Torres Strait to Tasmania. Some contain grand, elevated galleries while others may hold a single, faded image on an out-of-the-way rock face or cave wall. Artistic styles include paintings, rock engravings (petroglyphs) and beeswax motifs and designs. Scientists believe some examples to be 30,000 years old. Rock art hotspots include Arnhem Land, the Kimberley and the Pilbara.Australians planning interstate travel over the Christmas period could face difficulty securing accommodation refunds and flight credits if state and territory borders tighten in response to the Omicron variant. In anticipation of potential border changes, some airlines have in place flexible refund options for all fare types, but other airlines are less accommodating. Jetstar has begun charging some passengers if they want the option to get a flight credit voucher if they decide to cancel their ticket on a flight that is still going ahead. Ahead of the first Christmas since Covid when Australians will largely be free to move between states – with the exception of Western Australia – here is everything you need to know about the main airlines’ policies on disruptions. How likely are domestic border changes because of Omicron? New South Wales, Victoria and the Australian Capital Territory have introduced precautionary measures for international arrivals while health authorities determine if the new variant is more transmissible and whether reopening plans should change. However, they have made no changes to domestic travel restrictions. This week, Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said it was too early to say if the Omicron variant would affect the state’s plan to reopen by Christmas. Under that plan, the state will drop its quarantine requirement for vaccinated domestic arrivals by 17 December, when it is expected to reach 80% double-dose vaccination coverage. While Scott Morrison has declared “we’re not going back to lockdowns”, it is unclear if Omicron transmissions could see a return to entry restrictions to some states for travellers from specific local government areas. Jetstar Introduced in response to earlier internal border closures throughout the pandemic, Jetstar offers passengers who have booked a fare the ability to change the date of their trip if a border closes or they can no longer travel. If the fare was purchased after 17 September and before 31 December, Jetstar will waive the change fee. Customers will still have to pay the difference between their original fare and the new flight they select (which can be for travel up until 30 June 2023). If border restrictions or quarantine requirements change after a ticket is purchased that prevent a customer travelling to their destination or requires them to isolate upon arrival or their return home, they will be eligible to get a flight credit voucher. However, if there are no border restriction changes, but a customer becomes a close contact and can no longer go to their destination or must isolate on their flight date, they will not be automatically eligible for a flight credit voucher. A Jetstar spokeswoman said customers affected in this way will have to contact the airline and “will be assessed on a case by case basis”. This is a slight change from the budget airline’s policy introduced at the start of the pandemic, under which more customers were eligible for a refund or flight credit which can be used when booking flights at a later date. If a passenger wants to be able to cancel their flight and get a flight credit voucher – which can be used on any route with Jetstar – they will have to pay for this privilege at the time of booking. Customers will need to purchase “FareCredit” during checkout, which allows passengers to cancel their flight for any reason up until airport check-in opens for the flight. The voucher is valid for three years. The cost of Jetstar’s “FareCredit” protection varies, but on a one-way $64 flight from Sydney to Melbourne the cover costs $16.40 per passenger. Jetstar also offers passengers travel insurance policies – from a third party provider – however, these policies explicitly state that “as Covid-19 is considered a known event ... no cover is provided for any claim arising from travel restrictions due to government orders, advisories, regulations, directives or border closures”. Jetstar does not require a border to have closed or proof of close contact status in order to access any of the above flight offers, except for insurance. Qantas Qantas passengers are able to change their travel date or request a flight credit, provided they do this before the day of departure, and can choose new travel dates within 12 months. If changing the date of a flight, Qantas will waive the change fee but passengers will still need to pay any cost difference if their new fare is more expensive. If requesting a flight credit, the cost of the fare can be used on any route with Qantas within 12 months. There is no limit to how many times the date of a booking can be changed. However, if you want to cancel your booking with Qantas to get a cash refund, it’s a bit more complicated. Refunds will depend on the fare type you booked, ranging from being unavailable for the cheapest fare types, to incurring a $100 cancellation fee, through to being free for the most expensive and flexible fare type. Qantas does not require a border to have closed or proof of close contact status in order to access any of the above flight offers, except for insurance. Virgin Australia Similarly to Qantas, Virgin is waiving fees for passengers who can no longer travel and the ability to change their flight dates or cancel their booking for a travel credit. Passengers who want to change a flight will have to make the change before their day of departure. Customers changing their date of travel will still have to pay fare differences if their new flight is more expensive than their original booking. If cancelling their fare for a flight credit, the voucher can be used on any route Virgin Australia offers, both domestic and international. Virgin’s cancellation and changes options will cover all travel up until May 2022. If a passenger wants to cancel their flight and get a refund, it will depend on the flexibility of the fare they initially booked, similar to the Qantas policy. Rex Rex’s policy appears more generous than other airlines, in that they offer full refunds to passengers and their entire travelling group on each leg, if one person is affected by Covid disruptions. Covid disruptions include border closures, lockdowns, and isolation requirements for close contacts. Unlike Jetstar, Qantas and Virgin’s rules, passengers will actually have to be affected by a Covid disruption to access the refunds. What about accommodation? In most cases, refund and travel credit rules are set by individual hotels and accommodation providers. Generally, Airbnb flexibility will depend on the settings the accommodation host sets when booking. After the initial pandemic closures in 2020, Airbnb changed its extenuating circumstances policy to mean that Covid disruptions to travel were not covered. However, if a guest or host contracts Covid and their check-in date is within 14 days, they could be covered by the extenuating circumstances policy, but they must provide proof.I am about to break a pact of silence, a pact that has long bound my family. I am a child of domestic violence. I write as an adult, and yet I speak in the present tense: I am – not I was – a child who grew up with domestic violence. One is a child of domestic violence for life, locked into that role in part by the unspeakable effects of a trauma that is there from the beginning, so that there is no before or after trauma, so that trauma is the kernel around which one develops from early infancy. As research has shown, domestic violence shapes the development of the child’s brain, informing how the child thinks and feels, informing how the future adult conducts themselves in their relationships and in the world. It becomes almost impossible, in adulthood, to separate oneself from that original violence in order to speak of it as a separate thing. Trauma itself is silencing. But there are other reasons why the silence around domestic violence feels inviolable. There is the problem of shame, the social stigma still attached to those sorts of families – as if such families aren’t hiding in plain sight in every neighbourhood, judging by the statistics. That shame is exacerbated by the fact that stories about our experiences are so rarely told. It is as if the story is too sordid or obscene for public consumption. It is as if we are being expected to deal with the experience alone, as if, despite being mere children, we are somehow responsible. There is also the problem of loyalty and love. Because in families like mine, there is not only violence, fear, ugliness and injury. There is also laughter, resilience, pity and, yes, even love. It is a truism today that you should speak your truth. But when you speak your truth, you also violate someone else’s, because none of us lives alone. I am violating the truth of my family in writing this. It is a fact that makes me profoundly uncomfortable, even though I know that domestic violence is not a private problem. It is a social (largely gendered) issue of public provenance. In fact, to get this message across, to shift the burden from the private to the public, is one of the greatest motivations for writing this. Publishing this, however, has been challenging. News publications are morally and legally bound not to publish unsubstantiated criminal allegations. My sister was willing to substantiate my story, but I have to confess that it had never occurred to me that what my father had done was criminal, such was the normalisation of violence during my childhood. Another problem became apparent: what if my father saw this published under my name? How would he react? It became clear that my mother’s safety would be jeopardised. Thus, while a collective movement of testimonial storytelling by child victims of domestic violence – following in the example of the #MeToo movement – would have enormous power to give perpetrators pause and alleviate victims’ trauma, speaking out under our names is next to impossible. Publishing this anonymously is my only recourse. But publish I must. As a writer, as someone with a public voice, I have an obligation to break the silence that hides the suffering of children of domestic violence. That sense of obligation is intensified by my privilege, as someone who has been able to afford 10 years of cognitive behavioural therapy as an adult to deal with my complex PTSD. To say I was privileged to receive this treatment is not to say I didn’t have to work hard – harder than I ever have at anything else – to identify the trauma inside my brain and to neutralise its power through a strategic form of self-alienation. I had to second-guess every seemingly natural thought or reaction, slowly and laboriously forming new patterns for thinking and acting. How much easier would it be if some kind of therapeutic intervention was made early on? And should treatment be only for those who can pay? Mental health interventions should be available for free, perhaps in schools. Such change can only happen if we first commit to breaking the silence around this issue. There is another reason why telling our stories is important, though it is potentially more controversial. Women are said to inspire less sympathy than children among male perpetrators of domestic violence. Research has shown that abusive men are more likely to change their behaviour when the impacts of domestic violence on their children are presented to them in counselling. But how many men ever undertake that kind of counselling and obtain that kind of information? Reading news reports on domestic violence obsessively, as I am wont to do, it strikes me that the experience of children – unless they are (tragically) killed – is conspicuously absent. Speaking as a child of domestic violence, that public silence makes us feel as though we are invisible. It confirms our sense that our story is not something to be told. It isolates us in our misplaced feelings of shame and guilt. Enough. Let me share what some of us live through. The below experiences are mine, but I am using the plural “we” to acknowledge that I am far from alone. *** Our earliest memory? The primal scene? We have crept down the hallway, after being woken by some disturbance. From the doorway to our parents’ room, we glimpse our mother, smeared in blood. She has been beaten unconscious. Our childhoods rarely afford opportunities for nostalgic remembering. As we grow we learn that our role at night is to listen: for the sound of flesh attacking flesh, for the raised voice that might indicate the violence to come, for the sudden scraping back of a kitchen chair. Then we must leave our beds and act as guardians or at the very least witnesses, our bodies shaking with cold or fear – for who are we to understand what’s happening to us? We are just children, even though we act like soldiers, putting our bodies on the line while knowing we can’t really make any difference. Mostly it is our mother who cops it. Sometimes, though, our father turns on us. He denies that we are his children, throws things at us and threatens to murder us in our beds. On those nights, we are sent to hide outside, after being instructed by our mother to call a friend. When we are taken away to safety, we don’t know if we’ll ever see our mother alive again. Sometimes our mother takes us to a police station, still in our pyjamas, and from there to a shelter, where beds are crammed into tiny rooms, and where women swap stories in a kitchen that belongs to no one. This is a refuge, but it is also a distressing place. We see Once Were Warriors as teenagers in the cinema. We don’t feel triggered. We feel privately seen. We feel braver because of it. The gun-law reforms that come after the Port Arthur massacre are a godsend. We no longer have to hide guns and bullets – only the kitchen scissors and knives. We grow into adults and even then, from time to time, for no real reason, we find ourselves tormented by fear. It’s usually at night. We become convinced someone is coming for us. We slide furniture across the floor to barricade our bedroom doors. Veterans of war have been known to do the same. There are nightmares. Afterwards, we keep the bedside light on. In the morning we feel ashamed of our childish fears. We drive to work but end up somewhere else. Such dissociation once served us well, but in this world it’s a liability. Our boss suggests that we should get emotional intelligence training. Colleagues ask if we have been tested for autism. We often have trouble fitting in. It seems clear to others that there is something wrong with us, though we have no idea what it is. As it turns out, comorbid disorders often accompany our kind of post-traumatic stress. There are other comorbid behaviours too. We drink too much, or we abuse some other substance, finding liberation in those moments when we are lost to the world or when we feel invulnerable. When we argue with our partners, we want to tear the house down. At other times we want to hide in a cupboard. On those nights it seems like there is a supernatural entity, made up of rage and pain, buried somewhere inside us, waiting to burst out. In the worst-case scenarios we become perpetrators of domestic violence. Or victims. It is a well-known cycle. We never say anything to our children. Our parents are their grandparents after all. In the happiest ending, a partner convinces us to seek counselling. We go out of love for them. In the psychologist’s office, we are trapped by our silence. Having been forbidden to speak as children, having never heard our kind of story before, we have no idea what to say. *** Poetry, rather than psychology, was my first path to speaking about my childhood experience of domestic violence. Poetry allows for hesitation. It allows you to feel your way into an expression of things that you don’t even understand. The techniques of metaphor and persona also give you some cover. Creative writing, generally speaking, is a way of both revealing yourself and hiding yourself away. What I am doing here is something else. Even though I am writing anonymously, this is as close as it gets, at least for now, to coming out. It’s what more of us have to find a way to do. Domestic violence thrives under the cover of silence, as do the lifelong problems to which it gives rise. As children, we are domestic violence’s key accomplices, silenced by loyalty and fear, as well as by a social culture of denial around the issue. We are also among domestic violence’s key victims, though in the media we are largely invisible or presented as collateral damage, marginal to the real scene of gendered violence between adults. For so many reasons, domestic violence is not something children, even grown-up children, tend to speak about. I am certainly aware of the complex reasons for that silence. This piece was excruciatingly difficult to write. Making the decision to publish it was harder still. But surely it’s time for the children of domestic violence to be heard and seen. In Australia, the national family violence counselling service is on 1800 737 732. In the UK, call the national domestic abuse helpline on 0808 2000 247, or visit Women’s Aid. In the US, the domestic violence hotline is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). Other international helplines may be found via www.befrienders.org.Thirty five sailors were left unpaid for three months while aboard live export cattle ships with poor safety records amid a dispute between the ships’ managers and owners, one of whom is Australian businessman Nick Thorne, Guardian Australia can reveal. The seafarers’ division of the International Transport Workers Federation (ITF) has claimed the failure to pay the crews of the Barkly Pearl and Diamantina meant they could be considered abandoned under international law. Both ships are 70% owned by Singaporean company Beng Kuang Marine (BKM) as part of a joint venture called Cattle Line. Thorne owns the remaining 30% through his Northern Territory-based cattle export business, NTXLS. The 7,700 tonne Diamantina and the 5,400 tonne Barkly Pearl normally take cattle from Australia to south east Asia but have been sitting idle in Indonesian waters for the past three months amid a dispute between the owners and their manager, Global Radiance Ship Management. Ship records show that under Cattle Line’s ownership maritime authorities have repeatedly found both vessels to be in breach of safety rules, with 177 defects recorded against the Barkly Pearl and 68 against the Diamantina. In January, the Australian Marine Safety Authority banned the Barkly Pearl from Australian ports for two years after it was seen listing in the water with a hole in its hull. AMSA’s general manager of operations, Allan Schwartz, issued a statement at the time saying that the poor state of the vessel “put the lives of the seafarers on board at risk and posed an immediate threat to Australia’s marine environment.” BKM has also been under financial pressure. A report the company filed with the Singapore stock exchange shows its shipping division, which includes Cattle Line, recorded a loss of S$17.1m last year, helping drive the company as a whole to a loss of S$15.4m. John Wood, a campaign adviser with the ITF, said the Barkly Pearl was now at a shipyard owned by BKM on the Indonesian island of Batam, near Singapore, while the Diamantina was sitting off Jakarta after being arrested by the Indonesian navy at the end of August for anchoring in territorial waters without permission. He said that after the ITF’s intervention, most of the Pakistani, Filipino and Indonesian crew members aboard the two ships were paid last week, but as of Wednesday morning eight were yet to receive what they were owed. He accused a representative of BKM of abusing Pakistani crew members after the company paid them back wages aboard the Diamantina last week. “The last witnessed words said by the owner’s representative … to the Pakistani crew when they signed off from the Diamantina was, quote: ‘You take all your salaries and then fuck off from my property immediately,’” he said. In an email provided to Guardian Australia by BKM, the representative, a local agent, admitted to the outburst and apologised for failing to control his temper. In email correspondence with Wood, BKM’s chief financial officer, William Lee, said that BKM was “committed to our obligations including crew salaries” and blamed the former manager of the two ships, Singaporean company Global Radiance Ship Management, which BKM sacked in October. “We face payment and accounting irregularities with the ship management agent GRSM,” Lee said in his email to Wood. “They have yet to produce adequate payment records we have long requested for.” Lee claimed to Guardian Australia that GRSM “stopped making payment salaries to crews”. “We therefore have no choice but to step in to engage an independent reputable Indonesian agent to resolve their repatriation and make direct salaries payments,” he said. He said it was “incorrect” to say that the two ships had a poor safety record. “The vessels do carry out mandatory drydocking, repairs and maintenance,” he said. Thorne did not respond in detail to Guardian Australia’s questions but also blamed GRSM. “Cattle Line support our long-term seafarers and have fortunately been able to settle their outstanding salary when abandoned by our former ship management,” he said in an email to Guardian Australia. “Termination was served to our former managers to ensure and uphold the integrity of the welfare of livestock and our seafarers.” However, both Wood and GRSM claimed that GRSM had previously paid some wages out of its own pocket, without being reimbursed by BKM. GRSM’s lawyer, Australian solicitor Sharangan Maheswaran, said the company commenced legal action in Singapore in September to have the Diamantina and Barkly Pearl arrested. “The management agreements were terminated after demand letters were issued by GRSM for the repayment of significant outstanding debts incurred by Cattle Line,” he said. “Both proceedings relate to significant debts incurred by Cattle Line to GRSM for goods and services provided to both vessels. There is no issue in the accounts kept by GRSM.” He said the company was “disturbed by the treatment of the crew on both vessels” and its “most immediate concern is to ensure the crew of both vessels are not caught up in the dispute between Cattle Line and its creditors”.We’re in the thick of a champagne shortage and while there’s a lot of discussion around why this is the case, industry experts say there are several factors at play. Kyla Kirkpatrick, CEO of Emperor Champagne, says mass domestic consumption and supply issues have created the perfect storm. “You’ve got slow production from two years of Covid-19 affecting the workforce in France, and that has impacted everything from printing labels to producing corks,” Kirkpatrick says. “And people haven’t been travelling or going to restaurants. They’ve been purchasing consumer goods rather than having experiences.” Shipping costs have also skyrocketed as desperate companies pay premium rates to transport their goods. “And even if you do manage to get a shipping container, which has gone from an average of of $4,000 for a 20ft container to $11,000 in a 12-month period, you can’t get it in off the water,” Kirkpatrick says. “There are so many boats sitting off the coast of Sydney and Queensland and they just can’t dock.” It’s also been a difficult year for growers. Boutique champagne importer Ryan Larkin, of Larkin Imports, says volatile weather patterns have affected producers, with 2021 especially problematic for champagne. “This will most certainly create a shortage in years to come, and we will most definitely see a price increase as smaller-scale growers struggle to make ends meet,” Larkin said. So, while our love affair with champagne will remain, there has never been a better time to pop a bottle of Australian sparkling. From prosecco to pet nat and traditional-method sparkling, here are my top picks for the festive season. UNDER $25 Ninth Island, Sparkling Rosé NV, Tamar Valley, Tasmania (RRP: $25) Bang for your buck. Strawberries smothered in cream, like what your nan used to serve up to you as a kid, backed by layers of zippy acidity, zest and a rounded finish thanks to ageing on lees (basically a technique that adds texture, body and a lovely creaminess to the wine). Tasmania is synonymous with sparkling in Australia, and this little number offers up everything you need for a good time. UNDER $50 Elan Vineyard, Blanc De Blancs, Mornington Peninsula, Victoria (RRP: $40) Dry, crisp and consistent. Made using chardonnay grapes, this traditional-method sparkling carries all the hallmarks of an easy drinking champagne. I’ve been knocking this wine back, vintage after vintage, for years and it’s an absolute cracker for its price point. Elan is a small, low-yield, family-run affair and winemaker Selma Lowther is around most weekends, so you’ll get all the info you need straight from the horse’s mouth. Vasse Felix, Idée Fixe Premier Brut, Margaret River, Western Australia (RRP: $48) I tend to gravitate towards blanc de blancs (a fancy way of describing a wine made exclusively from white grapes, in this case chardonnay). For me, they’re everything you want in a bubbles. Elegant and expressive, Vasse offer up the goods with this refined drop that greets you with a luscious, toasty, biscuity-ness on the nose, and layers of citrus and creamy texture on the palate. I know that sounds a little wanky, but you catch my drift. Andrew Buller Wines, Cannobie Sparkling Pinot Chardonnay NV, Rutherglen, Victoria (RRP: $29) Served aboard the jet that brought Prince Harry and Meghan Markle to Australia a few years back, this sparkling punches well above its weight. Stone fruit, citrus and a whiff of yeast dominate the nose, with vibrant acidity following through on the palate. Made with traditional method, it is a bright, fresh bubbles at a ridiculous price point. It’s an absolute steal. Dal Zotto, Col Fondo Prosecco, King Valley, Victoria (RRP: $30) Don’t be turned off by the sediment dancing about the punt, this wine has undergone a secondary fermentation in bottle rather than being mass produced in stainless steel tank. This offers complexity, with flavours of lemon sorbet, green fruits and blossom, and ultimately a wine that’s far too easy to drink … particularly on a Friday. If you’re going to drink a prosecco, get a decent one. And for 30 bucks, I reckon this one nails the brief. Peregrine Ridge, NV Sparkling Shiraz, Heathcote, Victoria (RRP: $42) Plums, cherries and spice – if you’re looking for a sparkling red, give this baby a shot. Matured in oak, before being fermented in bottle, this medium-weighted wine is best served straight from the fridge. I guess you could cellar it; I never do. My mate is a Heathcote shiraz fiend, and got me on to this wine a number of years back. I find we mostly drink it around Christmas, as it pairs well with plum pudding and cheese, however it would stand up to your savoury mains with ease. Brash Higgins, ‘Crystal’ Sparkling White, McLaren Vale, South Australia (RRP: $37) Pet nat lovers, let’s chat. This wine is wild and unfiltered. A blend of chenin blanc and organic crystal grapes (google the story behind the latter, it’s an interesting one) this wine has a beer-esque vibe going on, with plenty of fruit, apples and pears predominately. But it really must be served cold. I love the way Brad and Nicole, the duo behind Brash, experiment with obscure varietals and playful techniques. So if you’re feeling brave this festive season, give their wine a burl. OVER $50 Parkside Estate, 2015 Chardonnay Pinot Noir, Macedon Ranges, Victoria (RRP: $65) Buy a dozen oysters and kickstart your evening with this vibrant, easy-drinking bottle of fizz. Citrus notes dominate the palate, with a well-rounded creamy brioche texture that’ll have you coming back for more. This is one of those “blink and you’ll miss it” type scenarios. It’ll evaporate before your eyes. Deviation Road, Beltana Blanc De Blancs, Adelaide Hills, South Australia (RRP: $105) Winemaker Kate Laurie has just dropped her 2015 vintage after a killer year with her 14. This woman can do no wrong, her sparkling wines are sensational. I had the privilege of interviewing Kate for the Halliday podcast and she is a wealth of knowledge. With creamy, luscious, roasted almond, preserved lemon and green fruit, her Beltanas have this minerality I adore. A lot of work goes into these wines, so don’t be put off by the price point. House of Arras, 2006 EJ Carr Late Disgorged, Tamar Valley, Tasmania (RRP: $200) OK, this wine is not cheap. And no, I don’t drink wine of this calibre often. But when I do, I’m blown away by what some Australian producers are doing. As good as any quality champagne, there’s texture, complexity, layers of biscuit, honey, curd, dried and fresh fruit and acidity. And my gosh, does it have length (a wanky term to describe how long the flavours linger in your mouth). What a wine. • Thomas Carr is the former deputy editor of the Halliday Wine Companion, and the host of their flagship podcast By the Glass.For the conspiracy-minded who thought supermarkets were playing particular music to influence us to buy certain products – that is, more expensive ones – I can reveal that’s not the case in Australia. Yet. But the big stores could easily use tunes to change our purchasing habits, according to the world’s leading expert on the subject, who is based at Curtin University in Perth. Prof Adrian North, originally from the UK, has spent his life studying the psychology of music and how we interact with it in various spaces – including retail stores. His work has made him the foremost expert in the world on the subject and he’s now the dean of learning and teaching in the health sciences faculty at Curtin. His enthusiasm for talking about how music affects us is contagious. A few months ago I wrote about the unexpected pleasure of supermarket radio in Australia. My parents operate the Friendly Grocer supermarket in the New South Wales town of Robertson so I know a bit about the subject. Coles is the only supermarket in Australia with its own radio station – outsourced to Nova – and when I asked Lisa Ronson, the chief marketing officer at Coles, whether research showed certain tunes could influence shopping habits, she would not be drawn. “It’s more about Nova having a knowledge of what’s trending, what people are listening to and what’s new,” she said at the time. North says his research suggests Coles’ use of innocuous and upbeat pop music isn’t part of a dastardly plan to make us spend more. The supermarket giant’s playlist doesn’t fit the bill. And after nearly a decade of living and working in Australia he’s yet to be called by Coles or Woolworths to consult on using music to increase sales – and, he notes, he would be the person most likely to be approached. Over a few days in a busy university cafeteria in the late 1990s, North and his colleagues conducted an experiment where one day they played classical music (Beethoven, Bach – the “greatest hits” of classical), another day they played pop music of the day and on the third day they played what we’d colloquially call “musak” or elevator music (sweeping strings and bland beats). Obviously, the students enjoyed pop music the most, but the classical music made the cafeteria and the students feel special, North says. “We added it all up and we found that people were prepared to spend the most when the classical music was playing, about 20% more.” Another study at that time found French music led to French wines outselling German ones in a supermarket, whereas German music led to the opposite effect. Responses to a questionnaire suggested customers were unaware of the effect of the music on their choices. A 2021 study found music played on a webshop had a similar impact on online buying behaviour. A paper published last year by one of North’s PhD students, Emma Flynn, also looked at supermarket music and buying habits. It found that playing country music resulted in an increase in the purchases of utilities, while classical music, again, had people reaching further into their pockets for luxury items. Shopping with Cher A little while back, I was walking the aisles of my local Woolworths. The new episode of one of my favourite television shows was about to drop, and I was having five friends around for a watch-party. I wanted to impress. At least one of the five I had a crush on – I wanted them to know that I knew how to cater. Already vibing, I got to the chip aisle when Cher’s The Shoop Shoop Song came on. Suddenly I decided chicken Twisties were just as important as cheese Twisties. Cheezels were as important as original Thins. And how could I offer up original Thins without salt and vinegar? They all went into the trolly as I headed to the cheese display bopping along and wondering if it is all “in his kiss” like Cher was singing about. Wasn’t it possible I was a victim of in-store music manipulation? Couldn’t this be part of Woolies’ plan – to make me buy more chips with their catchy tunes? Could the supermarkets be cluey to North’s research, settling for a diet of the latest pop music as a kind of limbo land between country music and classical? North isn’t convinced. He thinks it’s simply that the big two supermarkets, Coles and Woolworths, are “creating the kind of ambience they want on the premises, which, obviously for a mass retail supermarket, has got to be pretty accessible”. The musicologist finds it surprising that neither of the big two supermarkets in Australia does much to differentiate itself from the other. Sure, Coles might have a dedicated radio station, but the tunes you hear in Woolworths are from a very similar hymn sheet. (Woolworths did not respond to specific questions when I wrote my Aisle bop if I want to piece for Guardian Australia in mid-September, saying only that it had a “bespoke playlist” for its in-store radio.) “When you think about how much attention is paid to in-store marketing and signage, I find it so weird that so little attention is paid to music in that context,” North says. “Because I’m sure there is all sorts of research businesses do concerning store layout, and what to put on which shelf, but not a consideration of the audio environment.” Now, with some time between me and the Cher crisps incident, I did an experiment: if there was something with a fun beat, would it make me buy more biscuits? Reader, the song playing in my local supermarket was a techno mix of Sometimes When We Touch by Dan Hill. My basket remained biscuit-free. But I’m pretty sure that if Beethoven’s Piano Concerto No. 5 was playing, I’d have left with half the cheese aisle. And maybe some pear paste. And maybe a bottle of fancy mineral water.On a cool, grey Sunday in November, in a small home on the edge of Armidale, a new church is born. About 30 parishioners are crowded on the wooden deck, spilling back through the sliding doors and into a living room dominated by a black Kawai concert grand piano. They sit on patio furniture, white plastic lawn chairs and stools from the breakfast bar. On the edge of the deck is an altar, a table draped with the purple cloth of Advent with candles, flowers, wafers and wine. A hand-quilted Celtic cross with a love heart at its base drapes over the front, facing the parishioners. The new church doesn’t yet have a name. Stop reading if you’ve heard this before: a congregation of Anglicans are having an Advent service delivered by a Uniting church reverend in the Armidale home of a husband-and-husband duo, Peter Sanders and Peter Grace. They could no longer attend their regular church, St Mary’s, because they would have been forced to separate in order to continue their church roles. Peter Sanders was the musical director and organist, and Peter Grace had an unpaid leadership role on a small committee. “According to the Armidale diocese, you would have to be in the right state of grace to receive communion,” Grace says. “And the right state of grace is being a heterosexual, or a celibate gay person,” says Sanders. “Can you imagine if this had been done to some younger people, when people don’t have an identity and don’t feel good about themselves?” “How many graves are there already, in country areas, of young boys and girls who didn’t feel accepted and took their own life?” Guardian Australia emailed Bishop Rod Chiswell, head of the Armidale diocese, for comment but received no reply. He has previously told the ABC that he and the dean had sought to have a “pastoral conversation” with Sanders and Grace. Chiswell claimed he did not dismiss Sanders, nor were the men asked to leave the church. “The Anglican church in the Armidale diocese, like the Lord Jesus, welcomes all who choose to come to church, regardless of sexual orientation,” Chiswell said. “Involvement in positions of ministry or other leadership … is conditional upon agreeing to the Faithfulness in Service code.” Ultimately though, Grace and Sanders disagree with the conservative brand of Anglicanism preached by the Armidale diocese’s leadership, so they left. Unfortunately for the diocese, they’ve taken the majority of St Mary’s with them. Leaving a church isn’t easy. “Grieving” and “loss” are the words used to describe the experience, especially as many of those who attend the service at the Peters’ home had been going to St Mary’s for years, even decades. These people held weddings, baptisms and funerals at St Mary’s. That church was a huge part of their lives – it’s not something easy to walk away from. A group of six parishioners held meetings about what to do about the direction their church was taking. Many were outraged at what they perceived as the evangelical style of preaching the new bishop promoted, and the conservative interpretation of the Bible. Both Peters stress that the new church wasn’t set up for them, and are more worried about those who’ve dedicated large parts of their lives to St Mary’s. Sanders talks of an elderly woman who was giving a reading. “When you do a reading in church, it says ‘Hear the word of the Lord’. They changed it to ‘This is the word of the Lord’, and the lady said, ‘I’m not saying this. I believe God speaks to everyone as an individual – they hear the word of the Lord’.” “We had found fundamental doctrinal differences with the Anglican clergy. And we wanted our two brothers back, who are gay and married,” supporter Marg Kennedy says. “That wasn’t going to happen without conditions on us – we wanted to support them. We found it intolerable after a while and decided that we needed to move forward with our gay brethren. “And we needed to create a new church.” Jan Clark stitched the cloth draped over the altar for the service, and sourced the secondhand sherry glasses from op-shops to hold the communion wine. “This is technically a home church,” she explains. “We have no clergy. But we’re affiliated by love for each other, and worship. There are infinite ways of approaching God.” “It’s the hope that we stay together as a family, as a church – family and worship. And the people are comfortable because now we can worship as we please, without the restrictions, which were getting more severe and more and more unpleasant for us. So now we can have the service that we want, and enjoy a service and feel spiritually nourished.” The hardline doctrine in the Armidale diocese does not represent the whole of the Anglican church – in fact the Peters think it’s very much a minority view in the Australian Anglican church. They’ve received outpourings of support from Anglican bishops all over the country and say they would have been accepted almost anywhere else. “This wouldn’t be a problem in Queensland. It’s the Armidale diocese. The Armidale diocese aligned themselves with Bishop Jensen in Sydney,” Sanders says. Sanders is referring to Bishop Peter Jensen, the first leader of Gafcon, a breakaway conservative movement within the church that was set up in 2008 in reaction to developments in the broader church, including the ordination of an openly gay bishop and acceptance of same sex unions. The situation in Armidale is at the nexus between Australian politics’ flirtation with the culture wars, the Religious Discrimination bill, and the rift within the global Anglican church itself. And in the middle of it are ordinary people, such as those who gathered in their home reciting the Greeting of Peace. The Uniting church offered the use of one of its buildings, and Uniting Reverend Will Pearson was asked by a close personal friend, and attendee of St Mary’s, if he could hold the first service. And he does, quoting Luke 21:36: “Pray constantly that you will have the strength and wits to make it through everything that’s coming and end up on your feet before the Son of Man.” When asked about what he thinks of being a Uniting church reverend tending to a flock of Anglicans, Reverend Pearson says: “It took me back to when I was growing up in a small community, Yarrowyck, where there was a different denomination in the church every Sunday. One Sunday would be Presbyterian, another would be Baptist, another Uniting ...” “I found that to be a really fascinating experience.” Reverend Pearson’s service speaks of hope, touching on the joy and love that the disciples found in following Jesus, but also warns of the tribulations they would face that were ahead of them from the powers who would feel threatened by them. The service’s closing hymn is “Mine Eyes Have Seen The Glory” – a hymn chosen cheekily by Sanders. It’s uplifting, something to steel the congregation, and just as importantly, fun to belt out on an organ. The final note is still ringing out as the congregation breaks because, like any proper country church service, it ends with tea and coffee and homemade cake and slices, and chatting. And really, this morning tea is really what a church is all about. Everyone here has a personal connection with God, and no one, not even a bishop, can take that away. Attending church is a manifestation of that connection, not a condition of it, and a lot of the value in attending church is more mundane. Friends. Connections. Community. Thelma McCarthy had been attending St Mary’s for “40, 50 years”. Ninety-six years old, a second world war veteran, lifetime member of the Labor party, Thelma was appalled at how the Peters were treated for their sexuality, and the evangelical preaching. “I left back in June,” McCarthy says, “And all those others were the same. Some of them have been back to St Mary’s, only to keep it going, but a lot of them haven’t been back since.” “I think today was very healing.” She quotes Matthew 18:20: “For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.”Sydney barista Minh Bui rarely used to have time to sit down at her own cafe, but this weekday morning she’s in no rush. It’s just her and two women seated in the corner. Asked how business is at her Liverpool cafe since Sydney’s lockdown lifted, Bui motions to the empty seats around her. “It’s pretty bad, it’s worse than before the lockdown,” Bui says. “In the past two years we’ve been struggling, and pre-Delta we were doing about 50% of the business we used to. Now, it’s 25%.” Bui says her cafe, Oscarinos Espresso, was once thriving, fuelled by customers from surrounding office buildings that are still largely empty. She has had to lay off five staff and work herself to keep the cafe going, but she is betting that the local economy will soon bounce back. “I’m so disappointed and worried about the future. We went from a business that was making so much money, to barely surviving every day. I don’t want to close, but who knows?” While Sydney’s economy is recovering from this year’s prolonged Covid lockdown, business fortunes have been mixed in western Sydney, particularly in the 12 LGAs that faced the harshest restrictions. Most restrictions on the fully vaccinated were officially lifted on 11 October, nearly two months ago, but Bui believes Liverpool is still operating at about 20% capacity. Recent figures from the Australian Bureau of Statistics show the areas that faced the harshest restrictions, some of the most diverse suburbs in the country, now have the highest rates of unemployment in the city. Three statistical districts in Sydney, the inner south-west, the south-west and Parramatta, make up nearly half the city’s job losses in October. The inner south-west’s unemployment rate was 8.8%, the highest in Sydney, while unemployment rose to 8% in the south-west and 7.9% in Parramatta. By comparison, the wider unemployment rate for the city was 5.7% in October. It’s part of the hangover from a challenging and confronting couple of months in lockdown, business leaders say. And the ripple effects of those harsher restrictions are being felt by businesses now, with consumer confidence affected by a lingering sense of caution. Dimitri Karam, president of the Liverpool chamber of commerce and industry, said that while some businesses, especially those that adapted to the lockdown, were flourishing, many were still struggling. “There are mixed feelings, emotions and results, and it all depends on consumer confidence,” he says. “I feel like we’re still living on edge, we don’t know what will happen, we are one foot in and one foot out. Both our feet are not in yet, and that’s why you’re still seeing mixed feelings among businesses.” Carla Filipakis, founder and owner of specialised extracurricular service provider Decorati, said business is gradually picking up. “I think it’s improving every week. But we’ve only just come out of lockdown, and a lot of us haven’t really ventured too far.” Decorati runs arts and healthy eating programs in schools and shopping centres for children, so was hit hard by the lockdown. Filipakis says she’s getting more bookings and next year is looking busier, but she warned that many in western Sydney were still weary and cautious. “A lot of sole traders or small businesses haven’t reopened, there’s still a lot of anxiety around.” The emotional scars left by the harsher restrictions, which included a curfew and limits on travel, may take longer to heal. “I think there’s scarring just in the fact that we woke up every day to hear about cases in our community. So many of us were doing the right thing, but still felt targeted. “I just feel like the restrictions have lifted but the community is in the same space.” The state government appears to have little sympathy. The minister for western Sydney, Stuart Ayres, told reporters last week that the region needed to drop its “victim mentality”. “I completely reject the idea that we live in a two-tiered city,” he said. “The government made decisions to attack the virus where the virus was.” But community leaders insist the lingering sense of division from the rest of the city and fear that restrictions could return has not only weighed down the economy, but deepened other socioeconomic challenges. A report on the impacts of the lockdown, prepared by the Western Sydney community forum and the Western Sydney migrant resource centre, found the approach taken by authorities had a detrimental impact on social cohesion. “The public narrative has been perceived by local communities as an emphasis on compliance and punishment rather than on public health, resulting in increased social polarisation,” the report reads. Dr Archana Voola, policy officer from the Western Sydney migrant resource centre, told Guardian Australia the approach taken by authorities was exacerbating and exposing historical rates of inequality. “The foundations had cracks already. And when there’s an earthquake, those cracks are going to go deeper. It just so happened that this intense crisis situation made it obvious.” In her research for the centre, she spoke to community leaders from various backgrounds about their concerns and hopes post-lockdown. Many raised lingering feelings of division in their communities. “We are still getting questions from community leaders saying, ‘what is government doing in order to rectify this feeling of division, what is the plan? Are the problems just going to be discussed and never rectified?’ “It’s going to remain in people’s mind, especially if you’re vulnerable. The last thing you want is to feel like you’re outside the circle. I guess that’s going to be in their memory for a while.” Voola helped author the centre’s Pulse of South West Sydney CALD communities report, which raises a “fractured trust” between diverse communities and authorities. She says the nature of the lockdown, with its sudden shutting down of services and its set definition of home, family and authorised travel, particularly affected vulnerable communities. “They still present with many mental health issues. They couldn’t cope, many community members used words like stress, anxiety, sadness, depression, to describe being locked in and locked out of family, especially extended family.” The report also lays out recommendations, including introducing funding models for better multicultural programs, expanding employment pathways and developing improved health infrastructure. “You need to invest in people and infrastructure. Because if you just invest in infrastructure, the skills of the local people might not match, then you have to, again, get people from outside to meet those industry needs.” The NSW gvernment has announced a $5b “WestInvest” fund, but has not yet indicated where and how it will be spent. Ayres’ office did not respond when asked for details. “We need more than just words,” Voola says. “We need to see investment and infrastructure, we’re not just saying build the next club, we’re saying invest in the cohesion, in the voices from the region.” Despite the challenges facing western Sydney, she was optimistic about the future. “I don’t think the community is sitting every day thinking about how terrible it’s been. They don’t see it as a hopeless situation, they’re resilient, they’re already moving forward and higher.”California has become the latest jurisdictions to set up a system that would categorise and name heatwaves like cyclones or hurricanes, raising questions about whether Australia should adopt a similar system to reduce heat-related deaths. Following the recent example of Greece and the city of Seville in Spain, authorities in California will introduce a bill in January to develop the ranking system. The proposed system works by naming heatwaves and categorising them similar to cyclones, but instead of being coded by temperature they will be ranked according to their risk to human health – and specifically, the risk of death. For example, a category 1 heatwave might occur when the daily mortality rate was expected to climb by 10% on a normal day, with category 2 and 3 heatwaves rising further. When a category 3 heatwave would be declared, it may lead to the opening of swimming pools and air-conditioned shelters to the public, the activation of check-in services for the elderly, or a ban on utility companies cutting off the power for the period of the heatwave to ensure access to air conditioning. Dr Sarah Perkins-Kirkpatrick, a climate scientist at UNSW Canberra’s ARC Centre of Excellence for Climate Extremes, said it was a “great idea” that should be adopted in Australia. “I think naming [weather events] helps people to connect with them on a personal level. It’s personifies it,” Perkins-Kirkpatrick said. “But for example, Cyclone Tracy – just the name itself evokes how severe it was and the impact it had. “It’s also an exercise in science communication. It helps people say, ‘oh, there’s a heatwave, I need to take cover and do this, or do that’.” Dr Alistair Hobday, a research scientist at the CSIRO who was part of the team that proposed an informal system used to categorise and name marine heatwaves, said while he was cautious about naming systems, the value of the Californian approach was the way it suggested action. “I think we’re going to see many people in Australia experience events they have never experienced and they won’t know how to respond. This will help with that risk,” Hobday said. “At the moment it’s left up to individuals, but we know wealthier individuals survive events better than poorer individuals because they have more resources. Legislating this will require resources to be made available to everyone.” Australians might be keenly familiar with heatwaves but Perkins-Kirkpatrick said many people were unaware of just how dangerous they were or their role as the country’s “most deadly natural disaster”. “Heatwaves kill more people in Australia than all other natural disasters combined by a long shot,” she said. “And one fun fact: more people die on 27 January from extreme heat than they do on any other day of the year, because it’s the day after Australia Day. “Everyone’s dehydrated, they’re out in the sun, they’ve been drinking beers, their body starts to suffer heatstroke and they get rushed to hospital.” The Bureau of Meteorology currently has no plans to adopt a naming convention for heatwaves but it does publish a heatwave intensity map, run a forecast service and already categorises heatwaves by intensity. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Formalising this has sometimes proven tricky, as defining the length, breadth and areas affected by a heatwave is not easy – a category 3 heatwave might be declared in Melbourne but a category 2 heatwave may occur in Geelong during the same event. There is no global standard for what makes a heatwave, though in Australia it is defined as three or more days in a row when both daytime and night-time temperatures are unusually high relative to local conditions and recent history. The good news, Perkins-Kirkpatrick said, is that with the work done by the Bureau of Meteorology, Australia was already “halfway there” to setting up such a system. “We’ve only had a heatwave forecast for about a decade here. The bureau’s done a damn good job to get that together,” she said. “I think it’s a great idea, and it’s something we need to push for. It isn’t easy, but that doesn’t mean it’s not worthwhile.”The only political maxim worth remembering several months out from an election is that no one can predict how it will play out. Absolutes can change at a moment’s notice, and for the most part the voters who decide elections haven’t begun paying attention. But the election campaign is clearly under way already, which means the major political parties have been studying the electorates that need to be won, or held, to provide a pathway to victory. The campaigns The Coalition is laying the groundwork for a campaign based on the economy and moving forward from Covid, as well as trialling a “governments should get out of people’s lives” message, as it attempts to harness some of the brewing discontent surrounding lockdowns and vaccine mandates. Labor is basing its overarching message on whether Scott Morrison can be trusted. But the fractures left in the wake of the pandemic, which states and territories have experienced very differently over the past two years, mean the campaign is unlikely to be primarily about national messages. Instead it will be fought seat by seat, with tailored local campaigns based on what each major party believes will work. What goes on there will not be immediately obvious. Much like the franking credits and false “death tax” mini campaigns run at the last election, they will take advantage of social media, forums and word of mouth. A small example of that is apparent in the campaign Labor is whirring up around keeping aged pensioners off the cashless debit card – even though the Coalition has ruled that out. State of play The 2019 election almost mimicked the 2016 result. Nationwide, the swing was just 1.17% to the Coalition, which gave it a slim victory – not unlike that achieved by Malcolm Turnbull. The only difference was expectations. In 2016 it was assumed Turnbull would have an easy win, so almost losing to Labor unsettled the Coalition – starting the dominoes that led to Turnbull losing the prime ministership. In 2019 expectations were that Labor would romp home, so its loss hit harder, leading to soul-searching within the party, which has now spent eight years in opposition. The electoral commission has finished its boundary distribution. There are still 151 seats, with population changes meaning Western Australia has lost the electorate of Stirling (held by the Liberal party’s Vince Connolly), while Victoria has gained a new electorate in Hawke, which will be contested for the first time in 2022. Seventy-six remains the magic number for victory. Labor needs a net gain of eight seats for a majority government, while the Coalition, which now holds 76 seats, needs to retain the same number – it will also bank on winning back Hughes, which it lost to the crossbench when Craig Kelly defected. The people in each party who pay attention to the numbers – faction leaders, backroom types and strategists – rarely go on the record with their thoughts. The list of electorates considered in play has been pieced together from multiple sources over several weeks, and includes only those seats that both major parties consider to be in danger of flipping or vulnerable to challenge. Minor parties and independents Neither the Coalition nor Labor can be sure where votes carved off from their traditional bases will be going. The vote for the United Australia party, backed by Clive Palmer, is one of the most worrying for each campaign – in 2019 Palmer’s party damaged Labor, with its advertising hitting the Shorten opposition in seats where it could not afford to lose votes, particularly in Queensland. This time around, his influence may be stronger in NSW, but no one is sure which way those preferences will flow. Independents may also have a strong say in the result, with many challenging in Liberal seats backed by disparate and overlapping groups such as the “voices of” movement, the Climate 200 group backed by Simon Holmes à Court, and the Australian version of the Truth and Integrity project, supported by John Hewson and Barry Jones. Keep an eye on their impact in Angus Taylor’s seat of Hume, Josh Frydenberg’s seat of Kooyong and Paul Fletcher’s seat of Bradfield. Wentworth (Dave Sharma), Higgins (Dr Katie Allen) and North Sydney (Trent Zimmerman) are also on watch. One Nation’s usual impact (which can go either way) and the Greens’ climate credentials (which can hurt both parties in the inner city) also make the task of predicting how votes may flow to the major parties extremely difficult.Boris Johnson faces calls for an urgent inquiry into the “appalling” response to Storm Arwen and the resilience of the country’s electricity networks after thousands of people were left without power for more than a week. Local residents say they felt abandoned after the failure to restore power to more than 9,000 homes, mainly across Scotland and the north-east of England. MPs said it was a “national scandal” that the elderly and vulnerable had been put at risk in bitterly cold conditions. Ed Miliband, the shadow secretary for climate change, said: “It is completely outrageous that thousands of people have been without power for over a week. People are being left in the most appalling circumstances but there has been an absence of government leadership. “Communities in the north with their power cut off are being treated like second-class citizens. The government must get a grip on the immediate crisis and we need an urgent investigation to understand what went wrong, and to ensure that our power systems are never again this vulnerable to extreme weather events.” Storm Arwen has been one of the worst in a generation, with electricity poles snapped and wires down across large swathes of the country. The north-east of England, the Wye Valley, the Lake District, Aberdeenshire and Perthshire were among some of the areas most badly hit. Opposition MPs say that after severe storms in 2013 the government said lessons would be learned. Mary Foy, Labour MP for Durham City, said: “The response has been a national scandal and the storm has shone a spotlight on the lack of preparedness. If this had happened in the home counties, the government would have sprung into action and the prime minister would have got on his wellies and visited immediately. People have been freezing in their homes and it has put people at risk. My constituents feel they have been forgotten and betrayed.” Some of the worst affected areas are supplied by Northern Powergrid, which provides power for eight million people. It says it has restored power to 98% of homes, but 5,100 were still cut off on Friday evening. The company now faces questions over its electricity infrastructure, despite its proposals submitted to Ofgem, the regulator, earlier this year for extra investment in infrastructure. Farmer Ian Backhouse, from Reedness in East Yorkshire, said there had been a lack of investment: “There are several rotten and leaning poles that are only a strong wind away from falling over.” Stuart Roberts, deputy president of the National Farmers’ Union, tweeted: “We are now seeing the devastating consequences of that lack of investment.” He said many farms were without power and the damage would take years to rectify. Stephen Deakin, from Dissington, near Newcastle, told the BBC he had been without power for eight days. He said: “I understand it’s kind of an unprecedented situation but why did they not have a plan in place? Why were people not helped sooner?” Kevan Jones, Labour MP for North Durham, said some residents have been told repairs have been delayed because of the challenge of finding the parts for ageing infrastructure. He said Phil Jones, the chief executive of Northern Powergrid, should consider resigning over complaints by householders of the firm’s inadequate response. “They made the crisis worse by putting out the wrong information on when power would be restored to homes. We now need an urgent assessment of the resilience of the network.” Major incidents have been declared in County Durham and Northumberland. The Ministry of Defence said about 300 personnel from the British Army and Royal Marines were supporting local services, conducting door-to-door checks on vulnerable people. Defence Secretary Ben Wallace said: “Our dedicated Armed Forces personnel are working side by side with civil authorities to provide essential support to communities impacted by Storm Arwen.”Ofgem announced on Friday it was launching a review into the impact of Storm Arwen, which will focus on the role of the network companies in maintaining the resilience of the system and their emergency response. It says it will take enforcement action against firms which failed to restore power quickly enough. Residents can claim £70 for each 12-hour period they are without power, after an initial £70 for the first 48 hours. A £700 cap on compensation has been lifted. Tim Farron MP, the Liberal Democrat spokesperson for Rural Affairs, said: “There is no time to lose on learning the lessons of Storm Arwen. Winter has only just begun and it is clear our infrastructure cannot withstand any more storms. The past week has been a scandal and the Government has been asleep at the wheel.” Supplier Scottish and Southern Electricity Networks has said 950 properties were without power on Friday evening. Northern Powergrid apologised yesterday for poor communication with residents during the power cuts. The Energy Networks Association, which represents the UK’s electricity and gas network companies, said: “Our focus remains firmly on reconnecting the remaining customers without power. It’s clear that we must continue to learn from events like these, to ensure we are prepared for the future.” The association says power networks have spent £730m on resilience since 2015. On Saturday evening, Johnson said he said he has held calls with those leading the response to Storm Arwen, adding he remains “concerned” that thousands of households still do not have power. In a tweet, the prime minister said the government is ready to further support the recovery work “in any way we can”.It was probably fair to say that history was against Watford and so, unsurprisingly, was the present day. In 13 previous matches in all competitions against Manchester City going back to 2013, they had lost 13, shipping 50 goals and taking some hidings along the way – an 8-0 and a couple of 6-0s, including the one in the 2019 FA Cup final. This was another pummelling in all but the scoreline, City’s superiority stamped across every facet of the game and, given what had gone before, it felt faintly ridiculous when, after the substitute, Cucho Hernández, had reduced the deficit to 3-1 in the 74th minute, Joshua King blew a glorious chance for 3-2. Credit Watford for their fighting spirit, even if Pep Guardiola felt it crossed a line with Craig Cathcart’s cynical 85th minute hack at the substitute, Gabriel Jesus. The City manager would remonstrate with the referee, Simon Hooper, over that at full-time. “It looked like [an] orange [card], at least,” Guardiola said. Until the late and inconsequential twist, it had been a procession, City taking advantage of Chelsea’s defeat at West Ham to surge to the top of the table for the first time this season. On this and recent evidence, they will take some shifting. Bernardo Silva was the outstanding performer and he produced the moment of the match, cutting inside from the right and bending a shot into the far, top corner for 3-0. He had previously added to Raheem Sterling’s early header and City measured their disappointment purely in quibbles. They should have scored many more, with Jack Grealish particularly wasteful, while Ederson remained stuck on 99 clean sheets for the club. There was one pre-match statistic that had gone against the grain. In nine previous Premier League meetings with City, the Watford manager, Claudio Ranieri, had won eight and drawn one. It was always going to be a tough ask for him to continue that run, with the early exchanges making plain the gulf in class between the teams. City’s dominance at the outset was almost indecent, Watford chasing shadows as the visitors manipulated the ball with familiar smoothness. Aymeric Laporte had a header cleared off the line by João Pedro from a Phil Foden corner and Sterling opened the scoring moments later. The only mercy for Watford would be that City were not four or five goals up inside ten minutes. They created the chances. Playing as the false nine, Grealish headed another Foden corner straight at Daniel Bachmann when completely unmarked before he took a poor first touch after more probing by Foden. Sterling also extended Bachmann with a curler. The move for the breakthrough was ignited by Silva, whose crossfield pass was made to measure for Foden. When he crossed, Sterling was all alone to head home. Guardiola asked Silva and Ilkay Gündogan to wander up front whenever they saw fit and they did so regularly, the first half becoming an ordeal for Watford, who could not cope with City’s speed of movement and thought. Apart from an Emmanuel Dennis shot on 17 minutes, which Ederson saved easily, it was one-way traffic. Watford came to crave even the briefest sequence of possession. They barely got that. Silva scored the second from a tight angle, picking up the scraps after initially releasing Gündogan and seeing Bachmann get out to block. Before that, Grealish was denied by the goalkeeper with a deflected shot while he lifted another one high and, after it, Foden sliced when he should have done better. What makes this City team so ruthless and dispiriting to play against is their hunger out of possession. They were not without the ball for very long but when they were, they rushed men around it, showing their physicality and commitment, with Rodri most prominent. Ranieri switched to 4-2-3-1 for the second half, with Pedro in the No 10 role and, although Watford were better, City continued to create chances. And how about the show of strength when Guardiola introduced Riyad Mahrez and the fit-again Kevin De Bruyne on 67 minutes? Grealish did not look happy to come off. He had just skimmed the crossbar with a deflected shot – it was not his night – although, by then, City were 3-0 up thanks to Silva. Sterling also worked Bachmann, Foden hit the near post, Gündogan shot high and it was really was a shock when Hernández burst clear to beat Ederson at the second attempt. “Scoring goals is the most difficult thing in football and we are not specialists but we are playing really well,” Guardiola said. “What is important is to create the chances we have done.”The jail sentences given to the couple who killed six-year-old Arthur Labinjo-Hughes are to be reviewed to “determine whether they were too low”, the attorney general has announced. Arthur was left with an unsurvivable brain injury while in the sole care of his stepmother, Emma Tustin, who was jailed for life on Friday after being convicted of murder. Tustin’s life sentence carries a minimum term of 29 years, while Arthur’s father, Thomas Hughes, was sentenced to 21 years for manslaughter. A spokesperson for the Attorney General’s Office (AGO) said the sentences have been referred “for review to determine whether they were too low”. The AGO has 28 days from the date of sentence to review a case, assess whether it falls under the Unduly Lenient Sentence (ULS) scheme and make a decision as to whether to refer a sentence to the court of appeal. Arthur died in Solihull, Midlands on 16 June 2020 and his body was found to be covered in 130 bruises. The six-year-old had been poisoned, starved and beaten in the weeks before his death, the trial at Coventry crown court heard. A crossbench peer who led the inquiry in 2001 into the death of eight-year-old Victoria Climbié has warned that “marked” cuts to social care funding had taken their toll on child protection services that could have saved Arthur. Herbert Laming said the reduction in funding for social care in the last 10 years meant children like Arthur, whose abuse and death has shocked the nation, were being missed. Laming, who was later appointed to review the case of Peter Connelly (known as Baby P), told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme that the lack of funding had led to a “tremendous reduction of preventive services and family support services”. Both Victoria and Baby P had been neglected, abused and killed. Laming said: “The [frontline services] are not able to bring families into a day centre to see how the child reacts to the parents. They’re not able to observe a child with other children and then to see them go back to the adult in their lives, and social workers often find themselves in this day and age out on their own. And we must do something about that.” Football fans applauded during the sixth minute of the West Ham v Chelsea Premier League game as a picture of Arthur was shown on a screen. More tributes were paid by Coventry City, Wolverhampton Wanderers and Birmingham City while Aston Villa will do the same during Sunday’s match with Leicester. Solihull’s Local Child Safeguarding Partnership launched an independent review after it emerged in court the boy had been seen by social workers just two months before his death, but they concluded there were “no safeguarding concerns”. Education secretary Nadhim Zahawi said he would be making a statement on the case to parliament on Monday. The former children’s minister Tim Loughton said we all have a duty to make sure other vulnerable children are not let down by social care in the same way as Arthur. The Conservative MP wrote in the Sun: “Funding for children’s social care has lagged behind and social workers are overstretched and undervalued, when in truth they should be revered as our fourth emergency service. “Early interventions to stop the causes of safeguarding problems have been diluted to late interventions to firefight symptoms. “This is a false economy where in this case a child paid with his life. We all have an interest in putting this right urgently, and a duty to make sure it is.”David Hytner was at Vicarage Road to see the champions get back to the top. His report has landed, and here it is. Get clicking, good people. Thanks for reading this MBM. Nighty night! The sensational Bernardo Silva talks to Sky. “It was a very good job in the first half especially. We created chances and didn’t allow them to counter-attack. We scored two but should have scored more. At 3-0 we tried to control the game, but the last few minutes were not as good. We’re very happy, top of the league. It’s always better to be top than second or third or fourth, but it’s still the beginning, not even halfway through, and it’s so close. Lots of games to play, though it’s better to be in our position. It’s going to be tough for us and for Liverpool and Chelsea. It’s the most competitive league in the world, and we will do our best. At the end of the season we want to celebrate some titles.” Not a good day for Chelsea, then ... ... while Watford are suddenly in Newcastle’s sights. The champions return to the top of the Premier League, having secured the three points at Vicarage Road pretty much from the get-go. Watford will be happy to have kept the score down, and to have improved significantly in the second half. 90 min +4: One corner leads to another, then Ngakia steers a shot well wide right from the edge of the D. 90 min +3: Hernandez has another dig from a tight angle on the right. De Bruyne deflects it out for a corner. Chance for another late consolation. 90 min +2: On Sky, Alan Smith names Raheem Sterling as man of the match. He’s been magnificent ... though Bernardo Silva might have been even better. 90 min: There will be four extra minutes. 89 min: A loose ball to the right of the Watford D. De Bruyne opens his body and sends a powerful rising sidefoot towards the top right. The ball sails an inch over the bar. That would have been a stunner. 88 min: Jesus is fine. He trots back on and quickly gets back up to speed, bustling away to a chorus of boos. He then runs the ball out of play, much to the home support’s amusement. 87 min: Jesus is back up but whether he can continue isn’t yet clear. He limps off the pitch slowly. City have made all of their subs. 86 min: Jesus seems in a bit of pain. He’s grimacing quite a lot. The trainer is on, and Pep Guardiola is not happy, deep in discussion with the fourth official. 85 min: Jesus spins Cathcart, who responds by taking one for the team. A cynical clip on the heel, and a yellow card. 83 min: Ngakia has the chance to release Dennis down the left, but hangs onto the ball too long, and when he eventually makes the pass, the flag goes up for offside. 82 min: The corner leads to a half-chance for Silva, the ball dropping to him in a crowded six-yard box. But he’s swarmed and the shot is blocked. No hat-trick. Not yet, anyway. 81 min: City take the sting out of the game with some sterile possession. But then suddenly they step up the pace, and Sterling dribbles into the box from the left. His shot is deflected out for another corner. 79 min: Sterling drifts in from the left and looks for the top right. Always high and wide. 78 min: But you know what, it could easily have been two for Watford! Hernandez is sent scampering at full pace down the right. He crosses low and hard. King meets it first time, sweeping wide of the right-hand post. Not far away. Had that been on target - and it wasn’t the easiest of chances - it’s not clear that Ederson was getting to it. 77 min: That’s almost certainly too little, too late for Watford, but it was lovely play by Hernandez, and the hosts deserve something for a staunch second-half display against opponents who have at times threatened to overrun them. 75 min: Jesus comes on for Foden. Out of nothing! Hernandez takes up possession on the right-hand corner of the City box and creams a fine shot across Ederson and off the base of the left-hand post. So unlucky. But he doesn’t drop his head, and as the rebound flies across the face of goal, he sticks out a leg to guide it back towards the net. Ederson can’t keep it out, and that’s superb from Hernandez. 73 min: Kucka has a belt from 25 yards. It’s on target and heading into the bottom right, but not at enough pace to fox Ederson. 71 min: Ngakia comes on for Rose. 70 min: Foden sends it into the mixer. Cathcart heads over. Mahrez takes the latest City corner. Watford half clear, but City come back at them, Mahrez tiptoeing along the byline to the right of goal. His cross-cum-shot is blocked and loops high into the air. Laporte waits an age for it to come down, shapes to volley, then dummies to make more space. His eventual effort is bravely saved at close range by Bachmann, who requires a little treatment after taking one in his special area. 69 min: Sterling drops a shoulder to cut infield from the left. He’s crudely brought down in full flight by Dennis, who has the good grace to look sheepish. Free kick. 67 min: Grealish embarked on a long slow-motion dribble down the inside-left channel before Silva’s goal. He was forced to check back, but had attracted quite a few defenders, and that surely contributed to Silva then being found in acres on the other flank. That was his penultimate act of the evening; his last is a shot from the right-hand side of the D that’s deflected over the bar. He’s replaced by De Bruyne, while Gundogan makes way for Mahrez. 65 min: Dennis crosses from the right. King is lurking in the middle, but Ederson is on point and down quickly to smother. This is a peach. Silva, out on the right, waltzes into the box, drops a shoulder to send Rose off for the paper, and passes a curling shot into the top-left corner. That is such a stylish goal, and if we didn’t know it already, this is over. 62 min: City go up the other end and nearly make it three, Sterling racing down the right before rolling infield for Gundogan, who sends a rising shot towards the top-left corner ... but just too high. 61 min: Some good work by Pedro down the right. He earns a corner which is taken quickly, and taken short. City are a little slow to react, Pedro eventually whipping a low ball into the mixer. It’s shinned away by Laporte. 60 min: Foden powers into the box from the left and sends a fierce low drive off the base of the post and out for a corner ... as Bachman got a little touch to that. Laporte meets the corner on the penalty spot, swivelling and whipping a shot over the bar. Decent effort, that. 58 min: A little bit of space for Sissoko, 25 yards out. The crowd urge him to have a pop. He bows to their wishes, but drags a poor effort well wide left. 57 min: Dennis is tapped on the shin by Rodri as he dribbles into the City box from the left. He goes over, belatedly, and demands a penalty. He’s not getting one. Last season, perhaps. 55 min: Cancelo creams a diagonal ball towards Sterling on the right. Sterling can’t reach it. Goal kick. 53 min: Grealish shapes to shoot on the edge of the box but dummies and rolls forward for Sterling, free for a second on the penalty spot. Sterling takes too much time and his eventual effort is blocked and Cathcart clips clear. 51 min: Cancelo miscontrols and slips, allowing Dennis to make off with the ball down the right. But upon reaching the box he runs into trouble, and City break up the other end. Sterling skitters down the right, moves infield, and bashes a shot straight at Bachmann. This is not going to end 0-2. It just can’t. 50 min: Sterling tries to cross from the right. Blocked. The ball drops back towards him, so, brimming with confidence against the team he loves to play against, he creams a volley towards the bottom left. Cathcart sticks out a leg to deflect out for a corner, which is just as well for Watford, as that was heading in. Nothing much occurs at the corner. 48 min: Watford may as well go for it, and Dennis and Pedro make their presence felt on the edge of the City box. They earn a rare corner, from which Pedro heads over harmlessly, but that’s better from the home side, who would at least test the champions resolve should they somehow get the next goal. 47 min: Sterling and Silva combine again, down the right to earn the first corner of the second half. It’s played short and worked backwards, then Gundogan slips Silva clear down the inside right. He fizzes a low ball across the face of goal. Grealish can’t meet it at the far post, and the flag goes up for offside anyway. Watford get the second half underway. They’ve made two changes, replacing Cleverley and Louza with Hernandez and Kucka. Meanwhile Simon Johnston has been perusing the scoresheet, with hilarious consequences: “Sterling Silva? Who writes this stuff?” He’s here all week, ladies and gents. Try the pie and Bovril. Half-time entertainment. This is lovely. The half-time whistle goes. Watford will wish it was the full-time one, because this scoreline seriously flatters the home side. City have been outrageously dominant and have created enough chances to fill a large hat. 45 min +1: Grealish reaches the byline on the right only for his cutback to deflect into the arms of Bachmann. Watford launch a counter, Sissoko making ground down the right. His cross clanks off Laporte and into the arms of Ederson. The home fans want a free kick for a deliberate backpass, but the referee is, quite correctly, not interested. 45 min: Even more effortless football. There will be two added minutes. 43 min: More keepball. 41 min: Silva jigs his way down the right and slips a pass through three defenders towards Gundogan. The resulting shot is blocked out for a corner, which is claimed by Bachmann. 39 min: Foden rolls a ball down the left to release Cancelo, whose low cross is hoicked clear by Femenia. City are pulling Watford all over the place. 38 min: City are knocking it around for their own entertainment. A long game of keepball. 36 min: Silva smoothly makes his way down the inside-right channel and is this close to releasing Gundogan with a slip down the channel. The ball breaks to Sterling on the right; his cross is blocked by Rose. City are rampant. 34 min: Foden misses an absolute sitter. A cross comes in from the right. Troost-Ekong misses his header, the ball dropping to Foden on the spot. Foden spins and slices wide left. This quite feasibly could already be a cricket score. 32 min: ... and then Rose is booked for a late lunge on Grealish, earlier in the move. That all happened just as Watford were tentatively working their way into the match, asking a couple of polite questions up the other end. Gundogan is sent into the box by Silva. He takes a touch to the right, but Bachmann parries his low drive. No matter! The ball falls to Silva, who rounds the keeper and lashes home from a tight angle on the right. A sensational finish to a quick break upfield. 30 min: Dennis’s effort is harmlessly deflected through to Ederson. City then do what they do, attempting to play through the Watford press, but uncharacteristically get it wrong this time, allowing Sissoko the chance to shoot from 20 yards. Miles over. 29 min: Some good work by King, who latches onto a loose clearance by Laporte and threatens to bomb down the inside-left channel. He’s nicked by Dias, who is fairly fortunate not to go into the book. It’s a free kick, though. 28 min: Gundogan has a dig from the edge of the D. His effort clanks off the back of Grealish and out for a goal kick. 27 min: Cancelo screeches a speculative low drive wide right from 25 yards. 26 min: Well, the corner does lead to trouble, but only for Watford. Ederson punches it clear, and suddenly Sterling is romping up the other end on the counter. Watford look extremely light at the back, but Dennis tracks back to stop Sterling with a fine block. 25 min: Pedro turns on the jets and dribbles down the left at pace. He wins a corner. A chance for the hosts to load the box and cause a little trouble themselves. 23 min: Sterling and Silva play a lovely one-two down the right. Sterling’s sent clear into the box. He can’t quite get his feet in order to shoot, though, and the ball breaks to Grealish, 12 yards out. Grealish leans back and hoicks a shot over the bar, with poor Bachmann seriously isolated. City really should have scored there. 21 min: Grealish sashays his way down the middle and nearly breaks clear into the box. Not quite, but he still spots a little room between a couple of defenders to poke a shot through. His effort takes a deflection but Bachmann isn’t fooled and is able to save. 19 min: Gundogan, deep on the left, very nearly loops a lovely ball onto the boot of Sterling, zipping down the middle. Just a yard too far upfield, and Bachmann is able to gather. 17 min: Dennis shows again, scampering down the right touchline then cutting infield to whistle a shot towards the bottom right. It might have been going wide, but Ederson got down to smother easily enough anyway. 16 min: Space for Sterling down the right. He fizzes low and hard through the six-yard box, but there’s nobody in second-choice white, featuring all-over water graphics and iridescent accents, to trundle home. “How weird to see a young Judi Dench in that Z-Cars clip,” writes Rob Lewis. “Apparently she’s an Everton fan (who knew?), so I expect she’ll want Man City to win this one, so as to blunt the hopes of the Red side of Liverpool.” 15 min: Watford finally show in attack, which is probably going to be their best form of defence. Dennis crosses from the right, hoping to find King in the middle. Laporte eyebrows away from danger, just in time. 14 min: Watford haven’t conceded a chance for three minutes, which is progress of sorts. 12 min: They’ve just shown a replay of the King challenge on Foden. King’s lucky not to have walked for that, you know, studding his opponent on the ankle. You’ve seen folk sent off for less. Goodness knows what might happen if Watford go down to ten. 11 min: This is absurd. Foden makes good down the left again, and hooks infield for Grealish, whose attempt to slide home is parried by the busy Bachmann. His first touch, a little heavy, gave the keeper a chance. Watford are hanging on by their fingernails here. 9 min: The corner from the left leads to some pinball in the six-yard box. The ball’s forced out for another corner, this time on the right. From that one, Grealish is afforded a free header, six yards out. He really should score, but slaps his effort straight at Bachmann. This could already be three or four. Watford are in a spot of bother here. 8 min: This already has the sniff of rout about it. Sterling drifts in from the right and sends a low shot across Bachmann and towards the bottom left. The ball’s tipped around the post for a corner. There is also warm and heartfelt applause for the memory of the tragic Arthur Labinjo-Hughes. Rest in peace, little man. 7 min: King is booked for an over-zealous challenge on Foden. 6 min: Sterling has now scored 11 goals in nine career appearances against Watford. Don’t rule out that statistic ballooning further this evening. Foden crosses from the left. Sterling, running in from the other flank, meets the cross and steers a downward header across Bachmann and into the net. Just four minutes gone, and yet that had been in the post. 3 min: City keep the pressure on, and the ball comes almost immediately back to Laporte, six yards out. He opts to leave the ball to Grealish, unmarked next to him. Grealish is somewhat surprised and doesn’t react. Doesn’t matter, though, because ... 2 min: Sterling and Walker combine down the right, forcing Cathcart into the early concession of a corner. Laporte meets it, steering a header towards the top right. It’s heading in, Bachmann beaten all ends up, but Pedro heads off the line! What a start that could have been. City get the ball rolling ... but only after the taking of the knee. Warm applause greets the gesture. There’s no room for racism. Smooth, seamless segue dept. Like Everton, Watford run out to the Theme to Z-Cars. Here they come, in their yellow and black shirts. City sport second-choice white, featuring all-over water graphics and iridescent accents, it says here. We’ll be off in a minute1 We had a bumper edition of PRE-MATCH PESSIMISM: THE EVERTON WAY ahead of this week’s Merseyside derby. It’s proved popular enough for us to publish another edition today, albeit a shorter one. “Sigh,” begins Eric Peterson. “To be an Everton fan right now. Just when I thought the latest Miseryside Derby was safely in the rear view mirror, I have to deal with the sight of Divock Origi scoring the game-winner in injury time. Sigh.” You have to admire Eric’s commitment to our ongoing feature, despite Everton not even playing today. Pre-Match Pessimism: less a feature, more a way of life. Claudio Ranieri - who, and this statistic is weird enough to classify as psychedelic, has won eight of his nine matches against Manchester City - speaks to Sky. “Another big team, the champions of the Premier League. We will try to do our match. It will be hard, but we always believe and that is important. We have to play. Everything is a good experience for us. Our philosophy is OK, and we are ready.” Pep talks to Sky. “Watford are so demanding. Against Leicester and Chelsea they played really well, and beat United. They create chances and have a clear philosophy under Claudio Ranieri. We have to adapt to what they do in attack and impose, when we have the ball, our game.” A big result at Molineux. Wolverhampton Wanderers were 60 seconds of injury time away from becoming the first team to stop Liverpool from scoring this season. Then Divock Origi snatched the most dramatic of winners, and Liverpool leapfrog Chelsea into top spot! City can knock them off with a win here, but that’s a massive goal and a sickener not only for a determined Wolves side but also for the deposed leaders. Watford make one change to the starting XI named for the 2-1 defeat by Chelsea. Danny Rose replaces the injured Adam Masina at left-back. Manchester City make five changes to the side that beat Aston Villa 2-1. Jack Grealish, Phil Foden, Ilkay Gundogan, Kyle Walker and Aymeric Laporte take the places of Gabriel Jesus, Riyad Mahrez, Fernandinho, Olexander Zinchenko and Nathan Ake, all of whom drop to the bench. Watford: Bachmann, Femenia, Troost-Ekong, Cathcart, Rose, Louza, Dennis, Cleverley, Sissoko, Joao Pedro, King. Subs: Ngakia, Gosling, Fletcher, Tufan, Kabasele, Hernandez, Kucka, Elliot, Morris. Manchester City: Ederson, Walker, Dias, Laporte, Joao Cancelo, Gundogan, Rodri, Bernardo Silva, Sterling, Foden, Grealish. Subs: Stones, Ake, Gabriel Jesus, Zinchenko, Steffen, De Bruyne, Fernandinho, Mahrez, Carson. Referee: Kevin Friend (Leicestershire). Watford were unlucky not to get at least a point against Chelsea on Wednesday night. Whether that performance will give them hope for this evening’s visits of champions Manchester City is a moot point, because here, in reverse order, are their last unlucky 13 results against the Citizens: 0-4, 0-8, 0-6, 1-3, 1-2, 1-3, 0-6, 0-5, 0-2, 1-2, 0-2, 2-4, 0-3. That’s a cumulative score of 50-6 in City’s favour. All runs have to end sometime, and to be fair Watford drew both games in the Premier League in 2006-07, and actually won one in the old First Division back in April 1987. That victory, their last against tonight’s opponents in the top flight, put bottom-placed City on the brink of a relegation that would be confirmed three weeks later. But these were different times, and you wouldn’t put the entire mortgage on it happening tonight. Still, football is as football does, and you never know. Kick off at Vicarage Road is at 5.30pm. It’s on!All international arrivals to the UK will be required to take a pre-departure Covid-19 test to tackle the new Omicron variant, the health secretary has announced. Sajid Javid said that tightened requirements will come into force from 4am on Tuesday 7 December. Travellers will need to submit evidence of a negative lateral flow or PCR test to enter, which must have been taken a maximum of 48 hours before the departure time. People currently only need to self-isolate until they test negative within two days of arrival. The Scottish and Welsh governments also confirmed that people arriving in Scotland and Wales from abroad will need to take a pre-departure Covid test. The Department of Health and Social Care confirmed it intended the rules to apply to all the devolved nations. Nigeria will be added to England, Scotland and Wales’s travel red lists, joining several other southern African countries. The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) has said that the total number of confirmed Omicron cases had risen to 160 on Saturday, up 26 from the previous day. Javid said on Twitter that, in light of the most recent data, the government was “taking further action to slow the incursion” of the variant and stressed that vaccines remained the “first line of defence”, urging the public to have their boosters when offered. The introduction of pre-departure tests for travellers entering the UK has been called a “devastating blow” for the travel industry by the chief executive of the Airport Operators Association. Karen Dee told PA Media that the policy will act as a “major deterrent” to travel. “Most of the limited remaining demand following the reintroduction of self-isolation will now fall away, just as airports were hoping for a small uplift over the Christmas holiday,” she said. “Travel and aviation are the only sectors hit with any operating restrictions in response to the Omicron variant. The UK and devolved governments should have done the right thing and, alongside the restrictions, announced support for our businesses and our staff to get through another period of shutdown.” The CEO of Airlines UK, Tim Alderslade, called the decision “premature”. He said: “We don’t have the clinical evidence. The red list extension made complete sense – that’s what it’s there for – but we know from experience that blanket restrictions do not stop the importation of variants. “It’s already here. They’ve now changed their travel advice twice within a week and it’s just impossible for anyone to plan. These measures must be removed as quickly as possible in line with the speed of the booster programme.” The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, said on Twitter that he understood the move would be difficult for the travel industry. “As the scientists work to understand new Omicron variant we need to apply additional caution until picture is clearer,” he tweeted. “We appreciate this will be difficult for the travel sector as we prioritise public health &amp; protect the progress of our world-leading vax &amp; booster programme.” His comments come one day after one day after assuring travellers that pre-departure tests would not be needed. Meanwhile, the shadow health secretary, Wes Streeting, tweeted: “Finally the health secretary accepts Labour’s call for pre-departure tests, but why up to 48 hours before flight?” He also called for further action including increasing the number of booster jabs given to 500,000 a day.It’s almost two years since we first heard of Covid-19, and a year since the first Covid vaccines were rolled out. Yet this staggering progress is being squandered. We have drifted for months now, with richer countries, taking a very blinkered domestic focus, lulled into thinking that the worst of the pandemic was behind us. This variant reminds us all that we remain closer to the start of the pandemic than the end. There is a lot we need to learn about the Omicron variant. Whether or not this is a pandemic-changing variant – one that really evades our vaccines and treatments – remains to be seen. Research will tell us more in the coming days and weeks, and we must watch and follow the data closely while giving the brilliant scientific teams time to get the answers. Although I am very worried about countries with limited access to vaccines, I am cautiously hopeful that our current vaccines will continue to protect us against severe sickness and death, if we are fully vaccinated. But that may not be true for the next variant. The longer this virus continues to spread in largely unvaccinated populations globally, the more likely it is that a variant that can overcome our vaccines and treatments will emerge. If that happens, we could be close to square one. Importantly, right now, the urgent things haven’t changed: wearing masks indoors, increasing testing, social distancing, isolating if positive (with support to do so) and vaccination will all help to drive down transmission and protect against illness. We will probably never know for certain how or where Omicron originated, but we must continue to protect the most vulnerable as a priority, including immune-compromised people, the elderly and healthcare workers. It is understandable that countries are moving to use boosters to protect their populations. This must happen in parallel with ensuring global vaccine supply. Supply is finally increasing, and, with political will, it can be achieved. Rich countries, who have the majority of existing supply, must share more doses over the coming months. Covid-19 has already killed millions and changed everyday life for us all, but we must do everything we can to avoid a return to lockdowns – a sign that public health has failed. World leaders, by continuing to ignore the warnings and focusing only on their national populations, are playing with fire and putting our hard-won progress at risk. It is unbelievable that the ACT-Accelerator is still having to plead for the funding urgently needed to end this pandemic. This political drift and lack of leadership is prolonging the pandemic for everyone, with governments unwilling to really address inequitable access to the vaccines, tests and treatment. We are not yet in control of this pandemic – Omicron or an even worse variant could arise at any time. There have been wonderful speeches, warm words but not the actions needed to ensure fair access to what we know works and would bring the pandemic to a close. Even before we learned of this new variant, the global picture was already deeply troubling. The fourth wave we are seeing in Europe and southern Africa will soon hit the US, central and south America, and Asia. As the UK passes the G7 presidency to Germany, and Italy hands G20 to Indonesia later this month, it is crucial that world leaders see this for what it is: still the most urgent threat facing our world. We will only bring this pandemic to an end by working together globally and sharing access to all the vital public health tools needed to reduce transmission everywhere and save lives. It is staggering and utterly frustrating that, two years on, governments still haven’t woken up and realised this is in their enlightened, shared self-interest. Acting in national self-interest will only ever perpetuate this crisis, trapping us in a cycle of waves, new variants, lost lives and continued economic and societal disruption. No country should believe they are safe, purely because they’ve vaccinated their own populations. We can and must do better than this. Dr Jeremy Farrar is director of the Wellcome Trust, a global charitable foundationOn the face of it, a little over a third of the way through, this feels like a pretty good Premier League season – at least from a football point of view. There is the possibility of a three-way title fight. The only side that look as though they could be cut adrift have just been taken over by owners who can be expected to spend heavily in January. There are intriguing stories everywhere, from Manchester United’s struggles to the returns of Antonio Conte, Steven Gerrard and Patrick Vieira. The arrival of Ralf Rangnick at Old Trafford adds to the richness of the mix, the sense that the Premier League is the home of the world’s most tactically advanced football. Not only does the Premier League have coaches of the proven quality of Pep Guardiola, Jürgen Klopp and Thomas Tuchel, but also now, along with Marcelo Bielsa, two of the great theorists who have shaped so much of how modern football is played. The old carousel coaches, the ashen-faced football men who specialised in getting a side to 15th, have largely been driven out and the survivor of that generation, David Moyes, has undergone a remarkable reinvention, so much so that it is Rafa Benítez, with his Champions League and La Liga titles, who has come to seem like the upholder of that dour tradition. The growth of the Premier League’s middle class, with Leicester, West Ham, Aston Villa and Everton investing relatively heavily over the past few years to challenge (or at least be in a notional position to challenge) Tottenham and Arsenal for the European places, has added to the intrigue, aided by the way the Premier League has been insulated by its enormous broadcast deal against the economic impact of the pandemic seen elsewhere. Players such as Youri Tielemans, Son Heung-min, Emi Martínez and Tomas Soucek remain at upper-mid-table English clubs because the more glamorous predators who might once have pounced for them have been largely defanged. (As Rory Smith of the New York Times suggested recently, so great is the Premier League’s advantage that it’s barely worth La Liga or Serie A trying to compete on broadcast rights; there’s an argument they would be better off getting their games screened on free-to-air television overseas to try to build an audience for future rights deals.) But amid all the positivity, the sense that the Premier League this season is a good product that is worth watching, one statistic should perhaps give cause for concern: while the top three – before the weekend’s fixtures – had a combined goal difference of +79, only one other side, West Ham, had a positive goal difference. And that perhaps, more even than the seven‑point gap between third and fourth, gives an indication of how much better they are than the rest. The top three are all in their ways slightly flawed – Manchester City and Chelsea both tend to fail to take chances; Liverpool’s defence is far leakier than it was in their title-winning season. Which means there is not yet the same sense of relentlessness there was in 2018-19 when City won their last 14 games of the season to take the title by a point from a Liverpool side that themselves lost only once all season and won their final nine games. For all there was only a point between them, there was remarkably little intrigue over the final two months, a title race that, like a bad grand prix, came to feel like a parade. But still, catch one of those three on a good day and there is the potential for a hammering: Liverpool have won eight games by three or more goals this season; Chelsea six and City four. At the moment, Chelsea are on course for 90 points, which would be the eighth-highest total for the champions since the Premier League became a 20-team competition in 1995-96. West Ham, in fourth, are on course for 65 points, which would be the fifth-lowest total to take fourth since 1995-96 and the lowest since Everton in 2004-05. Other than emphasising the gulf between the top three and the rest, that shouldn’t be taken as an indicator of West Ham’s lack of ability; rather it suggests an equality below the top three, certainly while Manchester United, who remain the wealthiest English club by revenue, sort themselves out. The truth is that steps and gradations and subdivisions within a league are very hard to avoid. And that in itself raises the question of what an ideal league would look like. How much equality would be a good thing? A season in which all 20 teams finished on 50-odd points might be fun, but probably would suggest a lack of quality. And that matters, not just because it would have a negative impact on results in Europe, but because high-level teams are good to watch. There is a joy and a privilege in watching sides as gifted as City, Chelsea and Liverpool, even when there is unease at the financial structures or entities that have contributed to their dominance. For the rest, it’s good to have giants because there is a frisson in playing them; the question is how giant they should be. Every game should be a challenge, no result should be taken for granted. At the moment, the Premier League, while still probably overly skewed towards the elite, feels not too far off that point. But if City and Chelsea start taking their chances more consistently, or if Liverpool stop leaking soft goals, that perception could quickly change. The real fear lies ahead. In 2018, the Premier League ended the equal division of overseas broadcast rights. By last year, those rights were worth £1.3bn a year. US rights have just been sold for £2bn over the next six years. Despite problems over Chinese rights, the international market is growing, and increasingly profits the bigger clubs. Add in the change in the Champions League format from 2024 to provide more games and revenue for the elite, and the middle-class surge that has done so much to enliven the early months of this season could very quickly disappear.Pope Francis has used a trip to Greece to hit out at Europe for the divisions it has exhibited over migration while also warning against the perils of populism. In Athens, on the second leg of a Mediterranean tour that has highlighted the plight of migrants and refugees, the pontiff also expressed concern over democracy’s retreat globally. Greece has long been on the frontline of the refugee crisis. “The European community, torn by nationalist self-interest, rather than being the engine of solidarity, appears at times blocked and uncoordinated,” he said in an address at Greece’s presidential palace on Saturday. “In the past ideological conflicts prevented the building of bridges between eastern and western Europe; today the issue of migration has led to breaches between south and north as well.” The Roman Catholic leader, himself the son and grandson of impoverished Italians who moved to Argentina, has made the defence of migrants a cornerstone of his papacy. In Cyprus, the first stop of a five-day trip, the pope who turns 85 this month and now walks with a discernible limp, condemned what he described as the “slavery” and “torture” often suffered by those fleeing war and poverty. “It reminds us of the history of the last century, of the Nazis, of Stalin,” he said at a prayer service on Friday held for migrants coalesced in Nicosia, the war-split island’s capital. “And we wonder how this could have happened.” But Francis, who arranged for the relocation of 50 asylum seekers from Cyprus to Rome, reserved his harshest language for the Greek end of his tour. Citing Athens as not only the birthplace of democracy but where “man first became conscious of being ‘a political animal’, he expressed fears over the disenchanted being lured by what he called the siren songs of authoritarianism and warned against populists promising popular but unrealistic solutions. “We cannot avoid noting with concern how today, and not only in Europe, we are witnessing a retreat from democracy,” he said in a speech that steered clear of naming nations or individual leaders. “Democracy requires participation and involvement on the part of all … it is complex, whereas authoritarianism is peremptory and populism’s easy answers appear attractive.” At the southern extremities of Europe, Cyprus and Greece have toughened their migration policies in response to an influx of people fleeing conflict, persecution and poverty in Asia, Africa and the Middle East. In Greece, increased security at land and sea frontiers with Turkey has led to a dramatic drop in arrivals. But Cyprus, further east, has recorded a sharp rise in asylum seekers. Officials in the internationally recognised Greek-run south blame the breakaway Turkish-occupied north for allowing migrants to cross the ceasefire line which has divided the country since Ankara invaded in response to a coup aimed at union with Greece in 1974. With the EU hardening border controls more generally and allegedly engaging in pushbacks to keep migrants at bay, Pope Francis has served as a moral compass on the issue. In Nicosia on Friday he said he had a responsibility to both speak for and tell the truth about the suffering of refugees. Earlier on Saturday the Greek Cypriot interior minister, Nicos Nouris, confirmed that 14 of the 50 asylum seekers to be transferred to Italy would leave the island on 16 December including two Cameroonian students stranded since May in the island’s UN-patrolled buffer zone. Like Greece and other southern EU member states, Cyprus has complained of being forced to shoulder a disproportionate responsibility in managing mass migration to the bloc. Nouris said the pope’s gesture was more than symbolic. “[It] clearly shows solidarity in practice,” he told reporters following a farewell ceremony for the religious leader. “This is the substantive solidarity that we seek from our European partners.” On Sunday, in a repeat of his poignant visit to Lesbos in 2016, Francis will fly to the Aegean island to hear the testimonies of migrant men and women who have reached its shores. Five years ago, he stunned Europe’s political elite by rescuing 12 refugees seemingly doomed to live in the appalling conditions of a vastly overcrowded camp on Lesbos by taking them back with him on his plane. Asylum seekers have now been settled in a temporary reception centre after a series of fires gutted the squalid facility in Moria. For a Catholic leader who loves to surprise, it is not impossible that he could repeat the stunt. “There might be a spontaneous decision,” said Fr George Dagas, parish priest at the Greek capital’s Catholic cathedral. “The Holy Father wants a better future for all these people. Who knows? It might happen again.”The 1940s and 50s are often seen as a golden era for democracy, when Britain and its allies triumphed against fascism before the postwar consensus powered the formation of the welfare state and National Health Service. In those days we had a nation broadly content with itself and its values, and almost completely unquestioning of its system of government. Even in those patriotic times there was, however, a good deal of cynicism about the motivations of politicians among a significant proportion of the population. A landmark Gallup poll in 1944 found that 35% of voters believed politicians were merely “out for themselves”. But the same poll found slightly more – 36% – believed their political leaders were largely selfless people, focused primarily on advancing the interests of their country, while some 22% said they put their party first. Ever since then – as we show today – there has been a gradual decline in trust in politicians across the decades, to the point where today it is close to non-existent, raising profound questions about the health and future workability of our entire democratic system which must rely on mutual respect between elector and elected to work. New polling for the IPPR thinktank, which asked the same question at the end of last month as Gallup posed 77 years ago, shows that today 63% of people now believe their politicians are mainly in it for themselves. And most strikingly of all, perhaps, only 5% (one in 20) believe they are in it for their country’s best interests. The recent Owen Paterson scandal and subsequent sleaze stories about politicians seem to have turbocharged a pre-existing decline in trust to new levels under Prime Minister Boris Johnson to a point where lack of faith in those who we elect is the norm. When IPPR first asked YouGov to poll again on the question “who are they in it for?” in May this year, 57% said politicians were in it for themselves, while 9% believed they were in it for their country. The leap in distrust since May and the Paterson fiasco is regarded as statistically very significant. “Citizens have always been cynical about their politicians,” says Professor Will Jennings of Southampton University, joint author of a new IPPR report which draws on the polling, entitled Trust Issues: Dealing with Distrust in Politics. The report is the first in a series from IPPR looking at this phenomenon, its causes and how to stave off a potential resulting crisis for UK democracy. “But the latest data we have demonstrates just how far trust in politicians and their motivations has fallen. Even in recent months it is noticeable how far it has continued to fall.” The report suggests the phenomenon, in a post-Brexit UK struggling to re-establish new economic and diplomatic alliances, as well as deal with the Covid-19 pandemic, has huge implications for society and the way we are governed. “If low levels of trust reflected a healthy scepticism on the part of citizens that fuelled democratic accountability, there may not be particular cause for concern,” it says. “What is cause for concern, however, is if scepticism turns into cynicism, or distrust, and generalised perceptions of politicians are negative enough to drive disengagement with democracy or actions and attitudes that are corrosive against its foundations.” Brexit and Covid have themselves influenced and shifted levels of trust in politicians and the democratic system in profound but different ways, the reports shows. Using data from the British Election Study, the academics and researchers behind the report find that the type of voters associated with the Remain side tended to be more trusting in their politics and politicians before Brexit, and those associated with Leave much less so. But by the time the UK had finally left the EU, this had reversed. This suggests that Remainers felt let down by the system which delivered Brexit, while many Leavers felt it showed their voices had been heard, though at times they feared Brexit would not be delivered as promised. “There is robust evidence to suggest that, in the period leading up to the EU referendum of 2016, and in its aftermath, Brexit identities conditioned trust in politics and politicians,” the report says. “Looking back to 2014, panel data from the BES shows that would-be Remain voters were around 10 percentage points more trusting than would-be Leave voters – but, by June 2020, this pattern had been inverted, with Remain voters 10 percentage points less trusting than Leave voters.” At the start of the Covid pandemic, trust in politics and politicians was enhanced, as a “rally round the flag” attitude prevailed, only for this to be replaced by greater cynicism than existed before as the pandemic persisted. “Levels of political trust in Britain rose following the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic, as has often been the case in a crisis. It appears, however, that this opportunity to rebuild trust may already have been squandered, with levels of trust in government falling gradually through 2020 before returning to pre-pandemic levels. Evidence from previous epidemics suggests young people growing up through the Covid-19 pandemic may have their trust in government permanently damaged.” The report also finds that people in England trust their politicians less the further they live from Westminster, which may strengthen the case for more devolution of power to local levels. Faith in politics and politicians also varies among those with different levels of education, the study found. Those with GCSE-level qualifications or below consistently report lower levels of trust than those with higher education qualifications. However, as with the shift in faith among Remainers and Leavers, this trend reversed in 2019 when university-educated respondents reported lower trust levels than those with fewer qualifications for the first time. The IPPR argues that this process should be of particular concern to people on the centre left of politics who believe in strengthening the role of the state to deliver a more equal society, as without trust in government it will be more difficult to enact policies which deliver higher levels of government intervention. Unless there is action to reverse the decline of trust, the report warns that there could be a “downward spiral of trust” in which government performs worse, resulting in further declines as the economy underperforms, weakening public services and widening inequalities. All this could, in turn, lead to a rise in populism, more polarisation and more scandals and corruption. “Given this, we can clearly conclude that declining trust poses clear risks … Action is needed to set the UK on a new course away from democratic dissatisfaction and towards democratic and social renewal.”Trust in politicians to act in the national interest rather than for themselves has fallen dramatically since Boris Johnson became prime minister, according to figures contained in a disturbing new study into the state of British democracy. The polling data from YouGov for the Institute of Public Policy Research (IPPR) shows a particularly sharp fall in trust in the few weeks since the Owen Paterson scandal triggered a rash of Tory sleaze scandals. In 2014, when David Cameron was prime minister, 48% of voters believed politicians were “out merely for themselves” as opposed to their country or party. This had increased to 57% by May 2021 after nearly two years of Johnson in No 10, and leapt to 63% last week in the wake of the Paterson affair. In the same poll, just 5% of voters thought politicians were in the job primarily for the good of their country. While the polls have asked about politicians of all colours, the main opposition parties now believe the Tories are particularly vulnerable on questions of trust and sleaze, offering them a chance to break through. Last week, after he reshuffled his frontbench team, Keir Starmer wrote to all shadow cabinet ministers stressing the importance of ethics as one of many qualities they had to demonstrate, day in, day out. He also stressed the need to hold the Tory government to account for its constant “slogans” and “broken promises”. The poll findings come amid reports from the Liberal Democrats that they have dramatically closed the Tory lead in the previously safe seat of North Shropshire, where a byelection will take place next week following the resignation of Paterson, who was found to have broken parliamentary lobbying rules. According to canvassing data on postal voters, party insiders say the Lib Dem vote has risen from 32% to 38% in the past fortnight, while the Tory vote has fallen from 52% to 44%. If accurate, this would mean the Conservatives’ lead has fallen into single digits. At the last election, the Tories claimed 63% of the vote. With the Lib Dems hammering away on the theme of sleaze in the byelection, Johnson visited the seat on Friday in an attempt to lessen Tory jitters and boost his party’s campaign. A Liberal Democrat source said the seat would be even harder to win than Chesham and Amersham had proved to be in June, where Ed Davey’s party scored a shock victory. However, the source insisted the Lib Dems had momentum behind them. “Conservative support is draining before our eyes – our data shows they have lost at the very least 15% of their share of the vote,” they said. “This is definitely looking like it will be a close contest, and the Conservatives are in panic mode.” Robert Ford, professor of politics at Manchester University, said if the Lib Dems were to take the seat, where they had been strong before entering into coalition with the Conservatives in 2010, it could be a huge moment, not only for them but for British politics. “It would show not only that the slate had been wiped clean from the coalition but also that the political damage of being ultra-Remain had also gone. It would be really, really good news for them and really, really bad news for the Tories.” On Saturday, there was more unwelcome news for Johnson as police said they were considering complaints from Labour MPs that the prime minister and his No 10 staff held Christmas parties in breach of Covid regulations a year ago. Labour backbenchers Neil Coyle and Barry Gardiner have written to Scotland Yard asking police to investigate reports that two parties were held in the run-up to last Christmas at a time when such gatherings were banned. Johnson has not denied the events took place but said no rules were broken – although he has repeatedly refused to explain how that could be the case. In a statement, the Metropolitan police said that while they did not routinely investigate “retrospective” breaches of Covid regulations, they were considering the correspondence they had received. In an interview for today’s Observer, the new shadow secretary of state for levelling up, Lisa Nandy, said Starmer had been clear after the reshuffle that he now had the team that could take on the Tories and deliver for the country once in power. Nandy said news that the government had delayed a white paper on levelling up because of disagreements over strategy and the definition of the term showed they had never been serious about plans to make the UK more equal in the first place. She added: “They are in complete disarray on what is supposed to be the key element of their national policy at the next election. They have nothing to put in the white paper and I hear they can’t even agree what levelling up actually means. It is my job to expose their slogans and empty promises every day until the election.” The IPPR report – the first in a series that will look at the causes of distrust and possible remedies to shore up UK democracy – concludes that declining trust is a serious danger to the efficient functioning of society. “It matters for our democracy: where an absence of trust turns into active distrust – characterised by cynicism and disillusionment – it can lead to a downward spiral of democratic decline,” it says. • This article was amended on 6 December 2021. An earlier version referred to the Lib Dem vote and “internal polling based on postal votes”. To clarify : the vote figure is based on canvassing data on postal voters.How do we put a stop to the Channel crossings? There is no doubt that our relationship with France is pivotal. I’m not naive about this: I know a thing or two about negotiating with the French. Clearly, both the shadow of Brexit and the looming French presidential election are souring the context. But we have found common cause before: securing the Channel tunnel entrance and closing down the Sangatte refugee camp. We must rediscover that spirit of cooperation to ensure that robust patrol and surveillance measures are in place. That is surely not beyond us. Longer term, the nationality and borders billwill be integral to fighting this perilous phenomenon. The home secretary is undoubtedly committed to finding a solution and she is right on many of the proposed answers: we must take a tough stance on vile people smugglers who trade on people’s lives. But on one specific front, I very much fear she has got it wrong. The bill contains a proposal to grant the UK unprecedented powers to send migrants to a third country to have their asylum claims processed. This means the government could deport migrants before their applications have been considered, creating an immigration process in reverse: deport first, ask questions later. Advocates of the “offshoring” policy have used the Australian model, on which it is based, to argue that it was effective in reducing the number of boat crossings. But our geography is entirely different. And the Home Office has not explained where this offshore processing will take place. The Norwegians have said no. The Albanians have said no. The Rwandans have said no. So now the Home Office is left considering Ascension Island: 2,000 miles from Britain, with no infrastructure on the island and just one weekly flight from Johannesburg, via Namibia. Offshoring started off costing the Australians more than £300,000 a person a year to process but ended up costing more than £2m a person a year. The UK only has even more expensive options. We now know that in centres on Nauru and Papua New Guinea, many detainees were mistreated, while others languished in limbo year after year with little hope of resolution. We know that the staggering costs were unsustainable and the policy was abandoned. So why are we trying to emulate this failed strategy? The blanket nature of pre-emptive deportation is particularly worrying. For a deterrent to be effective, there can be no exemptions or exceptions. Indeed, the minister rejected an amendment at committee stage and explicitly ruled out any exemptions. So a pregnant woman, an orphaned child, a young family – all will be deported to a transit country and detained while their fate is decided. And herein lies a great irony. At least three-quarters of those asylum seekers detained in offshore processing centres by Australia were eventually judged to be genuine refugees. Similarly in the UK, the vast majority of those who claim asylum are granted asylum. Pushing the problem to another part of the world is just a costly way of delaying the inevitable. From mountains of paperwork and chartering RAF flights, to building the required infrastructure and dealing with foreign bureaucracies, the logistics involve colossal costs the British taxpayer could well do without. At worst, we could inadvertently create a British Guantanamo Bay. Parliament shouldn’t grant the government a power that it hasn’t explained how it would use. Nor should we grant a power we don’t want to see used. We said no to pre-trial detention. We said no to ID cards. And we should say no to offshoring until the government can explain how and where they plan to do it. There is no magic solution, but the current proposal will do little to tackle the push factors driving people out of their home countries or the pull factors that attract them to the UK, such as speaking English or a desire to be reunited with their families. Crucially, it will not deter refugees from attempting to reach the UK; they will always look for other ways. Instead of a policy built solely on keeping people out, the government should consider creating a legitimate route in for genuine refugees. Many will be surprised to learn that the UK does not have a proper scheme in place that allows people to exercise their right to seek asylum. Migrants fleeing repression in Iran or famine in war-torn Yemen are not able to apply at British embassies. They are not allowed to board flights without guaranteed permission to enter the UK. The only options available to them are either illegal or dangerous or both. Creating new legal and safe routes would be a constructive rather than destructive deterrent. It would give people a chance to make their case and to think again about crossing the Channel. It would send the message that Britain is firm and fair, realistic and compassionate. Only then will we truly take back control. • David Davis MP was Brexit secretary between 2016-2018A former Conservative cabinet minister has warned that the Home Office’s controversial borders bill risks creating a “British Guantanamo Bay”. David Davis, who served as Brexit secretary from 2016 to 2018, said that the home secretary’s plans to send asylum seekers to another country while their claims are processed may create a facility as notorious as the US detention camp in Cuba. Guantanamo Bay has been described as a “stain on the human rights record” of the US and the “gulag of our times” with detainees making repeated allegations of torture, sexual degradation and religious persecution. Davis described Priti Patel’s plans as deeply flawed, noting that the Home Office is unable to explain where its widely criticised offshore asylum processing facilities would even be located. The MP added that the plans also seemed to gloss over the fact that the majority of asylum seekers were eventually granted refugee status. “Pushing the problem to another part of the world is just a costly way of delaying the inevitable.” Davis added: “From mountains of paperwork and chartering RAF flights, to building the required infrastructure and dealing with foreign bureaucracies, the labyrinthine logistics would involve colossal costs the British taxpayer could well do without. At worst, we could inadvertently create a British Guantánamo Bay.” The nationality and borders bill, due to return to parliament for debate this week, also faces the prospect of a rebellion with Tory MPs seeking to expand the number of people leaving Hong Kong who are eligible for British citizenship. More than two dozen Conservatives have put their name to an amendment to broaden the UK’s visa programme with the Home Office responding that it has no plans to expand the eligibility criteria. Opposition to the borders bill continues to mount with British doctors the latest group to lambast its proposals. The British Medical Association (BMA), which has nearly 160,000 members, is among the signatories to a letter addressed to Patel that says the bill and its plans for “offshoring” will cause “lasting and profound harm to the health and wellbeing” of asylum seekers. John Chisholm of the BMA’s medical ethics committee chair, said: “It is beyond doubt that the proposals within the new bill have deeply alarming health implications. “The government must ensure that asylum seekers and refugees, many of whom already have complex health needs, are housed in humane conditions with accessible healthcare, indeed preferably in community-based accommodation in the UK.” Other signatories include Doctors of the World UK, the Faculty of Public Health, the Royal College of Midwives and the Royal College of Psychiatrists. The Home Office has defended its plans for offshore asylum centres by saying it wants to “manage the UK’s asylum intake” and that it would help “deter irregular migration and clandestine entry to the UK”.Even as Ralf Rangnick set his sights on shifting Manchester United’s focus from their past to the future, he began with a journey into his own history. His has been an unconventional route to Old Trafford but the interim manager recalled his impromptu role as Jürgen Klopp’s unofficial agent, a failed attempt to hire Thomas Tuchel for a second time and the day he went to scout Callum Hudson-Odoi and came away determined to sign Jadon Sancho. The “godfather of gegenpressing”, as Rangnick has been christened, is keen to arrange a dinner with the godfather of United. Yet his new job is no nostalgia trip for a manager who faced Sir Alex Ferguson with Schalke in the 2011 Champions League semi-finals. Whereas Ole Gunnar Solskjær seemed to be in a 1990s re-enactment society, Rangnick is positioning himself as United’s ambitious moderniser. Rewind decades and that description applied to Sir Matt Busby and then Ferguson, the men who forged United before becoming anachronisms in the 2020s. “The important thing is to celebrate the DNA this club still has, but to also implement it into the transformation to modern football,” Rangnick said. If the transition to modernity may seem a jolt to United, he showed he can speak both Ferguson’s and the Glazers’ language. “It’s pretty easy in football,” he said. “You need to have a certain idea: what do we want to stand for? Call it a corporate identity.” United’s brand has proved hugely profitable but elements appeal to Rangnick. While they are undoubtedly one of the biggest spenders in the Premier League, United also have a famously fine youth policy. “One does not exclude the other,” said Rangnick, who cited the academy graduates Marcus Rashford and Mason Greenwood as role models. “We should make sure that every year we have one or two players who are good enough to make it into the first team.” The other parts of the equation involve “the best possible recruitment” and “the best manager”. Since Ferguson, United have had neither. Rangnick assembled the Bundesliga’s youngest team at RB Leipzig. His transfer strategy has focused on the up and coming but he is adamant he is not too dogmatic. “If you pay big money for a 30-year-old and he’s still good enough to make you successful, I don’t mind that,” he said. “But you have to be aware the money is only being invested in the potential success over the next two or three years and you won’t get any return. I think it always makes more sense to sign a player at 21 or 22 and if you have to pay a big fee, you have the chance to develop him into a player who is worth even more.” Sancho, who caught his eye playing for England Under-19s but who rejected Leipzig for Dortmund, is a case in point. “It’s clear that his trajectory is now going upwards,” said Rangnick. His eye for talent extends to coaches. He has known Klopp since 1997. Four years later, when Mainz wanted their ageing defender to take over as manager, he turned to a friend for guidance. “In a way, I was his agent and I advised him what he should ask for,” Rangnick recalled. “Jürgen said: ‘Ah, do you not think that is too much to ask?’ I told him it was the right thing to do, and I am pretty sure he got what he wanted.” They bonded over a futuristic vision. Two decades on, one German pressing revolutionary was still able to make Solskjær’s United look outdated in Liverpool’s 5-0 win in October. Klopp has branded his high-octane tactics “heavy-metal” football. “Mine is definitely not a slow waltz,” Rangnick said. “I am not that far apart from Jürgen in terms of our ideas. That’s no secret.” A fellow traveller offers lessons. He noted the muscle injuries Liverpool players suffered when exposed to Klopp’s high-intensity approach. He feels his inheritance is better than Klopp’s was in 2015. “I think we are further forward,” Rangnick said, referencing the players, from Mohamed Salah to Alisson, who Liverpool have since added. The other point of comparison is Tuchel, whom Rangnick made manager of Stuttgart’s under-15s. “I later tried to lure him away from Augsburg when I was at Hoffenheim and I wanted him to become our under-23s coach,” he added. Now Tuchel is a Champions League winner. His mentor accepts he may not emulate his protege. “To do what Thomas did in four months at Chelsea was incredible,” Rangnick said. “I am not sure I can say that things will develop in the same way for me at United.” Pep Guardiola, Tuchel and Klopp render his task tougher. United have fallen behind more modern clubs. “To say I will challenge the top Premier League managers in the next few weeks or months is not realistic,” said Rangnick. “I am more than optimistic, but I also have to be realistic.”The Liberal Democrat peer Lord Strasburger has called for the House of Lords’ conduct rules to be strengthened after no action was taken on a complaint that the Conservative peer Michelle Mone allegedly sent a racist message to a man of Indian heritage. Strasburger has also said Mone should resign from the Lords due to the complaint, which alleges that she told the man, Richard Lynton-Jones, he was “a waste of a man’s white skin”. Mone is accused of sending the messages, screenshots of which have been seen by the Guardian, during a disagreement following a fatal yacht crash off Monaco in May 2019. In the weeks after the crash, in which a crew member was killed, Mone accused Lynton-Jones and his partner of partying soon after the accident and showing disrespect. Mone cast doubt on whether Lynton-Jones’s partner had really suffered serious trauma due to the accident, and described her as “a mental loony”. Lynton-Jones messaged Mone saying his partner had been seriously traumatised, and wrote: “I would prefer you back the fuck off.” According to the complaint and the screenshots of the WhatsApp messages, Mone then responded: “You &amp; your mental loony of a girlfriend have been parting [sic] like mad! … Your [sic] a low life, a waste of a mans [sic] white skin so don’t give us your lies. Your [sic] a total disgrace.” She added: “Now you deal with the police enquiries including your nut case bird.” Lynton-Jones sent an immediate reply in which he said: “A waste of a white mans skin? Did not know you were racist, Michelle.” He told the Guardian that Mone’s WhatsApp message had caused him severe distress, motivating him to make the complaint to the House of Lords commissioner for standards, Martin Jelley. Lynton-Jones said that for personal reasons he did not want to be named in any reporting, but after the Guardian’s publication on Thursday, on Saturday the Daily Mail named him as the complainant. As a result Lynton-Jones, a career banker and financial consultant based in Monaco, decided he was now prepared to speak publicly and have his photograph published. He says he is appalled that Jelley decided in August not to investigate Mone, because, the commissioner said, the messages were not sent in the course of her parliamentary duties, so are not covered by the code of conduct for peers. “I find it appalling that the House of Lords can be put on notice and sent a complaint, with evidence of a racist message by a member, yet do nothing at all, and leave her in position as a lawmaker of the country, without even an investigation,” Lynton-Jones said. “It feels like it has just been brushed under the carpet.” Contacted by the Guardian this week, a representative of the Tory peer initially said: “Baroness Mone is 100% not a racist. Baroness Mone and her husband have built over 15 schools in Africa in the past three years.” Her lawyers later provided further statements in which they denied that Mone is racist, sexist or “has a lack of respect for those persons genuinely suffering with mental health difficulties.” They said their client believed at the time that Lynton-Jones had “no trace whatsoever of non-white colouring or any features” that would suggest he was not “100% white and British”. The lawyers also made a series of allegations against Lynton-Jones, raising suspicion about his motives. They also questioned the authenticity of the messages, saying Mone had “no access” and no “detailed memory” of them, and they did not appear to be in the language of “a well-educated and articulate Baroness”. The lawyers said: “She is not prepared to comment on the messages unless and until their authenticity has been confirmed.” However in an Instagram post on Friday, after the Guardian reported on Lynton-Jones’s complaint, Mone did not question the authenticity of the quoted message but appeared to state a new justification for sending it, claiming that Lynton-Jones had displayed “white privilege”. “Since when did calling out a man on his actions after a manslaughter and his entitled white privilege constitute racism?” she posted. The Guardian understands that after official investigations, the skipper of the yacht that crashed into the boat belonging to Mone’s husband, the businessman Douglas Barrowman, was held to be at fault, but no finding of manslaughter has been made. Strasburger said: “There is something seriously wrong with the Lords code of conduct if it prevents the commissioner for standards from investigating alleged bad behaviour by a peer outside their parliamentary duties. On that basis a lord could prove themselves to be a completely unfit person to make the laws of the land but suffer no consequences because their misbehaviour was outside parliament. That can’t be right and needs to be fixed. “Baroness Mone says her comments were not racist but I’d like to know what other interpretation she can come up with for referring to the colour of Mr Lynton-Jones’s skin during an argument. “This has been a very ugly and unseemly sequence of events. Baroness Mone could do well to consider her position and perhaps bow out with as much grace as she can muster.” Labour last week called for Mone to refer herself to the commissioner over her involvement in the award of £203m-worth of government PPE contracts to a company, PPE Medpro, that was processed through the “VIP lane” for politically connected firms. Mone repeatedly denied last year any association with the company. However, it emerged earlier this month that she had referred PPE Medpro to the government as a potential supplier. Her lawyers have maintained that all her statements in relation to PPE Medpro were true, and she is not understood to have referred herself to the commissioner.That concludes our live blogging of global coronavirus news for the moment. For Australian readers here is our continuing live coverage from Guardian Australia. Here is the full story on Australia’s regulator provisionally approving a Pfizer vaccine for children aged 5-11. Australia’s medicine regulator provisionally approved on Sunday the Pfizer coronavirus vaccine for children between the ages of 5 and 11. The health minister, Greg Hunt, said the rollout could begin from 10 January. All international arrivals to the UK will again be required to take pre-departure Covid-19 tests, the health secretary Sajid Javid announced. The rule applies to all travellers visiting the UK or returning from a holiday, regardless of vaccination status, and will come into force from 4am on 7 December. Nigeria is also being added to the UK’s travel red list, joining several southern African nations which were added after the Omicron variant was detected. In Brazil, the mayor of Rio de Janeiro has announced the cancellation of the city’s world-famous New Year’s Eve celebrations amid fears over the impact the Omicron variant could have on a country that has already lost more than 615,000 lives to Covid. Chilean health authorities reported the first case of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus in a person who had arrived in the country from Africa. The German government has announced a lockdown for the unvaccinated and is considering making Covid vaccines mandatory, after weeks of record infections in the country and much of German-speaking Europe. The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, on Saturday urged Germans to get vaccinated against Covid-19, speaking days ahead of leaving office in the final episode of more than 600 weekly video podcasts. The Omicron variant has been detected in at least 38 countries but no deaths have yet been reported, the World Health Organization has said, amid warnings that it could damage the global economic recovery. Doctors’ leaders in England have welcomed a move to suspend some targets for GPs to enable them to concentrate on the vaccination programme, but warned the service remains under pressure. Romania’s health ministry said it has detected the first two cases of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus in two Romanians who returned from South Africa on 30 November 30. The UK prime minister has been reported to the police by Labour MPs over allegations there were at least two parties in Downing Street during lockdown restrictions last year. South Korea again broke its daily records for coronavirus infections and deaths and confirmed three more cases of the new Omicron variant as officials scramble to tighten social distancing and border controls. The 5,352 new cases reported by the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency on Saturday marked the third time this week the daily tally exceeded 5,000. The country’s death toll was at 3,809 after a record 70 virus patients died in the past 24 hours, while the 752 patients in serious or critical conditions were also an all-time high. Mexico’s health ministry on Saturday reported 251 more deaths from Covid-19. It brings the country’s death toll since the pandemic began to 295,154, Reuters reports. Australia’s medicine regulator provisionally approved on Sunday the Pfizer coronavirus vaccine for children between the ages of 5 and 11. The health minister, Greg Hunt, said the rollout could begin from 10 January. “They (the Therapeutics Goods Administration) have made a careful, thorough assessment, determined that it is safe and effective and that it is in the interests of children and Australians for children 5 to 11 to be vaccinated,” Hunt said. New York announced three more cases of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus Saturday, bringing the number of state cases linked to the new variant to eight. “The omicron variant is here, and as anticipated we are seeing the beginning of community spread,” state health commissioner Mary Bassett said in a news release. The number of states finding the variant is growing as well, with Massachusetts announcing its first case Saturday, a day after New Jersey, Georgia, Pennsylvania and Maryland reported their first confirmed cases, Associated Press reports. You can follow the latest Covid developments in Australia in our dedicated blog here: Romania reported 1,490 new daily Covid-19 cases and 131 deaths on Saturday. The EU’s second-least vaccinated country experienced its deadliest wave of the pandemic so far in October and early November, Reuters reports. Brazil has reported 8,838 new cases of coronavirus and a further 170 deaths, according to the country’s health ministry. The former queen of the Netherlands, Princess Beatrix, 83, has tested positive for Covid-19, the royal information service RVD said in a statement. Princess Beatrix, as she has been known since her abdication in 2013, got tested after coming down with “mild cold symptoms”, the statement said. “The princess is at home in isolation and adheres to the rules of life for people who have tested positive,” it added, according to Reuters. The emergence of the Omicron variant shows that the world is “closer to the start of the pandemic than the end”, one of Britain’s most senior scientific figures has warned, as he lamented a lack of political leadership over Covid. Sir Jeremy Farrar, the director of the Wellcome Trust, who stepped down as a government scientific adviser last month, said the progress in combatting Covid-19 since its emergence was “being squandered”. Writing in the Observer, he said rich countries had been taking “a very blinkered domestic focus, lulled into thinking that the worst of the pandemic was behind us”. He said while he was cautiously hopeful that current vaccines would protect against severe illness from Omicron, that may not be true for future variants. France on Saturday said more than 50,000 people had tested positive for coronavirus in the past 24 hours, AFP reports. The country recorded 51,624 new daily cases of Covid, health authorities said. France has recorded an average of almost 41,000 new cases a day over the past week, compared to fewer than 28,000 a week ago. Some 694 people had been admitted to hospital in the past 24 hours, including 119 who were critically ill. Labour’s shadow home secretary, Yvette Cooper, has supported the pre-departure tests for UK arrivals but criticised the speed it took the government to introduce the measure. “Why on Earth is this still only being brought in nearly two weeks after Omicron was identified?” she asked on Twitter. “Wes Streeting and I called for this, SAGE recommended this, and I am relieved the government is finally acting. But waiting until Tuesday is too slow at the border yet again,” she wrote. Romania’s health ministry said it has detected the first two cases of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus in two Romanians who returned from South Africa on 30 November 30. The two travellers, a 48-year-old woman from the central county of Brasov and a 59-year-old man from the eastern county of Vaslui, were isolated in their homes and had no symptoms, the ministry said. Authorities were sequencing a third test to identify virus variant, Reuters reports. Romania has introduced travel bans for non-European Union citizens arriving from several African states and has sent planes to recover Romanians stranded by cancelled flights. The returnees are expected to quarantine for two weeks. Chilean health authorities reported on Saturday that they detected the first case of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus in a person who had arrived in the country from Africa. The foreign patient residing in Chile arrived in the country on 25 November from Ghana with a recently taken negative Covid-19 test, Reuters reports. But a subsequent test taken upon arrival in Chile was positive and then sequenced. “The passenger, who had two doses of the Pfizer vaccine, is currently in good health and fulfilling his isolation,” the secretary of health of the Valparaiso region in Chile said. The UK’s health secretary Sajid Javid said there are now about 160 confirmed Omicron cases in the UK, up from 134 on Friday. Some 130 cases are in England, Javid added. People arriving in Scotland from abroad will need to take pre-departure Covid tests to help stem the spread of the Omicron coronavirus variant, the Scottish government has announced. International travellers will have to provide a negative pre-departure test taken two days before travelling, in addition to a negative PCR test on or before day two after arrival, under measures agreed on a four-nation basis. The requirement comes into effect at 4am on 7 December. Nigeria has also been added to the red list for international travel from 4am on 6 December, meaning all travellers returning to Scotland from Nigeria will be required to quarantine on their arrival in managed accommodation for 10 days. The introduction of pre-departure Covid tests for travellers entering the UK has been branded a “devastating blow” for travel by the chief executive of the Airport Operators Association. Karen Dee said that the policy, beginning on 7 December, will act as a “major deterrent” to travel. This is a devastating blow for aviation and tourism,” she said. “Pre-departure tests act as a major deterrent to travel and most of the limited remaining demand following the reintroduction of self-isolation will now fall away, just as airports were hoping for a small uplift over the Christmas holiday. “Travel and aviation are the only sectors hit with any operating restrictions in response to the Omicron variant. “The UK and devolved governments should have done the right thing and, alongside the restrictions, announced support for our businesses and our staff to get through another period of shutdown.” The UK’s transport secretary has given his reaction to the new measures for arrivals. The mayor of Rio de Janeiro, Eduardo Paes, tweeted that he would follow the recommendations of Rio de Janeiro state to cancel the celebrations, despite the city’s own view to the contrary. “We respect science,” he wrote. “The city’s committee says it can go ahead and the state’s says no. So it can’t take place. Let’s cancel the official New Year’s Eve celebration in Rio,” the tweet said. “I am very sad as mayor and personally. The New Year’s Eve celebration in Rio is one of the most incredible and incomparable parties in the world,” Paes later told a press conference. In Brazil, the pandemic has claimed more than 615,000 lives, the second highest total in the world after the US, Reuters reports. France has reported 92,557 coronavirus deaths in hospital, an increase of 49. It also reported that 2,037 people are in intensive care units with the virus, down by 21, Reuters reports. Nigeria has become the 11th African country to be added to the UK’s travel red list. Health secretary Sajid Javid said: “Over recent days we have learned of a significant number of growing cases linked to travel with Nigeria. “There are 27 cases in England already and that’s growing.” Some more data from Italy. The number of patients in hospital with Covid-19 – not including those in intensive care – stood at 5,428 on Saturday, up from 5,385 a day earlier. There were 59 admissions to intensive care units, down from 60 on Friday, Reuters reports. The total number of intensive care patients increased to 732 from a previous 708. Some 636,592 tests for Covid-19 were carried out in the past day, compared with a previous 588,445, the health ministry said. All international arrivals to the UK will again be required to take pre-departure Covid-19 tests, the health secretary Sajid Javid announced. The rule applies to all travellers visiting the UK or returning from a holiday, regardless of vaccination status, and will come into force from 4am on 7 December. Nigeria is also being added to the travel red list, joining several southern African nations which were added after the Omicron variant was detected. Higher hospital admissions among children during a fourth wave of Covid-19 infections in South Africa that has been driven by the Omicron coronavirus variant should not prompt panic as infections have been mild, a health official said. A large number of infants admitted with coronavirus last month in Tshwane, the metropolitan area that includes the capital Pretoria, raised concerns that the newly identified Omicron could pose greater risks for young children than other variants. Scientists have yet to confirm any link and have cautioned that other factors could be at play. Ntsakisi Maluleke, a public health specialist in the Gauteng province, told Reuters that out of the 1,511 Covid-positive patients in hospitals in the province 113 were under nine years old, a greater proportion than during previous waves of infection. Italy reported 75 coronavirus-related deaths on Saturday, the health ministry said. The daily tally of new infections was 16,632. Italy has registered 134,152 deaths linked to Covid-19 since February last year, the second-highest toll in Europe after Britain. It has reported more than five million cases to date. More than 40,000 people marched through Vienna on Saturday to protest against a lockdown and plans to make vaccinations compulsory to curb the coronavirus pandemic. Faced with a surge in infections, the government last month made Austria the first country in Western Europe to reimpose a lockdown and said it would make vaccinations mandatory from February. Around 1,200 police officers deployed to handle scattered protests that merged into a march on the central Ring boulevard. Police put the size of the protest at over 40,000, while around 1,500 staged counter-protests, Reuters reports. In the darkest days of the pandemic, with the industry she represented on its knees and no light at the end of the tunnel, the boss of UK Hospitality, Kate Nicholls, went to see a therapist. She had been acting as an “emotional sponge”, soaking up the anguish of tens of thousands of pubs, bars and restaurants fearing oblivion, while trying to shield her team, particularly the younger members, from the ravages of a uniquely stressful event. “There were times when it was really quite bleak,” she says. “Particularly when you got to October and November last year. We were in tears: there was that sense of frustration that businesses are open but not able to trade and you could see it all sliding away from you again.” The UK has recorded 127 deaths Covid-related deaths and 42,848 positive cases in the latest 24-hour period, government figures show. It brings the total number of cases to 10,421,104 and the death toll to 145,551. In Brazil, the mayor of Rio de Janeiro has announced the cancellation of the city’s world famous New Year’s Eve celebrations amid fears over the impact the Omicron variant could have on a country which has already lost more than 615,000 lives to Covid. The German government has announced a lockdown for the unvaccinated and is considering making Covid vaccines mandatory, after weeks of record infections in the country and much of German-speaking Europe. The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, on Saturday urged Germans to get vaccinated against Covid-19, speaking days ahead of leaving office in the final episode of more than 600 weekly video podcasts. The Omicron variant has been detected in at least 38 countries but no deaths have yet been reported, the World Health Organization has said, amid warnings that it could damage the global economic recovery. UK government officials and scientific advisers believe that the danger posed by the Omicron variant may not be clear until January, potentially allowing weeks of intense mixing while the variant spreads. Doctors’ leaders in England have welcomed a move to suspend some targets for GPs to enable them to concentrate on the vaccination programme, but warned the service remains under pressure. The UK prime minister has been reported to the police by Labour MPs over allegations there were at least two parties in Downing Street during lockdown restrictions last year. South Korea again broke its daily records for coronavirus infections and deaths and confirmed three more cases of the new Omicron variant as officials scramble to tighten social distancing and border controls. The 5,352 new cases reported by the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency on Saturday marked the third time this week the daily tally exceeded 5,000. The country’s death toll was at 3,809 after a record 70 virus patients died in the past 24 hours, while the 752 patients in serious or critical conditions were also an all-time high. I am at the helm of the Guardian’s global live blog, bringing you the latest information on coronavirus from around the world. Please keep in touch with me today via any of the channels below to ask questions, share comments or provide news tips. Thanks Instagram: sarah_marsh_journalist Email: sarah.marsh@theguardian.com In the UK, the Metropolitan Police have said they are considering complaints from Labour MPs that Boris Johnson and his No 10 staff held Christmas parties in breach of Covid regulations. Labour backbenchers Neil Coyle and Barry Gardiner have each written to Scotland Yard asking police to investigate reports that two parties were held in the run-up to last Christmas at a time when such gatherings were banned. Johnson has not denied the events took place but said no rules were broken - although he has repeatedly refused to explain how that could be the case. In a statement, the Metropolitan Police said that while it did not routinely investigate “retrospective” breaches of the Covid regulations, it was considering the correspondence it had received. On Wednesday, the Daily Mirror reported the prime minister gave a speech at a packed leaving-do for a senior aide last November when the country was in the midst of the second lockdown. Scotland has recorded 14 coronavirus-linked deaths and 1,257 new cases in the past 24 hours, according to the latest data. One case of the new Omicron variant has been confirmed in that time, in NHS Grampian, taking the total people infected with the variant to 30. NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde has the most of the new variant cases at 11, followed by NHS Lanarkshire with nine, five in NHS Forth Valley, three in NHS Highland and two in NHS Grampian. The Scottish Government said Public Health Scotland is “aware of a processing issue with UK government lab tests contributing to lower than expected cases and tests” in the daily figures and investigations are ongoing to resolve the problem. The death toll under the daily measure, of people who first tested positive for the virus within the previous 28 days, is 9,648. The daily test positivity rate was 5.9%, down from 7.6% the previous day. There were 605 people in hospital with recently confirmed Covid-19 as of Friday night and, of these, 50 were in intensive care. So far, 4,351,214 people have received their first dose of a Covid-19 vaccination, 3,956,719 have had a second, and 1,823,515 have been given a third dose or booster. The mayor of Rio de Janeiro has announced the cancellation of the city’s world famous New Year’s Eve celebrations amid fears over the impact the Omicron variant could have on a country which has already lost more than 615,000 lives to Covid. “It’s a decision I take with sadness ... but the most important thing is to carry on vaccinating and saving lives,” mayor, Eduardo Paes, tweeted on Saturday morning, adding that vaccinated tourists were still welcome to visit his “magical” city. A few weeks ago Rio authorities had voiced optimism that, with the Covid situation finally improving, it would be possible to hold the annual beachside ‘Réveillon’ fireworks display, which attracts millions of revellers onto Copacabana beach. “Right now Covid is under control … We’ve been through moments of such sadness. This is a moment of hope,” Rio’s health secretary, Daniel Soranz, told the Guardian last month, hailing a vaccination campaign that has seen 90% of over-12s fully vaccinated. “We hope that our New Year’s Eve and Carnival will be the best we have ever had, to make up for all this lost time,” Soranz added. Omicron, six cases of which have been confirmed in Brazil, none of them in Rio, has wrecked those plans. “I hope to be able to be on Copacabana beach hugging everyone to see out 2022,” Paes tweeted on Saturday, adding that his government respected science. The German government has announced a lockdown for the unvaccinated and is considering making Covid vaccines mandatory, after weeks of record infections in the country and much of German-speaking Europe. In Austria, thousands of people have taken to the streets in recent weeks to protest against a string of measures: from February, the government will be introducing compulsory vaccines for all, with exemption for those unable to receive a jab on medical grounds. Vaccination rates in both Germany and Austria are lagging behind the rest of western Europe, with under 70% of the populations having had two jabs. Read what people from both countries have to say about the current situation, and what they think of vaccine mandates and restrictions for the unvaccinated: The Omicron variant has been detected in at least 38 countries but no deaths have yet been reported, the World Health Organization has said, amid warnings that it could damage the global economic recovery. The United States and Australia became the latest countries to confirm locally transmitted cases of the variant, as Omicron infections pushed South Africa’s total cases past 3 million. The WHO has warned it could take weeks to determine how infectious the variant is, whether it causes more severe illness and how effective treatments and vaccines are against it. The WHO emergencies director, Michael Ryan, said: We’re going to get the answers that everybody out there needs. The WHO said on Friday it had still not seen any reports of deaths related to Omicron, but the new variant’s spread has led to warnings that it could cause more than half of Europe’s Covid cases in the next few months. The new variant could also slow global economic recovery, just as the Delta strain did, the International Monetary Fund chief, Kristalina Georgieva, said on Friday. She said: Even before the arrival of this new variant, we were concerned that the recovery, while it continues, is losing somewhat momentum. A new variant that may spread very rapidly can dent confidence. A preliminary study by researchers in South Africa, where the variant was first reported on 24 November, suggests it is three times more likely to cause reinfections compared with the Delta or Beta strains. Read the full story here: Several thousand people gathered in the central Dutch town of Utrecht on Saturday to protest against new coronavirus restrictions that came into force last weekend. Protesters walked through the streets of the town carrying banners saying “Medical Freedom Now!” and waving Dutch flags. A heavy police presence was visible along the route of the march. It is the first major demonstration in the Netherlands against the measures, which include a nighttime closure of bars, restaurants and most stores to stem a record-breaking wave of Covid-19 cases that is threatening to overwhelm the country’s healthcare system. The Netherlands saw violent protests two weeks ago after the government announced plans to ban most people who have not been vaccinated from public places. Those plans face widespread opposition in parliament, including from parties in the governing coalition and have not been put into place yet. Germany’s outgoing chancellor, Angela Merkel, on Saturday made what is likely her final appeal before leaving office next week for Germans to get vaccinated against Covid. Merkel gave what is expected to be her last weekly video message two days after federal and state leaders decided on a series of measures meant to break a wave of coronavirus infections. The measures include excluding unvaccinated people across the country from nonessential stores, restaurants and sports and cultural venues. In a longer-term move, parliament will consider a general vaccine mandate. At least 68.9% of Germans are fully vaccinated against the coronavirus, short of the government’s aim of a minimum 75% vaccination rate. The number of unvaccinated residents has been blamed as a key factor in a surge of new virus cases in recent weeks. Official figures suggest that the infection rate may now be stabilising, but at too high a level. The UK health secretary, Sajid Javid, has met the World Health Organization’s director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, describing the meeting as “productive”. He tweeted: “We continue to work with WHO on our global treaty to prepare for and respond to future pandemics, and on building a global surveillance network.” The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, on Saturday urged Germans to get vaccinated against Covid-19, speaking days ahead of leaving office in the final episode of more than 600 weekly video podcasts. “I once again emphatically ask you to take this tricky virus seriously,” Merkel said, calling the fourth coronavirus wave to hit Germany “very serious” and even “dramatic”, with intensive care units overloaded in some parts of the country. “The new Omicron variant in particular seems to be even more infectious than those that came before. Get yourself vaccinated, whether it’s your first shot or a booster,” she added. “Every vaccine helps.” After 16 years in power, Merkel is expected to pass the reins to Social Democrat, Olaf Scholz, following a vote in parliament on Wednesday to elect the new chancellor. In her podcast, she thanked “those who are reasonable and understanding in this difficult period” and “stick to the rules to protect themselves and take care of others”. “You are the vast majority in our country. You demonstrate the civic responsibility that’s so marvellous about our country, without which no chancellor or government can achieve anything.” One of Scholz’s first steps as head of government is expected to be passing a law to make vaccination compulsory from February or March next year. Most of the political spectrum has rallied behind the previously controversial move. Looking back at her first video podcast in 2006, Merkel recalled that “back then it was very unusual for a head of government to address the public online so directly”. “My hope at the time, that the World Cup should be a great party even beyond the stadiums, was more than fulfilled,” she added, using the “summer fairytale” moniker Germans still apply to the football tournament they hosted that year. While Merkel touched on a vast range of subjects in podcasts over her time in office, from digitalisation to antisemitism, in the past two years she has frequently spoken about the pandemic. UK government officials and scientific advisers believe that the danger posed by the Omicron variant may not be clear until January, potentially allowing weeks of intense mixing while the variant spreads. Across Westminster, invitations to Christmas drinks are landing in embossed envelopes or on WhatsApp groups. Departmental staff parties are set to take place, as well as a reception for journalists with Rishi Sunak at No 11. Even Keir Starmer and Rachel Reeves are hosting a joint bash. However, minutes for the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) suggest there is deep concern about the threat from the new variant, particularly its transmissibility. Though there is a wariness about overreacting, one government scientific adviser said Downing Street was “putting all its eggs in one basket” by focusing its efforts on the booster vaccine drive. Russia has reported 32,974 new coronavirus cases in the past 24 hours. Additionally, 1,215 deaths were reported in the country. Doctors’ leaders in England have welcomed a move to suspend some targets for GPs to enable them to concentrate on the vaccination programme, but warned the service remains under pressure. NHS England has told GPs that routine health checks for the over-75s and for new patients may be deferred. Dr Farah Jameel, chair of the BMA’s England GP committee, said suspending some paperwork would create some additional capacity, but that individual practices would have to decide how much they could switch to delivering Covid jabs. “That will then allow us to support the national effort - the national priority being to one vaccinating the nation as quickly as possible,” she told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme. “We have been struggling with significant prevailing workforce pressures - backlog pressures, winter pressures, pandemic pressures. “Whilst these changes make a difference and start to create some time, I think every single practice will have to look at just how much time it does release. “What it will do is free up staff time who are busy filling some of these tick-box exercises, so some of our staff can be redeployed to the vaccination effort.” Welcome to the Guardian’s live blog, bringing you the latest information on coronavirus from around the world. Please keep in touch with me today via any of the channels below to ask questions, share comments or provide news tips. Thanks Instagram: sarah_marsh_journalist Email: sarah.marsh@theguardian.com The UK prime minister has been reported to the police by Labour MPs over allegations there were at least two parties in Downing Street during lockdown restrictions last year. Neil Coyle, Labour MP for Bermondsey and Old Southwark, wrote to the Met police commissioner, Cressida Dick, asking her to investigate reports that the prime minister spoke at a leaving do in November and also allowed a staff Christmas party to go ahead in December. At the time, there were lockdown restrictions in place preventing socialising. After sending the letter, Coyle said: “I believe they broke the law. Most of my constituents followed the rules; those that didn’t faced penalties. Johnson is not above the law, despite his bloated self-entitlement.” Normally, planes are in constant motion, pinballing between continents. But in March 2020 all that came to a halt. What did it mean for our jobs, our horizons – and the planet? In England, unvaccinated women who suffered with Covid-19 during their pregnancies have told “terrifying” stories of having the virus, from being rushed to hospital to having emergency C-sections. The women appear in a video sharing their experiences of severe Covid-19 during pregnancy as part of a new campaign encouraging expectant mothers to get the vaccine. The Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) said 98% of pregnant women in hospital with symptomatic Covid-19 are unvaccinated. The video features three women who experienced serious complications after contracting Covid-19 before they had been vaccinated, as well as the doctors and frontline staff who treated them, to warn of the dangers of the virus for pregnant women and their babies. Christina, a mental health therapist from Guildford who was admitted to hospital with Covid-19 in her third trimester, said: “I had to give birth via emergency C-section because there was concern that I could have a stillbirth. It was terrifying. “I don’t know what the future holds for me and my baby; I’m still suffering with symptoms now along with the anxiety of not knowing how or when I’ll recover. “I would urge pregnant women to get vaccinated because I don’t want anyone to experience what I went through.” Tanviha, who works in anaesthesiology and research in Manchester, spent two months in hospital with Covid-19 following an emergency C-section, said she caught Covid-19 during her second pregnancy in February. An Italian man who wanted a coronavirus vaccine certificate without actually having the jab tried to play the system by presenting health workers with a fake arm. Despite the realistic skin colour, nobody was fooled by the silicone limb, and the man – in his 50s – was reported to local police following the incident on Thursday night in Biella, northwest Italy. “The case borders on the ridiculous, if it were not for the fact we are talking about a gesture of enormous gravity,” the head of the Piedmont regional government, Albert Cirio, said in a statement on Facebook. He said such an act was “unacceptable faced with the sacrifice that our entire community has paid during the pandemic, in terms of human lives, the social and economic cost.” The Cook Islands on Saturday recorded its first case of Covid-19 since the pandemic began, as the South Pacific country edges toward reopening its borders to tourists. The nation of around 17,000 people has one of the highest vaccination rates globally, with 96% of the eligible population double-dosed. The virus was detected in a 10-year-old boy quarantining after arriving on a repatriation flight with his family on Thursday, the prime minister, Mark Brown, said in a statement. The boy was believed to have flown in from New Zealand. South Korea again broke its daily records for coronavirus infections and deaths and confirmed three more cases of the new Omicron variant as officials scramble to tighten social distancing and border controls. The 5,352 new cases reported by the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency on Saturday marked the third time this week the daily tally exceeded 5,000. The country’s death toll was at 3,809 after a record 70 virus patients died in the past 24 hours, while the 752 patients in serious or critical conditions were also an all-time high. As the Delta-driven surge threatens to overwhelm hospital systems, there is also concern about the local spread of the Omicron variant, which is seen as potentially more infectious than previous strains of the virus. The country’s omicron caseload is now at nine after KDCA confirmed three more cases. The new cases include the wife, mother-in-law and a friend of a man who caught Omicron from a couple he drove home from the airport after they arrived from Nigeria on 24 November. The couple’s teenage child and two other women who also travelled to Nigeria have also been infected with Omicron. Officials say the number of Omicron cases could rise as some of the patients had attended a church gathering involving hundreds of people on 28 November. While the emergence of Omicron has triggered global alarm and pushed governments around the world to tighten their borders, scientists say it remains unclear whether the new variant is more contagious, more likely to evade the protection provided by vaccines or more likely to cause serious illnesses than previous versions of the virus.